Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 1
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Article I Administrative Code l.l0l - l.l07
Article II Reserved For Future Use
Article III Boards l.30l - l.3l2
Article IV Commissions/Authorities l.40l - l.413
Article V Purchasing Procedures l.500 - l.505
Article VI Reserved For Future Use
Article VII Validity/Adoption l.70l - l.702
Article VIII Code of Ethics l.80l - l.805
Article IX Conflict of Interest/Mandatory Financial Disclosure 1.901 – 1.902
Article X City Communications System 1.1001- 1.1002
Article XI Budget Preparation Date 1.1101
Article XII Prohibited Practices in Public Buildings 1.1201
Article XIII Municipal Enforcement Procedures (Citation Ordinance) 1.1301- 1.1308
Article XIV Municipal Fund Balance 1.1401- 1.1405
Article XV Leave at Termination Fund 1.1501 - 1.1505
Article XVI Adoption of Fees by Budget Resolution 1.1601 – 1.1604
Article XVII Funding of Public Art 1.1700-1.1707
Article XVIII Payment by Credit Card 1.1801-1.1802
ARTICLE I: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section 1.101: PREAMBLE
This Administrative Code is adopted pursuant to Section 3.9 of the Revised Charter of the City
of Portsmouth to outline the operation of the municipal government, exclusive of the School,
Fire and Police departments. It shall be applied and interpreted to further the spirit and intent of
the Council/Manager form of Government in general and as specifically created by the Charter.
Section 1.102 ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
The administrative service of the City shall consist of a City Manager and the following
subordinate departments, each of which shall be administered by a department administrator
appointed by the City Manager.
City Clerk
Community Development
Emergency Management
Finance
Health
Human Resources
Inspection
Legal
Library
Negotiation
Planning
Public Works
Recreation
Welfare
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 1
Section 1.103: ORGANIZATIONAL CHART
The organizational relationship of the administrative departments of the City to each other and to
the electorate, the Mayor and City Council, and the various municipal boards and commissions
shall be as shown in the following chart:
Section 1.104: SELECTION, QUALIFICATION, AND TERMS OF OFFICE OF
DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATORS
A principal administrator of each municipal department shall be selected and appointed by the
City Manager. All such individuals shall serve under such terms and conditions as deemed
appropriate by the City Manager.
Section 1.105: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT
ADMINISTRATORS
Each department administrator shall be responsible for the efficient operation of his/her
department in a manner consistent with all applicable laws and municipal policies. Each
department administrator shall bear the following responsibilities:
A. The department administrator shall be responsible for the preparation and
submission of that portion of the annual municipal budget which relates to his/her
department and for operating that department in compliance with the approved
municipal budget.
B. Each department administrator shall be responsible for the oversight of all human
and property resources of the department to maintain the highest practical level
productivity.
C. Each department administrator shall prepare, maintain and preserve all records
required by law or otherwise for the operation of his/her department.
D. Each department administrator, with the approval of the City Manager, shall adopt
such rules, regulations and policies as are necessary for the proper administration
of his/her department.
E. Each department administrator shall keep the City Manager informed of the
operating status of his/her department and of any matters requiring the
involvement of the City Manager or the City Council for resolution.
Section 1.106 SPECIFIC DUTIES, FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF
DEPARTMENTS
A. CITY MANAGER – City Manager shall be the chief executive officer of the
municipal government, with all the powers and duties inherent in that position.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 1
B. CITY CLERK – The department administered by the City Clerk shall be
responsible for all duties mandated by the state law or local ordinance for that
office, including the collection and maintenance of official City records and vital
statistics; preparation and maintenance of records of the City Council; and the
administration of any licenses or permits delegated to that office by the operation
of law.
C. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT – The Community Development Department
shall be responsible for the complete administration of any municipal programs
involving the receipt and expenditure of funds generated by the federal
government for community or economic development purposes.
D. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT – The Emergency Management Department
shall be responsible for all emergency management functions and responsibilities
mandated or authorized by State, Local or Federal law, including the New
Hampshire Emergency Management Act, and other regulations as determined by
the Director of Emergency Management. The Emergency Management
Department shall consist of the City Manager who shall serve as the Emergency
Management Director required by RSA 107-C:8, as it may be amended from time
to time, and such other officials as may be appointed by the City Manager.
E. FINANCE – The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the provision of
all accounting, tax collection, assessment, water/sewer billing, audit, and budget
services of the municipal government, and other related duties as may be assigned
from time to time by the City Manager or allocated by the municipal budget.
(Amended 3/19/2001)
F. HEALTH DEPARTMENT – The Health Department shall be responsible for
providing all public health services required by state law or municipal ordinance.
G. HUMAN RESOURCES – The Human Resource Department shall be
responsible for the development and administration of all programs and policies
of the municipal government relating to the employment of the individuals who
perform the work of the City. This responsibility shall extend to the Charter
Departments with respect to those human resource functions common to all
departments. The Charter Departments shall retain those human resource
functions which by law or practice are unique and specific to the particular
Charter Department. (Amended 3/19/2001)
H. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY – The Information Technology Department
shall be responsible for acquisition, maintenance and coordination of all computer
hardware, software and related information technology for all elements of the
municipal government, including the Charter Departments, except that the Charter
Departments shall retain those Information Technology functions which by law or
practice are unique and specific to the particular Charter Department. In its
exercise of this authority, the Information Technology Department, or a Charter
Department as appropriate, shall secure prior approval from the Finance
Department for all technology acquisitions. (Adopted 3/19/2001)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 1
I. INSPECTIONS – The Inspections Department shall be responsible for all
matters related to adoption, application and enforcement of the plumbing,
electrical and building codes.
J. LEGAL – The Legal Department shall provide all necessary legal services to the
municipal government, including those of an advisory as well as a
representational nature.
K. LIBRARY – The Library Department shall be responsible for every aspect of the
operation and maintenance of all public library facilities, including technological
services required to adequately provide information to the public.
L. NEGOTIATIONS – The Negotiations Department shall represent the City
Manager, the School Board, the Fire Commission or the Police Commission as
appropriate with respect to the negotiation and administration of all collective
bargaining agreements to which the City of Portsmouth is a party.
M. PLANNING – The Planning Department shall be responsible for all land use
regulatory functions required by state law and local ordinance, including zoning,
subdivision review, site plan review, historic district commission, conservation
commission and technical advisory committee services.
N. PUBLIC WORKS – The Public Works Department shall be responsible for all
engineering, sewer collection, water distribution, water treatment, building and
grounds maintenance, vehicle maintenance, highway maintenance, wastewater
treatment and water metering services and parking and transportation services of
the municipal government.
O. RECREATION – The Recreation Department shall be responsible for
developing and implementing recreational programs for the citizens of the city
and for operating the facilities in which those programs are provided.
P. WELFARE – The Welfare Department shall be responsible for providing all
welfare services mandated by the State of New Hampshire or otherwise provided
by the municipal government.
Section 1.1.07 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY MANAGER
The City Manager shall have the authority, within the general perimeters established by this
ordinance, to assign and reassign areas of specific responsibility within the various municipal
departments. (Adopted 12/20/1999)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 1
ARTICLE II: (RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 1
ARTICLE III: BOARDS
Section l.30l: CREATION
There shall be established the following Boards in the City of Portsmouth:
A. Planning Board
B. Recreation Board
C. Board of Health
D. Board of Plumbing Examiners
E. Board of Library Trustees
F. Personnel Advisory Board
G. Board of Trustees of the Trust Funds
H. Zoning Board of Adjustment
I. Building Code Board of Appeals
J. Portsmouth Heritage Museum Board (Adopted 9/19/88)
Section l.302: APPOINTMENTS, TENURE AND REMOVAL
A. All appointees to Boards shall serve for the term appointed or until a successor shall have
been appointed and qualified. Appointments for unexpired terms shall be for the
remainder of that term or until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
B. Records of attendance shall be kept by the Chairmen of Boards and Commissions
appointed by the City Council. The attendance records of Boards and Commissions shall
be reported to the City Council on an annual basis. If a member notifies the Chairman of
the Board or Commission prior to a meeting that he will not be able to attend the meeting
due to sickness, vacation or out of town business travel, such absence will be considered
an excused absence and so noted in the minutes of the meeting and the attendance sent to
the Council. The City Council shall declare vacant the office of any member who has
unexcused absences from more than one-third of the regularly scheduled meetings of the
board or commission in any calendar year.
C. In the case of appointees who must be removed pursuant to State Statute, the Chairman of
the Board or Commission shall notify the City Council in writing of any members in
violation of the previous paragraph and such violation may be found by the City Council
to be neglect of duty and may be grounds for dismissal.
D. Every member of a board, commission or committee of the City, whose term is to expire,
shall receive a notice from the City Clerk sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of his or
her term. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the City Council. Public notice of the
upcoming vacancy shall be advertised in the local newspaper.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 1
E. Eligibility for appointment to Municipal Boards shall be limited to residents of the City of
Portsmouth. Any individual who is a resident of the City at the time of appointment to a
Municipal Board shall become ineligible to remain on that Municipal Board in the event
that the individual shall discontinue residency in the City. (Adopted 9/22/97)
Section 1.303: PLANNING BOARD
A. Membership: The Planning Board of the City shall consist of nine (9) members and two
(2) alternate members, specifically; (Adopted 1/23/95)
1. The City Manager, or the designee of the City Manager with the approval of the
City Council, who shall be an ex-officio member;
2. An administrative official of the City selected by the City Manager who shall be
an ex-officio member;
3. A member of the City Council selected by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council, who shall be an ex-officio member;
4. Six residents of the City appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council.
5. Two (2) alternates who shall be residents of the City appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. (Adopted 1/23/95)
B. Term: All Planning Board members shall serve as such without compensation and the
appointed members shall hold no other municipal office except ward official, election
official and checklist supervisors. The term of each appointed member shall be three (3)
years. The Mayor shall apportion appointments so that no more than three appointments
occur annually. (Amended 6/3/2002)
C. Powers: The Planning Board shall have those powers and perform those duties identified
by State law and local ordinance. (Amended 3/22/93)
Section l.304: RECREATION BOARD
A. Membership: The Recreation Board shall consist of ten members, namely the City
Manager as a member ex-officio and nine persons appointed by the Mayor.
B. Term: All board members shall be residents of Portsmouth and shall serve for a three
year term without compensation. Appointments will be apportioned and appointed
members shall hold no other municipal office.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 1
C. Functions: The Recreation Board shall perform the following functions:
l. Assist the Recreation Director in planning a city wide recreation program.
2. Advise the City Manager in regard to recreational policy.
Section l.305: BOARD OF HEALTH
The Board of Health shall consist of 5 voting members appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
The Health Officer shall serve as an ex-officio member of the Board and shall vote only in the
case of tie votes. (Amended 5/3/93)
A. Term: The appointed members of the Board shall serve three year terms.
B. Composition: The Board shall represent a cross section of the community health delivery
system. One member shall be a physician, one member shall be a nurse with public
health background, one member shall have a background in environmental sanitation and
one member shall be consumer oriented.
C. Meetings: The Board shall meet at least semi-annually. Additional meetings may be
called by the Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney, or at the request of the three members
of the Board on five days notice; which notice may be waived in an emergency. Minutes
of all meetings shall be filed with the City Clerk.
D. Functions: The Board shall perform the following functions:
l. Formulate general policies regarding public health in the City.
2. Act as an advisor to the Environmental Health Officer and the City Manager.
3. Propose for adoption by the City Council ordinances pertaining to environmental
health and/or health consistent with State and Federal law.
4. Prepare an annual report concerning public health in Portsmouth and submit the
same to the City Council at the end of each calendar year.
5. Perform other health related duties which the City Council assigns to the Board
from time to time.
(Section 1.305 amended 9/22/97 by deletion of Subsection C – Qualifications.)
Section l.306: BOARD OF PLUMBING EXAMINERS
A. Membership: The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall consist of three members, namely
the Plumbing Inspector as Chairman, and two persons appointed by the City Manager.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 1
B. Term: One of the appointed members shall be a master plumber who has been engaged
for at least five years in the plumbing business in New Hampshire and the other members
shall be appointed from the Department of Health. Each member shall serve for a term of
three years without compensation. All members of the Board shall be residents of
Portsmouth.
C. Functions: The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall perform the following functions:
l. Examine and pass upon all applicants, whether as masters, employing plumbers or
journeymen plumbers in the City.
2. Issue a license valid in the State to such person who shall successfully pass the
required examination for plumbers.
3. Maintain a register of the names and places of business of all persons to whom a
plumber's license has been granted.
D. Issuance of Licenses: The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall issue a license valid for
one year, which license shall be renewed yearly upon proper application. The license
shall not be transferable and examination shall not be required of the same person more
than once in the City.
Section l.307: BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
A. Membership and Term: The Board of Library Trustees shall consist of nine members and
at least one of these members shall be a member of the Board of Education. All members
shall be approved by the Mayor and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
With the exception of the first appointments made under this authorization, all
appointments shall be for a three year term and no member shall be eligible for more than
two consecutive terms. First appointments made under this authorization shall be for
such terms as will provide for three member's terms to expire each year.
B. Powers and Duties of the Board of Library Trustees:
l. Adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the conduct of its own business and
choose its own officers.
2. To determine objectives which will result in the continuing growth and
improvement of library services and to establish policies necessary for the
attainment of these objectives.
3. Establish policies necessary for the operation of the library.
4. Finances:
a. Prepare the annual budget for the Library in consultation with the librarian
and present the same to the City Manager.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 1
b. Receive and expend the income from all trust funds, donations and
bequests made to the City for the benefit of the Library in accordance with
the wishes of the done.
c. Expend all monies received from fines, payments for lost or damaged
books, fees for providing non-resident services and other miscellaneous
income.
5. To recommend to the City Manager the appointment of the City Librarian and
staff librarians.
6. To prepare and present annual reports to the City covering all phases of the
operation of the Library and to make an annual report to the N.H. State Library as
may be required by the State Library Commission.
7. Saving Clause: To perform all other acts necessary for the management and
control of the Library.
Section l.308: PERSONNEL ADVISORY BOARD
A. Establishment: The Personnel Advisory Board shall be established in conformity with
Section 49 of the Amended Charter of the City of Portsmouth, l947, as amended.
B. Functions: The Personnel Advisory Board shall perform the following functions:
l. Exercise all power and perform all duties as stated in Section 49 of the Amended
Charter of 1947, as amended.
Section 1.309: BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF TRUST FUND
A. Establishment: The Board of Trustees of the Trust Funds shall be established in
conformity with Section 67 of the amended charter of the City of Portsmouth, l947.
B. Functions: The Board of Trustees of Trust Funds shall perform the following functions:
l. Exercise all power and perform all duties as stated in Section 67 of the amended
Charter of l947.
2. Receive all trust funds which may donated or bequeathed to the City or any
department thereof, unless otherwise provided or required.
3. Distribute income and principle in accordance with the purpose for which the
trusts were established.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 1
Section l.310: ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
A. Membership and Term: The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven (7)
members and two (2) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of Portsmouth, appointed
for terms of five years by the City Council. Appointments shall be apportioned, and the
Board shall annually elect a Chairman for its membership.
Members and alternates shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other
municipal office except ward official, election official and checklist supervisors. When
making appointments to the Board of Adjustment, the Council shall consider as
candidates the alternates to the Board as well as other nominations by the Mayor. The
Mayor shall submit the names of alternates and nominations to the council within thirty
days after a vacancy occurs. (Amended 6/3/2002)
B. Functions: The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall perform the following functions:
l. Exercise all power and perform such duties as stated in Chapter 673:3 of New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated. In addition the Board shall have those
powers as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Portsmouth, Chapter l0,
of this revised Code of Ordinances. (Amended 6/3/2002)
Section 1.311: BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
It is the intent of the City of Portsmouth to establish a Building Code Board of Appeals. This
ordinance authorizes the City Council to establish said Board and directs the reader to Chapter 12
of these Ordinances (City Building Code), for the specifics regarding the appeal process,
membership, member qualifications, conflicts of interest, hearings, board decisions, and
administration of the Building Code Board of Appeals. (Adopted 7/9/90)
Section 1.312: PORTSMOUTH HERITAGE MUSEUM BOARD (Adopted 9/19/88)
A. Purpose: The Portsmouth Heritage Museum Board is hereby created to encourage the
development of a facility which would provide the location for display, acquisition and
safe-keeping of various items which in the opinion of the Board have special historical
significance to the City of Portsmouth.
B. Membership: The Portsmouth Heritage Museum Board shall consist of five members.
One shall be the Mayor (ex-officio), one shall be the City Manager (ex-officio), one shall
be the Director of the Library (ex-officio), and two citizens of Portsmouth, one shall be
appointed by the Mayor and one person shall be appointed by the Trustees of
Prescott Park.
C. Term: Membership shall be for a term of two years. One appointment shall be made
each year except at the initial organization of the Board.
D. Duties and Powers of the Board:
1. Adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the conduct of its own officers.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 1
2. Determine objectives which will result in the continued growth and improvement
of the Portsmouth Heritage Museum, subject to the approval of the City Council.
3. Recommend to the Library Director policies necessary for the operation of the
Museum.
4. Recommend an annual budget to the Library Director.
5. Promote the acquisition through loan or gift of those articles of historical
significance to the City presently in private ownership.
6. Develop and recommend to the City a long-range plan for the preservation and
safe-keeping of historically significant artifacts.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 1
ARTICLE IV: COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES
Section 1.401: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT
Eligibility for appointment to Commissions and Authorities of the City of Portsmouth shall be
limited to residents of the City of Portsmouth. Any individual who is a resident of the City at the
time of appointment to a Commission or Authority shall become ineligible to remain on that
Commission or Authority in the event that the individual shall discontinue residency in the City.
(Adopted 9/22/97)
Section l.402: BUILDING COMMISSION
A. Membership: The Building Commission shall be a Board consisting of five members,
who shall be the head of the Health Department, the head of the Fire Department, the
head of the Planning Department, the Inspector of Wires and Poles and the Plumbing
Inspector.
B. Powers and Duties: The powers, duties and procedures of the Building Commission shall
be those set forth in Chapter 14 of this Code, Sections l4:114 through l4:118.
Section 1.403: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
A. Membership and Term: The Economic Development Commission shall consist of nine
(9) qualified regular members and one alternate member. They shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council for a term of four years. The Mayor
and City Manager shall also serve as ex-officio members of the Economic Development
Commission whose terms shall correspond to their respective tenure of office.
(Amended 9/22/97)
B. Powers and Duties: The Commission shall encourage the establishment of business and
industry in Portsmouth and the surrounding area and promote the welfare of local
industry and general business. (Adopted as amended 12/03/90)
C. 1. The Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
acquisition, bonding, developing, building, leasing and mortgaging of commercial
and industrial land and buildings and other matters incidental to attracting
business and industry to Portsmouth. (Adopted as amended 12/03/90)
2. It shall be the general responsibility of the Economic Development Commission
to increase and sustain the business and personal prosperity of all residents of this
community while protecting and maintaining the quality of our natural
environment and historic and cultural assets. This process should consist of the
encouragement of a broad, productive community effort to coordinate and
enhance the utilization of all community resources involved in any respect with
economic development. The process should further ensure that adequate
financing sources are available to those qualified enterprises, which desire to start
up, expand, and/or locate in our Community. (Adopted as amended 12/03/90)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 1
Section 1.404: HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
There is hereby established an Historic District Commission and it shall have the powers
prescribed in RSA 3l:89a - 3l:89(l) together with any amendments hereinafter enacted by the
General Court and as further defined in this Section and in Article X, Chapter 10 of the Zoning
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth.
A. Membership and Term
l. Membership: The Historic District Commission shall consist of seven members
and two alternates appointed by the City Council. One of the members shall be a
City Council member and another may be a Planning Board member as provided
by State Law. At least two members shall be residents of the Historic District and
at least one member shall be a person owning or being employed in a business
within the Historic District. All appointees must be residents of Portsmouth. All
members are required to have demonstrated interest in and commitment to
promote the purposes of historic districting as stated in this Ordinance. A
member's term serving at the time of enactment of this Ordinance shall not be
affected. Future appointments, however, shall be filled in accordance with the
provision of this Section. (Amended 9/21/98; Amended 11/22/2010)
2. Term: The members of the Commission shall be appointed for three-year terms.
In the event a vacancy is created, an interim appointment shall be made in
accordance with the procedures described above to complete the unexpired term.
All members shall serve without compensation.
3. Attendance: Records of attendance shall be kept by the Commission. The
attendance records shall be reported to the City Council on an annual basis. If a
member notifies the Chairman of the Commission prior to a meeting that he will
not be able to attend the meeting due to sickness, vacation, or business obligations
such absence will be considered an excused absence and so noted in the minutes
of the meeting. The appointed alternate shall serve in the absence of a member.
The City Council shall declare vacant the office of any member who has
unexcused absences from twenty-five percent or more of the regularly scheduled
meetings of the Commission in any quarter.
B. Organization, Meetings and Rules
l. The Commission shall annually elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary
from the appointed members and create and fill such other offices, as it may deem
necessary to fulfill its work during the first meeting of July. The Commission
shall meet at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the majority of
the Commission may determine, and shall adopt rules for the orderly conduct of
meetings. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept and all records and meetings of
the Commission shall be open to the public.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 1
2. Quorum: In order for the Historic District Commission to issue a Certificate of
Approval or Notice of Disapproval, at least five members must be present to
constitute a quorum for the conduct of such business, and a majority of the
members voting in the affirmative shall be required to issue a Certificate of
Approval. (Adopted 9/25/89)
C. Powers and Duties
l. The Historic District Commission, consistent with the powers specified in the
preamble of this Section, shall review and approve or disapprove all applications
for construction, alteration, repair, moving and/or demolition of buildings or
structures located within an historic district(s) before any building, demolition, or
other permit may be issued by the Building Inspector, subject, however to the
provision of the Scope of Review as specified in Article X, Section l0:1004. The
review shall be limited to the exterior of the building(s) or structures and shall not
apply to the interiors thereof.
2. The Building Inspector shall notify the Chairman of the Historic District
Commission within seven working days after receipt of any application for permit,
which is subject to the Scope of Review and conditions of this Ordinance.
3. It shall be the duty of the Commission to file with the Building Inspector or other
duly delegated authority, either a Certificate of Approval or a Notice of
Disapproval following the review and determination of the application. Said
certificate shall be filed with the Building Inspector within thirty calendar days
after the filing of the application for said certificate, unless the applicant shall
agree in writing to a longer period of time. No building permit shall be issued
until a Certificate of Approval signed by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman has
been filed with the Building Inspector. In the case of disapproval, such notice
shall be binding upon the Building Inspector and no permit shall be issued. Failure
to file said certificates within the specified period of time shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the Historic District Commission.
4. The Commission may request reports and recommendations regarding the
feasibility of the applicant's proposal from the Planning Board, Fire Chief,
Building Inspector, Health Officer and such other administrative officials who
may possess information pertinent to the application. The Commission may
request advice from such professional, educational, cultural or other groups as
may be deemed necessary for the determination of a reasonable decision. The
Historic District Commission may request the City Manager to have persons
present whose input is deemed necessary.
5. The Commission may request such technical assistance and consultants as may be
deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance subject to funding, if
necessary, by the City Council.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 1
6. The Historic District Commission shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules
and regulations necessary for the conduct of business providing the same have
been approved by the City Council. The Commission also shall prepare and issue
guidelines to assist the applicants in determining the appropriateness of the
applicant's proposal.
D. Appeal: Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Historic District Commission
shall have a right of appeal to the Board of Adjustment as provided by State Law. Any
such appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment within thirty days of the date of
final decision of the Historic District Commission. Any person aggrieved may apply to
the Commission for a rehearing. Upon the filing of application for rehearing, which must
include a written statement with reasons for the request, the Commission shall either
grant or deny the same. In the event such a rehearing is granted, the Commission shall
schedule the rehearing for the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting, except at
the request of the Petitioner. (Adopted 9/25/89)
Section l.405: HOUSING AUTHORITY
A. Membership, Qualifications, Tenure: The Housing Authority shall consist of five
commissioners appointed by the Mayor to apportioned five year terms. The
qualifications, tenure, and succession of the said commissioners shall be those set forth in
Chapters 203-5 through 203-7 of the N.H. RSA.
B. Power: The Housing Authority shall constitute a public body corporate and politic,
exercising public and essential governmental functions within the provisions of
Chapter 203-8 N.H. RSA, and all other provisions of the Housing Authority Law of N.H.
as contained in said Chapter 203.
Section l.406: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
A. Membership and Terms: The Planning and Development Council shall consist of nine
members:
Chairman and one member of the Planning Board;
Chairman and one member of the Economic Development Comm.;
Chairman and one member of the Portsmouth Housing Authority;
Chairman and one member of the Conservation Commission;
City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the Chairman of the Council. Members shall serve terms of four
years with the exception of the first members appointed to this Commission:
2 shall be appointed for one year;
2 shall be appointed for two years;
2 shall be appointed for three years;
2 shall be appointed for four years.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 1
B. Powers and Duties
l. The Council shall advise the City Council on such matters as it deems appropriate
for the City Council to consider in the development of planning goals, objectives
and programs for the City of Portsmouth in the several areas represented by the
membership of the Council.
2. The Council shall act as coordinating and information exchanging agency for city
planning and development.
3. The Council shall meet monthly and shall submit a semi-annual report of its
activities including recommendations to the City Council to include record of the
vote and any minority report, if the minority members wish to file such a report.
4. The Directors of the several departments and agencies represented by the
members of the Council shall function as advisors to the Council.
Section l.407: CONSERVATION COMMISSION
A. Authority to Establish, Purpose: The City Council of the City of Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, hereby does adopt the provisions of Chapter 36-A of the RSA of the
State of New Hampshire which chapter authorizes the establishment of a conservation
commission, for the promotion and development of the natural resources and for the
protection of watershed resources of the City.
B. Establishment, Duties and Powers: There hereby is established the Portsmouth
Conservation Commission which shall consist of seven members and two alternates to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The duties and powers and
terms of membership shall be set forth in said Chapter 36-A. (Amended 8/16/99)
Section 1.408: CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
(amended in its entirety 2/26/96)
A. Membership, Qualifications, Tenure: The Cable Television and Communications
Commission shall consist of five (5) commissioners and one alternate commissioner
appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the City Council. Of the initial
appointments, three shall be of three (3) years and two shall be for two (2) years.
Thereafter, all appointments including the alternate commissioner shall be for a term of
three years. The alternate commissioner shall attend all Commission meetings and may
vote at any time when there are less than five commissioners otherwise voting.
(Amended 10/3/05)
Commissioners shall be residents of the City of Portsmouth at the time and during the
terms of their appointments. Commissioners shall be familiar with the general concepts
underlying the operation of cable television.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 1
B. The Commission shall have the authority to establish standing sub-committees on matters
pertaining to the operation and performance of cable companies within the City.
Such subcommittees shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Cable Commission. In the
first instance, the standing Sub-committees shall consist of:
Government/Education Access Channels, I-Net System and Customer Service.
The Commission shall have the right to appoint non-Commission members to
subcommittees; when possible, the Commission shall attempt to use Portsmouth
residents for such appointments. If the Commission wishes to appoint a non-
Portsmouth resident who has skills helpful to the Commission's work; the
Commission shall have the authority to make such an appointment.
C. Powers: In addition to establishing the standing Sub-Committees referenced above, the
Commission shall have the authority to eliminate such Sub-Committees and create new
ones as the Commission deems appropriate. The Commission shall oversee the operation
of the existing Cable Television Franchise Agreement and any future agreements, which
the City Council may approve.
D. The Commission shall meet as often as deemed appropriate and necessary to insure the
proper operation of the Franchise Agreement. The Commission shall, upon request of the
City Council, submit written or verbal reports of its activities.
Section 1.409: PORTSMOUTH HOUSING ENDOWMENT FUND ADVISORY
BOARD
A. The PHEF Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) voting members, specifically:
1. A realtor maintaining an office in the City of Portsmouth (residential real estate),
who shall be a resident of Portsmouth;
2. A residential real estate banker, who shall be a resident of Portsmouth;
3. A local appraiser, who shall be resident of Portsmouth;
4. A City resident;
5. A representative of the Portsmouth Housing Corporation;
6. An administrative official of the City from the Bureau of Community &
Economic Development, who shall be an ex-officio member;
7. An administrative official of the City from the Legal Department, who shall be an
ex-officio member.
All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council with the exception of the City
officials who shall be designated by the City Manager.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 1
B. Term: The appointed members of the Board shall serve a three-year term and shall serve
without compensation.
C. Powers:
1. Formulate general policies regarding the operation of the program including
application criteria;
2. Establish specific policies as the need may arise dictated by the program demands;
3. Advise the City Manager and City staff with regard to the operation of the
program;
4. The Advisory Group shall not have the authority over the investment of the PHEF
Trust, which function shall remain with the Trustees of the Trust Funds.
D. Meetings: The Advisory Group shall meet at least semi-annually and may be called by
the City Manager, the City staff representatives or upon the request of the Advisory Board
on five (5) days notice, which notice may be waived in an emergency.
(Section 1.409 Adopted in its entirety 5/20/96)
Section 1.410: MICROENTERPRISE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
A. The Microenterprise Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7) voting members:
(Amended 9/22/97)
1. An Attorney
2. Two (2) Accountants or Commercial Loan Officers (Amended 9/22/97)
3. Four (4) owners of small businesses, (businesses with ten (10) or fewer
employees, including the owner) (Amended 9/22/97)
All members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council. Preference will always
be given to Portsmouth residents unless there is an overriding reason for selecting an
individual who is employed in Portsmouth, yet is not a resident.
B. Term: The members of the Committee shall serve a three-year term and shall serve
without compensation.
C. Powers:
1. Formulate general policies regarding the operation of the program, including
application selection criteria.
2. Establish specific policies as the need may arise dictated by the program demands.
3. Advise the City Manager and staff with regard to the operation of the program.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 1
D. Meetings: The advisory Committee shall meet at least semi-annually and may be called
by the City Manager, the City staff or upon the request of the Committee on five (5) days
notice, which notice may be waived in an emergency.
Section 1.411: PEIRCE ISLAND COMMITTEE
A. Membership and Term: The Peirce Island Committee shall consist of not less than twelve
(12) or more than eighteen (18) regular members. The members shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council for a term of two (2) years,
coterminous with the City Council term.
B. Powers and Duties: The Committee shall provide advice and recommendations to the
City Manager and the City Council with respect to all issues affecting the development
and use of Peirce Island, including the solicitation and acceptance of grants; the
expenditure of any funds for specific improvements; and any expenditures from the
Peirce Island Trust Fund. Nothing herein shall limit the power of the City Council or
City Manager to take immediate action in the event of exigent circumstances. (Amended
5/17/99)
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Peirce Island Committee to encourage the use and
enhancement of Peirce Island in the manner which maximizes the value and use of the
island for the residents of the City of Portsmouth while minimizing the impact on the
environmental condition and natural beauty of the island.
Section 1.412: PARKING AND TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE (Adopted
11/21/2011)
The Parking and Traffic and Safety Committee shall be established and shall have the
duties and authority as described in Chapter 7, Article I of these ordinances.
Section 1.413: TREES AND PUB LIC GREENERY COMMITTEE (Adopted 10/21/2013)
There is hereby established a Trees & Public Greenery Committee. The Committee shall
consist of nine (9) voting members including the following: City Manager or designee; Tree
Warden or designee; the Public Works Foreman in charge of tree maintenance; and six (6)
individuals with an interest in trees and public greenery. Members of the Committee, other than
City Officials listed above, shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for three year terms
with the length of the initial terms being staggered at the discretion of the Council. Vacancies for
the unexpired terms shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
The main purpose of this Committee shall be to advise and assist the City’s Tree Warden
in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance as well as to ensure the proper expansion,
protection, and maintenance of the City’s Urban Forest consistent with best arboricultural
practices, horticultural practices, aesthetic concerns, and public safety. The Committee shall,
with the assistance of the Department of Public Works, collect and maintain all records and data
necessary to objectively evaluate whether progress is being made toward the proper protection
and expansion of the City’s Urban Forest. The Committee shall prepare an annual report
summarizing all activity relating to this Ordinance and shall offer recommendations for actions to
better achieve the proper maintenance and expansion of the City’s Urban Forest. This report
shall be presented to the City Council for its consideration.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 1
ARTICLE V:PURCHASING PROCEDURES
Section l.500: PURCHASING POLICY
The City Manager shall develop, implement and maintain a purchasing system which shall be
contained in a printed purchasing manual consistent with the provisions of the City Code of
Ordinances and which shall meet the following objectives:
A. To procure materials, supplies, equipment and services other than professional, at the
lowest cost consistent with the quality and service rendered.
B. To establish clearly the responsibility for the purchasing functions as being vested in the
Purchasing Agent only.
C. To exercise positive financial control over purchases.
D. To provide an efficient means for procurement of materials, supplies, or equipment which
avoids duplication and overstocking.
E. To establish and maintain standards of quality in materials, supplies, equipment and
services other than professional, based on suitability for use.
Section l.50l: COMPETITIVE BIDS
Purchasing by the City of Portsmouth shall be made on the basis of competitive bids where
practical. Competitive bidding is deemed generally impractical for the following sorts of
purchases:
A. Goods or services valued at less than $10,000; this limit shall be adjusted annually effect
July 1 by the Finance Director in accordance with the most recent available regionally
adjusted Consumer Price Index (CPI) as published by the US Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjusted amount shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk. (Amended 5/4/98)
B. Professional or other services involving special skills, training, experience, taste or
discretion;
C. Goods or services required in an emergency;
D. Goods or services available from a single source.
Section l.502: BIDDING PROCESS
A. For purchases by competitive bidding, a notice inviting bids shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the City at least seven days preceding the last day
set for the receipt of bids. Other forms of notice likely to come to the attention of
prospective bidders may also be given.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 1
B. The notice shall generally describe the goods to be purchased and shall state how to
obtain bid forms, specifications and other available information, the period for submitting
bids, and the time and place for the opening of the bids.
C. All bids shall be submitted to the City Purchasing Officer in writing, sealed and plainly
marked as bids on the envelope.
D. No bids shall be opened until the appointed time.
E. At the time and place stated in the public notice all bids shall be opened by the City
Purchasing Officer or his agent. All bid openings shall be open to the public and all bids
shall be available for examination by any resident of Portsmouth.
Section l.503: AWARDS
A. Except in cases involving the purchase of real estate owned by the City of Portsmouth,
the City Purchasing Officer shall award contracts by competitive bids to the lowest bidder
who properly responds to the invitation to bid, unless the City Purchasing Officer shall
deem said low bid unsatisfactory in the best interest of the City.
In the case of a response to an invitation to bid on real estate owned by the City of
Portsmouth, the City Purchasing Officer shall accept the highest responsive bids unless he
shall deem said bid unsatisfactory in the best interest of the City.
B. In such cases, the bids shall be referred to the City Council, which may then either
determine the lowest and best bidder and award the contract to such bidder or reject all
bids.
C. In determining the lowest and best bidder, the Council may consider:
l. Price and quantity of the goods or services offered;
2. The capacity, skill and financial resources of the bidder to perform fully and
properly;
3. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the
bidder;
4. The quality of the bidder's performance on previous contracts;
5. Any conditions attached to the bid.
D. In cases where the City of Portsmouth owns a mobile home(s) with taxes owed on such
property in the amount of $10,000.00 or less, the Tax Collector shall be authorized to
negotiate the sale of such mobile homes, with the intent to recoup as much of the taxes
owed as possible as well as such additional monies that are negotiated.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 1
If the Tax Collector can successfully negotiate a sale price for the mobile home, he/she
shall then recommend that the City of Portsmouth sell such property, and the City
Manager shall be authorized to transfer such property without any further authority of the
City Council or Planning Board. Subject to the review of the internal Auditor before the
sale can take place. (Subsection D Adopted in its entirety 1/9/95)
Section 1.504: PUBLIC AUCTION
A. A public auction shall only be conducted by an auctioneer licensed by the State of
New Hampshire.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall prepare a notice identifying the particulars of the proposed
public auction requesting proposals. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper
having general circulation within the State of New Hampshire at least seven days
preceding the last day set for receipt of proposals. Other forms of notice likely to come to
the attention of prospective auctioneers may also be given.
C. All proposals shall be submitted to the City Purchasing Officer in writing by the
published deadline.
D. The City Purchasing Officer shall forward all proposals to the City Council for final
selection by the Council.
(Section 1.504 adopted 12/07/87)
Section l.505: PURCHASING RECORDS
A. Property Valued at Less than $500 Other Than Real Estate:
Upon request of the proper department head and with the approval of the City Manager,
the City Purchasing Officer shall conduct the sale of any municipal supplies, materials
and equipment valued at less than $500 and no longer required by the City.
B. Property Valued at $500 Or More and Real Estate:
l. No municipal supplies, materials and equipment valued at $500 or more and no
real estate whatsoever shall be offered for sale unless and until the City Council so
orders.
2. Any such sale authorized by the City Council may be conducted by competitive
bidding, public auction, or any other means authorized by the City Council as
follows: (amended in its entirely 12/07/87)
a. If the sale is authorized by competitive bidding, the sale shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedures for purchasing by competitive bidding
and shall be made to the highest bidder;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 1
b. If the sale is authorized by public auction, it shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures for public auction;
c. If the sale is authorized by any means other than competitive bidding or
public auction, it must be by 2/3 vote of the City Council and in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
3. Property taken by tax lien may be deeded to the person from who it was taken or
his heirs or devises for a sum equal to the full amount of taxes, interest and
penalties due thereon in accordance with Chapter 80 of the RSA's of the State of
New Hampshire. (Adopted 12/07/87)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 1
ARTICLE VI: (RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 1
ARTICLE VII: VALIDITY AND ADOPTION
Section l.701: VALIDITY
Separability: Should any section, clause, or provision of this Code be declared by the Court to be
invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Code as a whole or any part thereof, other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
Section l.702: ADOPTION
A. Ordinances Repealed: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this
"Administrative Code" are hereby repealed.
B. Short Title and Effective Date: This Code, entitled "The Administrative Code" shall
become effective upon its passage by the City Council.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 1
ARTICLE VIII: CODE OF ETHICS
Section l.801: DEFINITIONS
For purpose of this Article, the following terms shall be defined in the following manner:
A. Officer: The term "Officer" shall be defined to include every member of the City
Council, School Board, Police Commission, Fire Commission, each member of every
land use regulatory board, i.e. the Board of Adjustment, Planning Board, Historic District
Commission, Conservation Commission, Technical Advisory Committee, Traffic Safety
Committee, Building Code Board of Appeals, Recreation Board, Planning and
Development Council, and Economic Development Commission, every department head
as that term is used in the Administrative Code, Chief of Police, Fire Chief,
Superintendent of Schools, the Trustees of the Trust Funds and members of the Housing
Authority.
B. Employee: The term "Employee" shall include all employees of the City including the
Police, School and Fire Departments whose salary is paid in whole or in part from the
City Treasury.
C. Governing Body: The term "Governing Body" shall mean the City Council,
School Board, Police Commission, and Fire Commission.
D. Official Duties: The term "Official Duties" shall mean the following:
1. In the case of members of the City Council, School Board, Fire Commission,
Police Commission and the City Manager, those duties and responsibilities set
forth in the City Charter and/or established by State law.
2. In the case of members of Land Use Regulatory Boards, the Trustees of the Trust
Fund and the Portsmouth Housing Authority, those duties and responsibilities set
forth in the legislation that established each board and/or outlines the duties and
responsibilities of each board.
3. In the case of the Chief of Police, the Superintendent of Schools, the Fire Chief,
and all employees, those duties and responsibilities set forth in the respective job
description for each party or employee.
Section 1.802: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A. No Officer or employee shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a
financial or other private interest, direct or indirect, which is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his/or her official duties.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 1
B. Representing Private Interests Before City Agencies: No Officer or employee shall
appear in behalf of private interests before any governing body or land use regulatory
board of which the officer or employee is a member or membership on which is subject to
approval by the officer or employee.
Officers and employees, however, may appear without compensation in behalf of
constituents or in the performance of public or civic obligations. This section shall not
prohibit appearances upon matters only incidentally requiring official action which do not
develop into a substantial part of the employment, provided, that the retainer is not for the
purpose of appearing before the governing body or land use regulatory board.
C. Representing Private Interests Before Courts: No officer or employee shall represent
private interests in any action or proceeding against the interests of the land use
regulatory board or governing body of which the officer or employee is a member, or
membership on which is subject to approval by the officer or employee in any litigation to
which the City is a party.
D. Disclosures of Interest in Legislation: A Councilor who has a direct or indirect financial
or other private interest in any proposed legislation shall publicly disclose, on the official
records of the Council, the nature and extent of such interest.
E. Disclosures by Officer or Employee of Interest in Legislation: An officer or employee
who has a direct or indirect financial interest or other private interest in any legislation
and who participates in discussion before or gives official opinion to the Council, shall
publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of such interest.
F. Gifts and Favors: No officer or employee shall accept any gift, over $100.00, whether in
the form of service, loan, thing or promise, any other form from any person, firm or
corporation which to his/or her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any
manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the City. This provision shall not apply to
campaign contributions of $100.00 or less.
G. Disclosures of Confidential Information: No officer or employee, who holds any
investment direct or indirect in any financial, business, commercial or other private entity
which creates a conflict with his/her official duties shall publicly disclose on the official
record the nature and extent of such interest.
H. Investments in Conflict with Official Duties: Any officer or employee, who holds any
investment direct or indirect in any financial, business, commercial or other private entity
which creates a conflict with his/her official duties shall publicly disclose on the official
record the nature and extent of such interest.
I. Incompatible Employment: No officer or employee shall engage in or accept private
employment or render or seek services or goods for private interests when such
employment or service creates a conflict with his/her official duties.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 1
Section 1.803
Any violation of any provisions of this ordinance shall constitute cause for fine, suspension or
removal from office or employment.
Section l.804: BOARD OF ETHICS
A. There is hereby created and established a method for appointing a Board of Ethics. This
Board shall consist of five persons: one member each selected by lot from the
City Council, School Board, Police Commission and Fire Commission and the
City Attorney (ex officio) or such other legal counsel (ex officio) that the Board should
decide. The Board member shall be drawn at the first meeting of the calendar year of
each of the governing bodies.
The members of the Board shall elect a chairperson. They shall adopt such rules for the
conduct of their business as they see fit and they shall have the power to draw upon the
various City departments for reports and information and stenographic and clerical help.
They shall have all subpoena powers as may be available to them under State law.
B. Advisory Opinions: Upon the written request of the Officer or employee concerned, the
Board shall render advisory opinions based upon the provisions of this Code. The Board
shall file its advisory opinions with the City Clerk but may delete the name of the officer
or employee involved.
C. Hearings and Determinations: Any individual having information that an officer or
employee as defined in Section 1:801, other than the City Manager or the City Attorney,
is engaged in improper activities or has a conflict of interest may present his or her
complaint to the City Attorney.
l. Said complaint shall be in writing, under oath, specific and to the point. The
City Attorney shall review the written complaint with the Mayor and if either the
Mayor or the City Attorney feels that the complaint is of substance, then the
Mayor shall refer the matter to the Board.
2. If both the Mayor and City Attorney believe that the complaint is without
substance, the person making the complaint and the subject of the complaint shall
be notified in writing of that fact.
3. The Board shall hold a hearing which may be public or private at the discretion of
the Board and at which the accused party shall be entitled to be represented by
Counsel at his or her own expense to examine the party making the complaint, to
summon witnesses and to present evidence on his or her behalf. If the Board finds
that the individual is guilty as charged in the complaint, the whole matter shall be
referred to the appropriate governing body for enforcement as set forth in
Section 1:805.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 1
4. Complaints against the City Manager and/or City Attorney for violations of this
Ordinance shall be in writing, under oath, specific and to the point, and shall be
referred directly to the Mayor or Assistant Mayor. If either the Mayor or Assistant
Mayor believes that the complaint is of substance, then the complaint shall be
referred to the Board for a hearing as set forth in paragraph C.3 above. If the City
Attorney and the Assistant Mayor believe that the complaint is not of substance,
then the person making the complaint and the Mayor shall be notified of that
decision.
5. Complaints against the Mayor shall be filed with the City Attorney who shall
review them with the Assistant Mayor. If either the City Attorney or the Assistant
Mayor believes that the complaint is of substance, then the complaint shall be
referred to the Board for a hearing as set forth in paragraph C.3 above. If the
City Attorney and the Assistant Mayor believe that the complaint is not of
substance then the person making the complaint and the Mayor shall be notified of
that decision.
6. All members of the City Council (including the Mayor), School Board,
Police Commission and Fire Commission are eligible to serve and must serve on
the board when requested to do so except, however, that any person that has been
charged in a complaint shall be barred from serving on that particular board.
7. All complaints shall be disposed of or forwarded to the Board by the
City Attorney and/or the Mayor and/or the Assistant Mayor within thirty days
after receipt.
8. The Board shall have thirty days to investigate and hold meetings and to report to
the appropriate governing body as a whole if their findings warrant further action.
9. The statements of the findings of the Board shall be issued upon the request of any
person charged.
Section l.805: ENFORCEMENT
A. Sanctions: In the event that the Board of Ethics determines that any officer or employee
subject to its control, has engaged in any act prohibited by this ordinance or failed to
make a mandated disclosure, the governing body shall take any one of the following
steps:
l. In the case of the Governing body members:
a. Vote for removal pursuant to the City Charter as amended
b. Vote to publicly censure the offending member
c. Vote to place the matter on file
d. Vote for innocence of any wrong doing
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 1
2. In the case of all officers and employees the governing body, consistent with the
Merit System and any applicable bargaining agreements, shall:
a. Vote for removal
b. Vote for dismissal
c. Vote for suspension for a definite period
d. Vote for the censuring
e. Vote to place the matter on file
f. Vote for innocence of any wrongdoing.
B. Criminal Sanctions: In addition to the civil sanctions imposed by this ordinance,
violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a criminal offense and the
City Council may authorize the City Attorney or any other attorney approved by it to
prosecute such a violation in the Portsmouth District Court.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this Ordinance upon conviction in the
Portsmouth District Court shall be $l,000 for each offense.
(Adopted In Its Entirety 4/4/88)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 32 Chapter 1
ARTICLE IX: CONFLICT OF INTEREST/MANDATORY FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
Section 1.901: MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS DISCLOSURES (Amended 12/22/14; amended
04/16/18)
A. Preliminary: This ordinance is adopted by the City of Portsmouth in compliance with the
mandate contained in the Charter Amendment entitled "CONFLICT OF INTEREST"
which was adopted by referendum vote of the City of Portsmouth on November 3, 1987
as amended pursuant to referendum vote of the City of Portsmouth on November 7, 2017.
This ordinance may be referred to as the Mandatory Disclosure Ordinance.
B. Definition: For purposes of this Article only, the following terms shall be defined in the
following manner:
Municipal Official: For the purpose of mandatory financial disclosure, the term
"Municipal Official" in this provision shall include members of the City Council, School
Board, Police Commission, Fire Commission, Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment and Historic District Commission.
Income: The term "income" shall be defined as a gain of recurrent benefit usually
measured in money that derives from capital, labor, or investment.
Capital Assets: The term "capital assets" shall be defined to include interests and
investments in Portsmouth-based businesses, businesses owned by Portsmouth residents
and businesses which transact business with the City of Portsmouth. The term "capital
assets” shall also be defined to include all real estate holdings and interests in real estate
located in the City of Portsmouth.
Financial Disclosure Statement: The term "financial disclosure statement" shall mean a
written statement, given under oath:
1) Listing an individual's primary source of annual income and capital assets.
However, in no instance shall disclosure be mandated of any capital asset
whose value at the time of disclosure is below Ten Thousand ($10,000)
dollars nor shall the value of any source of income or the value of any capital
asset be required for disclosure.
2) Listing any sources of income, whether or not connected with the City of
Portsmouth which individually produce income in an amount greater than
$10,000 calculated annually on a per calendar year basis.
C. Obligation of All Municipal Officials: All municipal officials will maintain an updated
financial disclosure statement in the Office of the City Clerk. The Financial Disclosure
Statement shall be updated annually as of June 30th. Forms shall be based on the form
used by the State to implement RSA 15-A (attached) prepared by the City Clerk for
approval by the City Council and made available to all municipal officials for this
purpose.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 33 Chapter 1
D. Determining Violations: For violation and enforcement purposes, complaints alleging
violation of the mandatory disclosure ordinances shall be administered in accordance with
the process under the Municipal Code of Ethics, Reference Chapter I, Article VIII.
E. Public Records: Financial Disclosure Statements shall be public records.
F. Return of Records: Financial Disclosure Statements shall be returned to the public
official six (6) months after leaving office.
G. Penalties: Any violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties prescribed for
violation of the City Code of Ethics, Sec. 1.801 et seq.
Section 1.902: ELECTION CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE (Adopted Section
1.902 in its Entirety 6/4/2007; amended 07/10/2017; amended 04/16/2018 pursuant to
referendum vote of the City of Portsmouth on November 7, 2017)
A. Required Disclosure: Each candidate for City Council, School Board, Police or Fire
Commissions, and every Political Action Committee shall report contributions and
election related expenditures.
1. Political Action Committee: The term “Political Action Committee” (PAC) is
any person or group of people raising and spending money to elect or defeat
candidates for City Council, School Board, Police and Fire Commissions or
pass or defeat Charter Amendments, Ballot Questions or Referenda.
B. The report of expenditures shall specify the cumulative total, need not be itemized, and
shall be required only if the candidate’s or Political Action Committee’s expenditures
since the last municipal election equal or exceed a cumulative total of $100.00.
C. The report of monetary contributions to the candidate or Political Action Committee shall
identify each contributor of $100.00 or more since the last municipal election by name,
address, amount and date of contribution(s).
D. The reports must be filed, or updated as appropriate, with the Office of the City Clerk
seven (7) days prior to any election at which the candidate, slate of candidates or Charter
Amendment, Ballot Question or Referendum appears.
E. Any contribution received within the seven (7) days prior to the election must be
submitted in a final report to the Office of the City Clerk no later than two (2) weeks
following the election.
F. Violations: For violation and enforcement purposes, complaints alleging violation of the
mandatory disclosure ordinance shall be administered in accordance with the process and
penalties available under the Municipal Code of Ethics, Reference Chapter 1, Article
VIII.
G. The City Clerk shall prepare forms which shall be utilized by all persons and Political
Action Committees subject to these disclosures.
H. Public Records: All election financial disclosures shall be public records.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 34 Chapter 1
Form used by the State to implement RSA 15-A
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 35 Chapter 1
ARTICLE X: CITY COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
The City hereby approves the establishment of a consolidated City communications system; the
purpose of which is to provide the most efficient and highest quality communications possible to
serve the emergency, fire, and police needs of the City of Portsmouth. All emergency
communications systems shall, in accordance with this ordinance, be located in the new Police
Communications Facility, which shall be located at One Junkins Avenue in the Municipal
Complex upon completion of construction.
Section 1.1001: OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT OF CONSOLIDATED CITY
SERVICES COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
A. All policies, procedures, rules and regulations governing the City's emergency
communications systems shall be developed and promulgated by the Portsmouth Police
Chief, together with the Portsmouth Fire Chief, who shall have co-equal status with the
Portsmouth Police Chief regarding the aforementioned policies and procedures.
B. Dispatch personnel shall be comprised of Portsmouth Police Department employees, job
descriptions for such personnel shall be developed by the Police Chief and by the Fire
Chief. The hiring of dispatch personnel shall be conducted in accordance with normal
hiring policies for the Portsmouth Police Department; however, the Fire Chief shall play
an integral role in the hiring process for such dispatch personnel. The Police Chief and
Fire Chief will develop a training curriculum for dispatchers, and all dispatchers will
receive training before a consolidated City communication system is put into operation.
C. The Fire Chief shall develop policies for fire and ambulance dispatching, including
contractor ambulance services. Dispatchers will be cross-trained in fire and police
functions, and specific questions that must be asked by a dispatcher will be developed by
the Police Chief and Fire Chief for their respective services. Two dispatchers will be on
duty 24-hours per day. Each dispatcher will have a primary function assignment on each
watch, either police function or fire function; however, each dispatcher shall have the
ability to provide support services for the other, unless two simultaneous emergencies
occur. In the event of simultaneous emergencies, the police personnel shall provide the
necessary backup until the emergency is completely disposed.
D. A part-time dispatcher list will be established to provide trained personnel when City
personnel cannot fill a vacancy.
E. The emergency communications project will be submitted to the City Council through the
Portsmouth Police Commission and will be part of the Portsmouth Police Department's
budget.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 36 Chapter 1
Section 1.1002: COORDINATION OF RELATED COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
A. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the regular workday dispatching
function for Public Works activities, and will continue to maintain a base station and
separate frequency to handle this activity.
All Public Works emergency dispatching (nights, weekends, holidays) will be
coordinated by the Fire Chief, unless the emergency is of such a nature that the Director
of Public Works assigns a Public Works dispatcher to handle dispatching from the Public
Works base during the course of the emergency response, i.e., snowstorm, flood, etc. In
the event that a Public Works dispatcher is assigned to handle this dispatching function,
then the Director of Public Works shall maintain responsibility of such dispatching.
B. The Director of Emergency Management Services, in conjunction with the Fire Chief, the
Police Chief and the Director of Public Works, shall develop policies to assure
coordinated responses and communications during any unusual occurrences that entail the
use of the City's emergency management ordinance.
(Adopted 1/15/90) (Effective 7/01/91)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 37 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XI: BUDGET PREPARATION DATE
Section 1.1101:
Pursuant to Section 7.9 of the Charter of the City of Portsmouth, each officer or director of every
municipal department, including the Charter departments, shall submit an itemized estimate of
the expenditures for the next fiscal year for the department or activities under that individual's
control to the City Manager no later than March 15 of each year.
(Adopted in its entirety 9/17/90)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 38 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XII: PROHIBITED PRACTICES IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
Section 1.1201:
A. FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
It shall be unlawful for any person to have a firearm in his or her possession at any time
while within any public building.
B. EXCEPTIONS
1. The prohibitions established in Section 1.1201.A, shall not apply to bona fide
federal, state or local law enforcement officials.
2. The Chief of Police is authorized to grant advance written permission to allow any
individual or organization demonstrating good reason to possess a firearm within
a public building with permission to do so under such terms and conditions as the
Chief may establish.
C. PENALTY
The penalty for violation of this provision shall be $500 per occurrence.
(Article XII adopted in its entirety, as amended, 2/4/91)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 39 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XIII: MUNICIPAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Section 1.1301: CITATION AUTHORITY
A. City departments or officials charged with the responsibility for enforcing the ordinances
and codes of the City are hereby authorized to issue citations for any violation of the
ordinances or codes that they are responsible for enforcing. The enforcement authority
provided hereby is in addition to the authority for ordinance and code enforcement that
currently exists.
Section 1.1302: DEPARTMENTS AUTHORIZED
A. The heads of the Fire and Planning, Inspections and Department of Public Works and/or
employees designated by the heads of those departments are hereby authorized to issue
such citations.
B. All proposed citations are to be reviewed with the Office of the City Attorney prior to
issuance.
Section 1.1303: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS FUNCTION ESTABLISHED
A. An Ordinance violations function is hereby established for the purpose of processing
citations issued by the department authorized to issue such citations. This function shall
administratively be part of the Tax Collector's Office, and shall, in conjunction with the
departments involved, be responsible for preparing citation forms, distributing these
forms to the departments as needed and collecting, accounting for and depositing all
monies received from citation penalties (including currently existing parking citation
penalties) according to procedures established by the Finance Director. Additionally, this
function shall be responsible for initiating the appropriate judicial proceedings with
regard to citations that are not paid. It is the intent of this Section that parking violation
citations become a part of Ordinance Violation Citations.
Section 1.1304: CITATION DEFINED: CONTENTS
A. A citation is a written and/or printed notice describing a specific violation of a City
ordinance or code which is served on the person responsible for the violation. Each day
on which a violation exists or occurs is a separate offense and a citation may be issued for
each offense. A citation shall be served in the manner described in this article and shall
contain the following information.
1. A clear and concise description of the violation.
2. The location of the violation and the date and time on which it was observed.
3. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 40 Chapter 1
4. The penalty for the violation as provided for by this article.
5. A statement or table describing the penalties for future occurrences of the same
violation.
6. A statement as to whether the citation is being issued for a first, second or
subsequent offense.
7. The name and address of the office to which payment of the penalty may be made.
8. The time period during which a reduced penalty may be paid in full satisfaction of
the citation.
9. Notification that failure to pay the penalty will result in court action.
10. The signature and printed name and department of the individual issuing the
citation.
Section 1.1305: SERVICE OF CITATION
A. Any citation shall be served by the official issuing it in any one of the following ways.
1. In hand to the person responsible for the violation.
2. At the abode of the person responsible for the violation.
3. By certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address
of the person responsible for the violation.
4. In any other manner permitted by the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
B. The official serving the citation shall maintain a record of the date, time and manner of
service of the citation including the Post Office receipt and return receipt if service was
accomplished by registered or certified mail.
Section 1.1306: CITATION PENALTIES
A. Except for parking violations, the penalties for any offense for which a citation has been
issued shall be as follows:
First offense $ 25.00 if paid within 7 days
$ 50.00 thereafter
Second offense $ 50.00 if paid within 7 days
$100.00 thereafter
Subsequent offense $100.00 if paid within 7 days
$200.00 thereafter
Penalties for parking violations shall be as established by the appropriate ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 41 Chapter 1
Section 1.1307: GENERAL PENALTY: CONTINUING VIOLATIONS
A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who commits an act prohibited or
made unlawful by this code or any other code or ordinance of the City or who fails to
perform any act required by any such codes or ordinances shall be guilty of a violation
and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each day any violation of any provision of any code or
ordinance shall exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 1.1308: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY CITATION: SEPARATE
OFFENSE
A. Whenever any person fails to pay any penalty imposed pursuant to a citation issued under
the authority granted by this code, such person shall be guilty of a violation and shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense. Each citation penalty, which is not paid, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Article XIII adopted in its entirety, as amended, 5/4/92)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 42 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XIV: MUNICIPAL FUND BALANCE
Section 1.1401: MANDATED FUND BALANCE
The General Fund Balance of the City, at the end of any fiscal year as recorded in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and excluding any and all reserves, and
any dedicated fund balances of the General Fund (otherwise referred to as Unassigned Fund
Balance of the General Fund) shall be maintained at the prescribed amount of not less than 10%
of the actual Total General Fund appropriations for that fiscal year.
Section 1.1402: OPERATIONAL OBJECTIVE
Notwithstanding the provision of 1.1401, it is recognized that the financial management goal of
the City of Portsmouth is to annually maintain an Unassigned Fund Balance of between 10% and
17% of total general fund appropriations.
Section 1.1403: USE OF UNASSIGNED FUND BALANCE
In any subsequent fiscal year, the City Council may utilize the excess of actual Unassigned Fund
Balance of the General Fund (as determined by the annual financial audit of the City) over the
prescribed level in Section 1.1401 from the prior fiscal year for capital projects, transfers to
capital reserve, or any other appropriation nonrecurring in nature.
Section 1.1404: EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS
At any time, in any budget year, the City Council may, after notice and public hearing, make
emergency appropriations from Fund Balance to meet an essential need for public expenditure.
Such appropriations shall be adopted by written resolution, after notice and public hearing by a
favorable vote of a majority of the members of the City Council. If such appropriation reduces
the Unassigned Fund Balance to a level below that prescribed by 1.1401 of this ordinance, the
resolution authorizing such appropriation shall include a plan to restore the funds within a period
not to exceed two (2) years to the prescribed level. The City Council may, by a two-thirds (2/3)
majority vote appropriate from the Unassigned Fund Balance for non-emergency appropriations
by following the foregoing procedure, provided that such appropriation does not reduce the
Unassigned Fund Balance below the minimum balance required by 1.1401 of this ordinance.
Section 1.1405: RESTORATION PLAN
Whenever the Unassigned Fund Balance of the General Fund is less than the prescribed level, the
City Council shall be required, within the fiscal year, to formulate and implement a plan to
restore such prescribed amount to the General Fund, such plan shall not exceed a two (2) year
period.
(Article XIV - Adopted in its entirety 8/18/97; Amended 04-02-2012 replaced “Undesignated”
with “Unassigned”; further amended 02-19-2013)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 43 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XV: LEAVE AT TERMINATION FUND
Section 1.1501:
The City of Portsmouth shall establish a special revenue fund from which payments for leave at
termination shall be paid.
Section 1.1502:
The Leave at Termination Fund shall be created from leave at termination budgetary
appropriations, which shall be made by the Municipal, Police, Fire and School Departments. The
appropriation amount shall be determined by an actuarial study. The departments shall budget
the required amount as determined in accordance with that study.
Section 1.1503:
The actuarial study shall be reviewed every three years.
Section 1.1504:
Each department, except for the School Department, shall transfer the entire appropriated amount
from its termination line item to the special revenue fund on July 1, of each fiscal year starting
with FY1999. The School Department shall contribute to the special revenue fund in FY2000.
Section 1.1505:
Each department shall maintain its own balance within the fund, from which payments for leave
at termination shall be paid. In the event that any department incurs leave at termination liability
in excess of its balance in the special revenue fund, that department shall borrow from the reserve
for termination liability account. The debt created thereby shall be paid back through annual
appropriation transfers.
(Article XV adopted in its entirety 8/3/98)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 44 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XVI: ADOPTION OF FEES BY BUDGET RESOLUTION
Section 1.1601: PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted for the purpose of creating a more efficient system for the City to adopt
and adjust municipal fees.
Section1.1602: PROCEDURE
To the extent permitted by law and notwithstanding any ordinance previously adopted to the
contrary, all municipal fees, whether established by ordinance or otherwise shall be adopted and
may be amended by resolution during the annual budget adoption process.
Section 1.1603: EXCLUSION
This ordinance does not apply to penalties, fines or civil forfeitures or to fees established in
Chapter 7, Article II – Taxi Cabs.
Section 1.1604: DEFAULT
Any municipal fee which is not listed in the fee resolution adopted during the annual budget
process, or any municipal fee which is determined to require a process other than adoption by
annual budget resolution, shall remain at the level at which it was last validly adopted by the
City.
It is further ordained that the City Clerk is hereby authorized to replace the fee provision in any
appropriate ordinance, with a provision reading “Fees to be determined in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. Such ordinances include, but are not limited to the
following: (See list attached to ordinance as adopted).
(Article XVI adopted in its entirety 3/18/2002)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 45 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XVII: FUNDING OF PUBLIC ART
Section 1.1700: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is hereby declared that is shall be the public policy of the City of Portsmouth to assist and
encourage the participation of its citizens and visitors in the enjoyment of the many benefits
which flow from the arts. Among other activities to this end, the City will allocate a portion of
the expense of public building construction and significant building renovation projects to be
spent on works of art which shall be available for the benefit of all without additional cost to
those persons. Such works of art shall be called public art as defined in more detail herein.
Section 1.1701: DEFINITION OF PUBLIC ART
“Public Art” or “Public artworks” are meant to be enduring original artworks of the highest
quality and craftsmanship. The artworks should be an integral part of the landscaping and/or
architecture of a building or other site, considering the historical, geographical and social/cultural
context of the site and constructed on a scale that is proportional to the scale of the development.
“Artwork” – includes but is not limited to, painting, murals, inscriptions, stained glass, fiber
work, statues, relief’s or other sculpture, monuments, fountains, arches, or other structures
intended for ornament or commemoration. Also included in this definition are installations that
are technological in nature, carvings, frescoes, mosaics, mobiles, photographs, drawings,
collages, prints, crafts – both decorative and utilitarian in clay, fiber, wood, metal, glass, plastics
and other materials. Landscape items include the artistic placement of natural materials and
other functional art objects. Works of art may be portable as well as permanent.
This definition shall not include:
Objects that are mass-produced from a standard design or reproductions of original art works;
decorative, ornamental or functional elements, which are designed by the building architect;
landscape architecture and landscape gardening except where these elements are an integral part
of the artwork by the artist; directional elements such as super graphics, signage, or color coding
except where these elements are integral parts of the original work of art; logos or corporate
identity.
Section 1.1702: PUBLIC ART COMMITMENT
One (1%) percent of the bid price or negotiated contract price for the construction of all new
municipal buildings or for the renovation of existing municipal buildings, in which the bid price
or negotiated price shall be in excess of Two Million ($2,000,000.00) Dollars up to fifteen
Million ($15,000,000.00) Dollars (expressed in terms of actual construction costs exclusive of
design and engineering fees), shall be contributed to the Public Art Trust for the purpose of
funding public art. Thereafter, such funds shall be expended in accordance with the terms of this
ordinance and the Public Art Trust.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 46 Chapter 1
Section 1.1703: PUBLIC ART TRUST
There shall be created a Public Art Trust to serve as a repository of all public art contributions
generated by application of this ordinance. Such Trust shall be administered for the purpose of
implementation of this ordinance. The terms of the Trust shall be consistent with this ordinance
and shall be interpreted by reference to this ordinance.
Section 1.1704: EXEMPTION
By a two-thirds (2/3) vote, the City Council may exempt a municipal building, such as a water or
sewer plant, from the Public Art Commitment described in Section 1.1702 if the purpose of this
ordinance would not be fulfilled due to the building’s inaccessibility to the public, location, use
or other factors. Any Council determination to exempt a building under this provision shall be
made no later than the final vote of the Council authorizing the funding for the project.
(Amended 06/19/2017)
Section 1.1705: EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC ART FUNDS
Expenditure of public arts funds shall be determined by the City Council. In authorizing such
expenditures the Council shall apply the following protocol and criteria:
A. No less than ninety (90%) percent of the principal amount of public art
contribution generated by any particular building project shall be expended on the
site of that project.
B. In determining the selection of any public art project, the City Council may:
1. Refer the question to any agency of a public, non-profit or private nature
which might be selected by the City Council for an advisory report, or;
2. Refer the question to a standing committee for public art which may be
created by the City Council under such terms and conditions as it may
establish, or;
3. Create an ad hoc committee for any particular public art project under such
terms as the Council may establish, or;
4. Seek such other advisory recommendation as the City Council deems
appropriate
C. Upon the authorization by the City Council of a public arts project, the
administrative and financial implementation of that authorization shall be
performed by the administrative officials of the City.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 47 Chapter 1
Section 1.1706: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF PUBLIC ART
Public art funds under this ordinance and the Public Art Trust to be created in conjunction
herewith shall be available for repair and maintenance of public art, regardless of whether the
public art work was initially funded by the Public Art Trust or otherwise.
Section 1.1707: FUNDING ACCEPTED
This ordinance authorizes and the Public Art Trust shall provide for the acceptance by the City of
donations, grants or contributions to public art which might be approved from time to time by the
City Council.
(Adopted 9/18/2006 to become effective August 21, 2007)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 48 Chapter 1
ARTICLE XVIII: PAYMENT BY CREDIT CARD
Section 1.1801: AUTHORTITY GRANTED TO THE OFFICE OF CITY
MANAGER
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City by RSA 80:52-c the City Manager is hereby
authorized to direct appropriate municipal officials to accept payment of local taxes, charges
generated by the sale of utility services, or such other fees as the City Manager may determine by
use of a credit card.
Section 1.1802: SCOPE OF AUTHORITY
Authority granted to the City Manager pursuant to this ordinance includes but is not
limited to the following:
A. To determine the types of payments that may be accepted by credit card.
B. To determine the maximum or minimum amount of any individual credit card
transaction which shall be allowable for any particular payment.
C. Whether service charges shall be charged and the amount thereof.
D. To negotiate and execute processing agreements with third party credit card
processors governing the collection of credit card payments, including any terms
relating to the applicability of processing fees, the amount of such fees, and the
terms and remittance of funds to the City.
E. To execute such other agreements and take any further actions necessary to
implement and modify credit card payments in accordance with the terms of this
ordinance and RSA 80:52-c.
(Adopted 07/21/2008)
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 2
CHAPTER 2
SEAL, DEEDS AND ELECTIONS
Article I City Seal 2.101
Article II Deeds 2:201
Article III Elections 2:301
ARTICLE I: CITY SEAL
Section 2.101: DESCRIPTION
The seal of the City shall be a disk an inch and a half in diameter encompassed with laurel; upon
the border of the disk shall be the words:
"City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire, Incorporated 1849".
Upon the face of the disk shall be a shield with the following devices symbolic of commerce and
manufacturing: a wharf and docks, two schooners, several factory buildings and an engine with
transportation cars and at the bottom of the shield shall be the words "Settled 1623". The whole
shall be arranged according to the seal hereto annexed.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 2
ARTICLE II: DEEDS
Section 2.201: EXECUTION
All deeds, leases, indentures, or conveyances under seal, that may be given or required to be
executed by authority of the City Council, shall be signed by the City Manager and sealed with
the seal of the City.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 2
ARTICLE III: ELECTIONS
Section 2.301: VOTING HOURS
At all primaries and elections held in the City of Portsmouth for the nomination or election of
ward, city, county and state officers, United States Senators, Representative to Congress, and
Electors of the President and Vice President of the United States, the polls shall be open at
8:00 a.m. and close at 6:00 p.m. the day of the primary or election and of the day of any
adjournment from that day. No ballot shall be given in, received, or placed in the ballot box
after 6:00 p.m. that day.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 2
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 3
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC HEALTH
Article I Public Health 3.101 - 3:111
Article II Solid Waste, Yard Waste and Recycling 3.201 - 3.207
Article III Burying Grounds 3.301 - 3.303
Article IV Noise Control 3.401 - 3.407
Article V Lead Paint Poisoning Prevention/Control 3.501
Article VI Adult Oriented Establishments 3.601 - 3.605
Article VII Drug-Free Zones 3.701 – 3.704
Article VIII
Article IX
Article X
Mosquito Prevention Control
Distribution of Single-Use Disposables on City Property
(Effective 12/31/2020)
Distribution of Single-Use Disposables Citywide
(Effective 12/31/2020)
3.801 – 3.807
3.901 – 3.907
3.1001- 3.1005
ARTICLE I: PUBLIC HEALTH
Section 3.101: NUISANCES
The Health Officer shall inquire into all nuisances and all causes of danger to the public health,
and whenever he shall know, or have cause to suspect, that any nuisance or other thing injurious
to the public health is in any building, vessel, or enclosure he shall make complaint under oath to
some justice of the peace who shall issue a warrant directed to the proper authority to search such
building, vessel or enclosure and he may enter therein and make search.
Section 3.102: NOTICES
The Health Officer shall notify the owner or occupant of any building, vessel or enclosure to
remove or destroy any nuisance or other thing therein, deemed by him, upon careful examination,
to be injurious to the public health, within a reasonable time limited, and in case such owner or
occupant shall neglect to comply therewith, the Health Officer shall cause such nuisance to be
removed or destroyed. And such owner or occupant shall be liable to pay the expenses of the
removal or destruction of such nuisance or other thing, including all fees of the Health Officer,
and the same shall be recovered by action brought by the Health Officer in the name of the City.
Section 3.103: ASSISTANCE
The Health Officer may employ suitable assistance to carry out the provisions of the preceding
sections; and any person resisting him or them therein shall be prosecuted under the provisions of
Section 5, Chapter 147, N.H. RSA.
Section 3.104: KEEPER UNKNOWN
Whenever the owner of any building, vessel or enclosure described in the preceding sections is
unknown to the Health Officer or does not reside in the City or the same is unoccupied or the
occupant is unable to remove any such nuisance or other thing, said Health Officer may proceed
as in the preceding sections without notice.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 3
Section 3.105: VENTILATION AND TOILET FACILITIES
No person shall occupy, lease to any other person or permit any other person to occupy any
building, basement, cellar or part thereof, within the compact part of the City, as a dwelling
house, office, store, shop, hotel, inn or sleeping apartment, unless the same is provided with
suitable toilet facilities, properly ventilated and constructed, and kept in proper sanitary
condition, provided with suitable drains or sewers to convey away sink or waste water, or filth,
from the premises into some public sewer, if there be one within one hundred feet therefrom; and
if not within such distance, for conveying the same away under ground or in such other way that
will not be offensive.
Section 3.106: PENALTY, VIOLATION OF SECTION 3:105
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of Section 3:105 shall be fined
not exceeding one hundred ($l00) dollars for each day of neglect or refusal after reasonable
notice from the Board of Health who may order the discontinuance of any such nuisance.
Section 3.107: POLLUTION OF WATER
No person shall willfully or negligently pollute, or cause to become impure the water of any
reservoir, stream, well, or spring, within the limits of the City used for domestic purposes.
Section 3.108: DUMPING IN PONDS
No person shall deposit any filth, rubbish, paper, or any other matter in either of the ponds of the
City, or upon the flats thereof, or upon any land whereby the same may be conducted to said
ponds or flats, nor in any public place, street or alley.
Section 3.109: SWILL
No person shall remove, transport, or carry in, or through, any of the streets, squares, courts,
lanes, avenues, or alleys within the City of Portsmouth, except in covered water tight carts, casks
or vessels, approved by the Board of Health annually, any swill or house offal, grease, bones, fat
decayed, putrefied, or vile smelling animal or vegetable substances including vault manure, or
any refuse substances from any dwelling house or other places in the City.
Section 3.110: MANURE
Within the compact part of the City no manure shall be allowed to accumulate until it becomes
offensive to persons residing in the vicinity or passing along any highway; and no swill or
garbage, or any animal or vegetable substances shall be allowed to accumulate in or about any
premises until the same becomes offensive or putrid. The owner, agent, occupant, or any other
person having the care of any building where swill, garbage, or animal or vegetable substance is
accumulated, shall cause the same to be removed as often as requested by the Health Officer.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 3
Section 3.111: PENALTY OR VIOLATION
Any person or persons, company or corporations, that shall violate or cause to be violated by
agent or otherwise, any of the provisions of Article I, Chapter 3, or any of the orders, rules or
regulations of the Department of Health in reference thereto, or who shall fail or neglect to
comply with any of the requirements thereof, by agent or otherwise, upon conviction shall be
fined not less than three dollars ($3) nor more than one hundred ($100) dollars, for each offense.
(Previous Section 3.111 deleted in entirety 10/22/2012)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 3
ARTICLE II: SOLID WASTE, YARD WASTE AND RECYCLING
Section 3.201: PURPOSE
The City of Portsmouth recognizes that a comprehensive municipal program for the disposal of
solid waste and yard waste, as well as the recycling of materials is necessary for the convenience
of its citizens and the protection of the environment of the municipality. The City further
recognizes that such program must be developed and administered in the most cost efficient
manner consistent with the goals of the program.
Section 3.202: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions apply:
Bulky Waste: any items whose large size or weight precludes or complicates their handling by
normal collection, processing or disposal methods.
Downtown Business District: For the purposes of this section, the Downtown Business District
shall mean the following areas:
Congress Street from Middle Street to Market Square;
High Street from Congress Street to Ladd Street;
Ladd Street from High Street to Market Street;
Market Street from Market Square to Deer Street;
Daniel Street from State Street to Market Square;
State Street from Daniel Street to Middle Street;
Pleasant Street from Court Street to Market Square;
Chapel Street from Bow Street to State Street;
Porter Street from Middle Street to Pleasant Street;
Sheafe Street from Chapel Street to Penhallow Street;
Bow Street from Daniel Street to Market Street;
Penhallow Street from State Street to Bow Street;
Hanover Street from Market Street to Maplewood Avenue;
High Street from Hanover Street to Deer Street;
Fleet Street from Hanover Street to State Street
Non-Business Districts: For the purposes of this section, the Non-Business Districts shall mean
all areas other than those designated as being within the Downtown Business District.
Commercial Property: any property the predominate use of which is a structure used for
commercial or business purposes including, but not limited to, the following:
• Properties containing five (5) or more dwelling units;
• Hotels, restaurants, warehouses;
• Manufactured Housing Parks;
• Markets, bakeries, grocery stores, fruit stands;
• Manufacturing or industrial;
• Business offices;
• Condominiums; and
• Any non-residential use
Construction and Demolition (C&D): waste from the building, tearing down or destruction of a
structure or part of a structure.
Garbage: All putrescrible waste material including, but not limited to wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. Garbage shall not include yard,
industrial, hazardous and/or radioactive waste.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 3
Hazardous Waste: A solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous waste, or combination of,
which because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious or
incapacitating illness, or pose a health hazard to humans and the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported or disposed.
Industrial Waste: Byproducts or scrap remaining from an industrial manufacturing process.
Putrescrible Waste: Any organic material, which can decompose and give rise to foul odors and
noxious byproducts.
Radioactive Waste: Material regulated by the Atomic Energy Commission.
Recyclable Materials or Single Stream Mixed Recyclables are defined as follows:
• “Metal” means cans made of aluminum, tin or steel
• “Glass” means jars and bottles colored green, brown or clear
• “Paper” means fibrous material derived mainly from wood, examples of such are
cardboard, newspapers, junk mail, magazines, office paper, phone books, paperback
books, paper board (cereal and pasta boxes), wax coated milk and juice cartons, and
paper egg cartons
• “Plastic” means plastic bottles, jars, jugs and containers labeled number 1 through 7
inside a three-arrow recycling symbol
• This list of recyclables may be modified as needed by the Department of Public
Works
Refuse: Any solid waste composed wholly or partly of garbage and rubbish.
Residential Property: Any property the predominate use of which is a residential structure
containing at least one (1) dwelling unit but not more than four (4) dwelling units.
Rubbish: All nonputrescrible waste material including, but not limited to, paper, cigarettes,
cardboard, cans, wood, glass, bedding and crockery. Rubbish shall not include yard, industrial,
hazardous and/or radioactive waste.
Yard Waste: Leaves, grass, clippings, garden debris, small brush (no greater than 5” in diameter)
or chipped branches.
Section 3.203: PROGRAM COMPONENTS
The City’s program for waste disposal and materials recycling shall consist of the following
components, each of which is to be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance:
A. Curbside Placement Time
The City shall maintain a regularly scheduled program of curbside solid waste pick-up from
residential properties and commercial properties in the Downtown Business District.
1. Non-Business waste shall be placed curbside no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the evening before
collection
2. The Department of Public Works shall determine and publish the days and hours under
which the curbside collection shall be available to residents and property owners.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 3
3. Downtown Business District Waste shall be placed curbside no earlier than two (2) hours
prior to the scheduled collection time which will be determined and published by the
Department of Public Works.
B. Solid Waste Disposal (Curbside pick-up):
Solid waste may consist of garbage and refuse, but shall exclude other types of waste.
The limitations on curbside solid waste pick-up are as follows:
1. Weekly pick-up from residential properties shall not exceed 300 U.S. gallons of
solid waste
2. Weekly pick-up for commercial properties in the Downtown Business District
shall not exceed 300 U.S. gallons of solid waste. Where a non-residential
structure contains five or more business establishments, including multi-family
housing, and is located in the Downtown Business District, that building shall be
considered one unit limited to not more than 300 U.S. gallons.
3. All waste placed for curbside pick-up shall be kept in covered, sanitary containers
not exceeding a volume of 100 U.S. gallons.
4. Trash containers shall not be so filled so as to be grossly unwieldy; containers
smaller than a volume of 45 U.S. gallons may not exceed fifty (50) pounds each
or be so worn or damaged as to make them likely to fail. Containers larger than
45 gallons but smaller than 100 gallons must have working wheels and stop bar
compatible with collection trucks hydraulic tipper.
5. Every rental and leased dwelling unit shall be provided by the property owner
with adequate storage receptacles with tight fitting covers for rubbish and garbage.
These containers must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and
disposal procedures must comply with this ordinance.
6. In the Downtown Business District, materials for disposal or recycling shall not be
placed in plastic or paper bags, unless the bags are within covered containers.
C. Recycling:
Recycling of recyclable materials is mandatory for all residential and commercial
property owners or residents who dispose of waste at the Recycling Center or who utilize
the curbside collection service of the City. The recycling program shall operate under the
following terms and conditions:
1. The City shall make available recycling container for use in connection with the
curbside recycling program. These containers shall not be used for any materials
other than specified recyclable materials.
2. All recyclable materials do not need to be separated and may be placed in a
common recycling container.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 3
3. If recycling materials exceed the capacity of one recycling container, multiple
additional recycling containers may be left for pick up provided the additional
containers are labeled “Recycling”.
4. All fiber, metal, glass and plastic to be recycled shall be cleaned and placed
together in the recycling container. Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic
bags.
5. Excess paper and cardboard shall be placed on top of or next to the recycling
container in a manner to prevent the scattering of paper. Paper and flattened
cardboard shall either be packed in standard paper grocery bags, cardboard boxes,
or securely tied in flat bundles, none of which shall weigh greater than fifty
pounds.
6. If there are more recyclables than can be held in one container, the resident shall
flatten those materials which can be flattened and/or place the additional
recyclables next to the recycling container in a separate cardboard box or other
suitable container clearly marked “recyclables.”
7. No person other than an authorized agent of the City acting in the course of
his/her employment shall collect or pick-up or cause to be collected or picked up
any recyclable material placed at curbside.
8. Mixed recyclable materials generated at both commercial and residential
properties in the City may be delivered to the City’s Recycling Center.
9. Recyclable materials shall be separated from municipal solid waste when placed
at curbside.
D. Bulky Waste (Curbside Collection):
Residential properties which qualify for curbside collection of municipal solid waste shall
also be permitted to utilize an on demand curbside bulky waste collection service
maintained by the City. Curbside pick-up of bulky waste shall be performed under the
following terms and conditions:
1. The property owner or resident shall schedule bulky waste pick-up on an
appointment basis by arrangement with the Department of Public Works.
2. Each property shall be allowed up to four curbside collections of bulky waste per
calendar quarter, each of which shall be limited to a maximum of sixty-four cubic
feet per collection (64 cubic feet is approximately the bed size of a mid-sized
pick-up truck).
3. All bulky waste items set out at curbside must be properly sorted by type in
accordance with categories to be established by the Department of Public Works
and communicated to the property owner/resident at the scheduling of the
appointment. Bulky waste shall be placed curbside no earlier than the Saturday
prior to collection.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 3
4. Any bulky waste which is not collected by the City due to lack of compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance must be removed from the curbside by the
property owner/resident within twenty-four (24) hours of being provided notice
that the Department of Public Works will not collect the bulky waste.
5. Where bulky waste is not picked up by the City for any reason, proper disposal is
the responsibility of the owner/resident.
E. Bulky Waste and Municipal Solid Waste (Recycling Center):
The City shall maintain a recycling service for bulky waste and municipal solid waste.
The terms and conditions under which the Recycling Center shall operate are as follows:
1. The Department of Public Works shall determine and publish the days and hours
under which the Recycling Center shall be available to residents and property
owners.
2. The Recycling Center shall be available only for waste generated by residential
properties.
3. The Recycling Center shall be available to Portsmouth Commercial Properties for
single stream mixed recyclables only, provided an annual pass is obtained from
the City. The fee, if any, for the annual pass shall be established by the City
Council during its annual budget process.
F. Yard Waste
Yard waste shall be collected by the City in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
1. Yard waste shall be collected at curbside in accordance with a collection schedule
to be determined and published by the Department of Public Works.
2. Brush which is placed at curbside must be cut into lengths not exceeding four (4)
feet; contain no pieces of brush greater than five inches in diameter, and be tied in
neat bundles the diameter of which shall not exceed one (1) foot and a weight of
which shall not exceed greater than fifty (50) pounds.
3. Other than brush, yard waste which is placed at curbside must either:
A. be placed in commercially manufactured biodegradable bags which are
factory labeled to indicate that they are 100% biodegradable; or
B. be placed in open containers which are clearly labeled, “Yard Waste.”
Neither the biodegradable bags nor the open containers shall weigh more than
fifty (50) pounds each when filled and placed at the curbside.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 3
4. Any yard waste placed at curbside which the Public Works Department refuses to
collect due to lack of compliance with this ordinance must be removed from the
curbside by the property owner/resident within twenty-four (24) hours of being
provided notice by the Public Works Department that the yard waste will not be
collected.
5. The Director of Public Works may designate a central repository to which
residential properties may deliver yard waste. Landscape contractors may utilize
the same repository for a fee. The fee shall be established by the City Council
during its annual budget process. Yard waste must originate from Portsmouth
residential property only.
Section 3.204: PROHIBITIONS:
The following acts are not permitted in the City of Portsmouth:
1. The disposal at City’s Recycling Center or the placement at curbside for
municipal pick-up of any hazardous waste or radioactive waste.
2. The disposal of any materials on public or private property in any manner not
permitted by this ordinance or by state law.
3. The placement of solid waste for curbside pick-up, the placement of bulky
waste for curbside pick-up or the deposit of any waste or recyclables at the
City’s Recycling Center or other repository by any person, firm or corporation
not expressly authorized to do so under the provisions of this ordinance.
4. The bringing of materials into the City of Portsmouth from elsewhere for
disposal or recycling by the City.
5. The use of public trash containers for disposal of commercial or residential
garbage, rubbish or refuse.
Section 3.205: RIGHT OF INSPECTION
The placement of any materials at curbside for municipal pick-up conveys to the City the right to
inspect such materials for compliance with this ordinance as well as local, state and federal law.
Section 3.206: PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
In addition to any other penalty or remedy permissible by law for violation of this ordinance, the
following shall apply:
1. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be subject to a penalty, upon conviction, up to the maximum amount
authorized under state law.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 3
2. The Public Works Department is authorized to issue citations to persons,
firms or corporations violating this ordinance in accordance with
municipal citation authorization contained in the ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth. All citations issued for violation of this ordinance shall be in
the amount of $100.00 for the first violation, $250.00 for the second
violation and $500.00 for third violation and loss of municipal services for
subsequent violations.
3. The Public Works Department may refuse to accept or pick-up any waste
of any kind which is not delivered or placed in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance or any rules adopted hereunder by the
Department of Public Works. In all such circumstances, proper disposal
of the waste is the responsibility of the owner/resident.
4. The Public Works Department has the right to refuse residents/commercial
properties access to the Recycling Center who misuse the Center, are
negligent and/or abusive to City employees.
5. The City Attorney is authorized to file any appropriate legal proceedings,
including but not limited to requests for injunctive relief, necessary to
prevent violation of this ordinance.
6. The Public Works Department may negotiate and settle civil claims
involving violations of this ordinance.
Section 3.207: SEVERABILITY
In the event that any portion of this ordinance is found to be unenforceable for any reason, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
(Amended Article II by deleting it in its entirety and replaced with the following on 12/16/2003).
(This ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2003 except for mandatory recycling in the
business district which shall become effective on July 1, 2003; Amended Article II 10/17/2016).
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 3
ARTICLE III: BURYING GROUNDS
Section 3.301: ESTABLISHMENT
No interments shall be made in any other places than those acknowledged by the City as burying
places and recorded as such in the City records. No new burial place shall be opened without the
consent of the City Council.
Section 3.302: MOVING BODIES
No body previously interred in any of the City burying grounds shall be removed for the sole
purpose of making room for other interments.
Section 3.303: PENALTY
If any person shall violate the provisions of this Ordinance he shall be fined not less than one ($l)
dollar nor more than one hundred ($100) dollars for each offense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 3
ARTICLE IV: NOISE CONTROL
Section 3.401:
It is found and declared that:
A. The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary loud noises within the limits of the
City of Portsmouth is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and
volume of such noises is increasing;
B. The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive unnecessary, unnatural or
unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and
use, affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the City of Portsmouth and;
C. The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public
policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained
and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of
Portsmouth and its inhabitants.
Section 3.402:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of
the City.
Section 3.403: NOISES PROHIBITED - UNNECESSARY NOISE STANDARD
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud disturbing and unnecessary noises in
violation of this Ordinance, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
A. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the
City, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of
any unreasonable loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any device for an unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by
hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason being
held up.
B. Radios, Phonographs, Etc.: The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or
operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle
or chamber in which such machines or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners
thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of ll:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 3
a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
C. Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising: The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud
speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound which is case upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure.
D. Yelling, Shouting, Etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
street, particularly between the hours of ll:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
E. Animals, Birds, Etc.: The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or
long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
F. Steam Whistles: The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached
to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper City authorities.
G. Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary
internal combustion engine, motor boats, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
H. Defect in Vehicle or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
I. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in
connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or ship or the opening and destruction
of bales, boxes, crates and containers. The loading or unloading of any sanitation
vehicles in any district between the hours of midnight and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as
to be plainly audible in a residential district at a distance of 50 feet from such loading or
unloading shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section.
J. Construction or Repairing of Buildings: The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may be
granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and
which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency
continues. If the Building Inspector should determine that the public health and safety
will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the
excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he
shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he
may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or
during the progress of the work.
K. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on streets
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use,
or adjacent to any hospital which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a
school, hospital or court street.
L. Hawkers and Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 3
M. Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale.
N. Metal Rails, Pillars and Columns, Transportation Thereof: The transportation of rails,
pillars, columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public
places upon cars, trays, cars, trucks or in any other manner to loaded as to cause loud
noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
O. Street Railway Cars, Operation Thereof: The causing, permitting or continuing any
excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a street railway car.
P. Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc.: The operation between the hours of l0:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric
hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
Q. Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal
combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating
gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is
equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.
R. Engine Compression Brakes: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than
police or fire emergency vehicles to use, operate or cause to be used or operated, within
the City of Portsmouth, any mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the stopping or
braking of said vehicle, in a manner so as to create excessive, loud, unusual or explosive
noise from the vehicle. (Adopted 5/15/2006).
Section 3.404: VIOLATION - MISDEMEANOR
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding One Thousand ($1000) Dollars (Amended 1-7-85). Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder.
Section 3.405: MANNER OF ENFORCEMENT
Violations of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other violations of the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth. Complaints may be brought by the Portsmouth Police or
the Building Inspector of the City of Portsmouth or his agent.
Section 3.406: ADDITIONAL REMEDY - INJUNCTION
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or
machinery in violation of any provision hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to the
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or
peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be
subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 3
Section 3.407: SEPARABILITY
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this Ordinance shall be
deemed independent of all other provisions herein and it is further the intention of the
City Council that if any provision of this Ordinance be declared to be invalid, all other provisions
thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 3
ARTICLE V: LEAD PAINT POISONING PREVENTION AND CONTROL
Section 3.501:
The provisions of the N.H. RSA, Chapter 130(A) are hereby adopted by the City of Portsmouth.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 3
ARTICLE VI: ADULT ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
Section 3.601: Findings and Purpose
The City Council of the City of Portsmouth finds:
A. That there are a number of "adult oriented establishments" located in the City which
require special supervision from the City's public safety agencies in order to protect and
preserve the health and welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City;
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and towns in the
United States indicate that:
1. Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such "adult oriented
establishments", especially those which provide closed booths, cubicles, studios
and rooms for the private viewing of so-called "adult" motion pictures and/or
video tapes and/or live entertainment;
2. Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by patrons,
clients or customers of such "adult oriented establishments" for the purpose of
engaging in certain sexual acts;
3. Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such establishments in
order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients or customers of such
establishments within such booths, cubicles and rooms;
4. Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the entrances and/or
exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms which are closed while such
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are in use encourage patrons using such
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with
prostitutes and/or with other members of the same sex, thereby promoting and
encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which cause blood,
semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths,
cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the health
and safety of other persons who may come into contact with such deposits; and
5. The reasonable regulation and supervision of such "adult oriented establishments"
tends to discourage such sexual acts and prostitution, and thereby promotes the
health, safety and welfare of the patrons, clients and customers of such
establishments.
C. The continued unregulated operation of adult oriented establishments including, without
limitation, those specifically cited at Paragraph A hereof, is and would be detrimental to
the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of Portsmouth;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 3
D. It is not the intent of the Council, in enacting this ordinance, to deny to any person rights
to speech protected by the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of
the Council to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, video-tapes, books and/or
other materials. Further, by enacting this Ordinance, the Council does not intend to deny
or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials
protected by the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or
deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually
oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials.
Section 3.602: Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following
meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
A. "Adult-oriented Establishment", shall include, without limitation, "adult bookstores",
"adult motion picture theaters", "adult mini-motion picture theaters" and further means
any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which
are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments
or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a
member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held,
conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An "adult-oriented
establishment" further includes, without limitation, any "adult entertainment studio" or
any premises that are physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or
represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter
studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of like import.
B. "Adult Bookstore" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of
its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, or magazines and other periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as
defined below, and in conjunction therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult
entertainment, as defined below, and including adult-oriented films, movies or live
entertainment, for observation by patrons therein.
C. "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50)
or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
D. "Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of less
than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined below, for observation by
patrons therein.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 3
E. "Common Areas" as used in Section 3.603 (b) means an adjacent public room or rooms,
so that the area inside a booth is visible to persons in the adjacent public room.
"Common areas" shall not be construed to mean a hallway or passageway. (Adopted
5/2/94)
F. "Council" means the City Council of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
G. "Employee" means any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in
or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult-oriented
establishment.
H. "Entertainer" means any person who provides entertainment within an adult-oriented
establishment.
I. "Adult Entertainer" means any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance or any type which has as a significant or substantial portion
of such performance any actual or simulated performance of "specified sexual activities"
or exhibition and viewing of "specified anatomical areas", removal of articles of clothing
or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal services offered
customers.
J. "Minor" shall be deemed to be a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
K. "Operator" means any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or
maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
L. "Specified Sexual Activities" means:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
3. Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female
breasts.
M. "Specified Anatomical Areas" means:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered;
a. human genitals, pubic region;
b. buttocks;
c. female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely
covered.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 3
N. "Sexual Activities", as used in this Article, is not intended to include any medical
publication or films or bona fide educational publication or films, nor does it include any
art or photography publications which devote at least 25 per cent of the lineage of each
issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects or art or photography. Nor dies
this definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describes current events and
which from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or semi-nude person in
connection with the dissemination of the news. Nor does this definition apply to
publications or films which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to
time publish or show photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when
describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population.
Section 3.603: Requirements for Adult-Oriented Establishments
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow or permit any
minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including parking lots immediately
adjacent to such establishment used by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the City on and after January 1,
1994 shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner that
the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls, wherein adult
entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by
doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be
unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented
establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the purpose of providing for the
secluded viewing of adult-oriented motion pictures, or other types of adult-oriented
entertainment.
C. On and after January 1, 1994, operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be
responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of live entertainment shall be well
lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its
entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than one (1.0) foot-candle as measured at the floor level. It shall
be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that the illumination described above
is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
D. No apertures or openings of any kind shall be allowed to exist between any two booths,
cubicles, rooms or stalls used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or
other types of adult entertainment.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 3
E. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act of omission
occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result
of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator
committed the act or caused the omission.
F. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed
premises, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for
purpose of determining whether the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by
this Ordinance.
G. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by
the Portsmouth Police Department, Inspectors employed by the City, or such other
persons as the Council may designate.
Section 3.604: Penalties and Prosecution
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this Ordinance shall
be fined a definite sum not exceeding One Thousand ($1,000) Dollars for each such
violation.
B. Each violation of this Ordinance shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation
continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each
hour of violation.
Section 3.605: Savings Clause
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or provision of this
Ordinance to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such section. Clause or
provision so declared unconstitutional, and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision
of this Ordinance. (Adopted 10/4/93)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 3
ARTICLE VII: DRUG-FREE ZONES
Section 3.701: Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish certain drug-free zones in the City of Portsmouth,
pursuant to the authority and terms of New Hampshire RSA 47:17, XVII.
Section 3.702: Establishment
Any area inclusive of the Portsmouth Housing Authority properties known as Gosling Meadows
and Wamisett Place and within one thousand (1,000) feet of such Portsmouth Housing Authority
properties in the City of Portsmouth, is hereby established as a Drug-Free Zone.
Section 3.703: Delineation of Drug-Free Zones
In accordance with New Hampshire RSA 47:17, XVII, the Drug-Free Zones established by this
Ordinance shall be delineated and published on a map clearly indicating the boundaries of the
Zone, which shall be posted in a prominent place in the Portsmouth District Court, the
Portsmouth Police Department and on the affected Portsmouth Housing Authority properties.
The Zone shall also be marked by signs posted in one or more prominent places in or near the
affected Portsmouth Housing Authority properties, which indicated that the posted area is a
Drug-Free Zone extending to one thousand (1,000) feet surrounding such properties and which
warn that a person who violates RSA 318-B, the Controlled Drug Act, within the Zone, shall be
subjected to severe criminal penalties under that statute and an additional possible penalty of up
to $1,000.00 under this Ordinance.
Section 3.704: Violations and Penalties
Pursuant to the provisions of New Hampshire RSA 47:17, XVII and this Ordinance, any person
convicted of a crime under New Hampshire RSA 318-B in a drug-free zone, in addition to any
penalties imposed by the Courts under RSA 318-B, shall be subject to a penalty of up to one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 3
ARTICLE VIII: MOSQUITO PREVENTION CONTROL
Section 3.801: Purpose
This ordinance shall be to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of person in the
City and to prevent the spread of disease from mosquito transmission by preventing the
development of mosquito larvae in the following:
A. Pool Water that is not maintained properly
B. Water that accumulates in tires
C. Accumulation of water in or upon any premises, improved or vacant, or on any
open lot or alley, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, glass or rubbish of any
kind, unless the same is kept in approved covered receptacles.
Section 3.802: Pools
A. PROPER POOL MAINTENANCE
Pools located within the City shall be properly maintained to prevent the existence
or presence of any water in which mosquito larvae may mature and grow or exist.
B. POOL COVERS
Any pool cover must be maintained in a way as to prevent the collection of
stagnant water.
Section 3.803: Tires
A. PROPER STORAGE OF TIRES
Tires shall be stored in a totally enclosed structure or covered to prevent the
existence or presence of any water in which mosquito larvae may mature and
grow or exist. If stored outside, tires must be stored and covered in a manner to
prevent standing water.
B. UNUSABLE TIRES
Tires shall be disposed of in a manner to prevent the collection of stagnant
rainwater in said tires.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 3
Section 3.804: General Regulations
A. COLLECTION OF WATER
No person shall have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of standing
or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such
collection of water is treated or maintained effectually so as to prevent such
breeding.
Section 3.805: Notification
A written notice of the violation shall be issued to the owner of any property found by the City to
be in violation of this ordinance and shall include the following:
A. The location of the property.
B. The notice shall indicate any and all violation(s), indicate alternative techniques or
practices to correct the violation(s) must be given and the necessary methods to be
employed in the correction.
C. A time limit within which to correct the violation(s).
Section 3.806: Penalties
Any person or person violating any act or provision of this ordinance shall be fined not more than
$100 for each offense unless mandated correction is completed within the time period contained
in the notification.
Section 3.807: Injunction
Notwithstanding any permissible provision contained herein, the City Attorney is hereby
authorized to pursue injunctive proceedings in a Court of competent jurisdiction to protect the
public health.
(Article VIII adopted 8/6/2001).
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 3
ARTICLE IX: DISTRIBUTION OF SINGLE-USE DISPOSABLES ON CITY
PROPERTY (Adopted 10/07/2019; Effective 12/31/2020)
3.901: PURPOSE
The City of Portsmouth recognizes that limiting the distribution of single-use disposables
through source reduction is necessary to protect human health, to preserve the natural
environment, and to conserve precious and dwindling natural resources through the
proper and integrated management of solid waste.
3.902: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions apply:
Composting Facility: any solid waste compost facility certified to properly perform that
function by the Director of Public Works of the City of Portsmouth.
Cost Pass-Through: the cost which must be collected by retailers from their Customers
when providing a Single-Use Carryout Bag or a Single-Use Cup.
Customer: any Person obtaining goods from a Store.
Food Service Establishment: any restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other
business that is required to obtain a valid food service license from the Public Health
Department of the City of Portsmouth. Food Service Establishments do not include
Nonprofit Food Establishments.
Medical Facility: a business or nonprofit that has a primary purpose of providing medical
services.
Nonprofit Charitable Reuser: a charitable organization or a distinct operating unit or
division of the charitable organization, that reuses and recycles donated goods or
materials and receives more than fifty percent (50%) of its revenues from the handling
and sale of those donated goods or materials. To be considered a Nonprofit Charitable
Reuser, the entity must meet the terms of section 501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue
Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)).
Nonprofit Food Establishment: a charitable entity that prepares or serves food directly to
the Customer or otherwise provides food or meals for consumption by humans. The term
includes central food banks, soup kitchens, and nonprofit food delivery services. To be
considered a Nonprofit Food Establishment, the entity must meet the terms of section
501(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)).
Operator: the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a
Store, which may include, but not be limited to, the owner of the Store.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 3
Person: any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group
however organized.
Pharmacy: any Store where prescriptions, medications, controlled or over the counter
drugs, personal care products or health supplement goods, or vitamins are sold.
Prepared Food: foods or beverages which are prepared on the premises by cooking,
chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further
preparation to be consumed. Prepared Food does not include any raw, uncooked meat
product or fruits or vegetables which are chopped, squeezed, or mixed.
Produce Bag: any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or
other food items to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such food items from
coming into direct contact with other purchased items. A Produce Bag is not a form of
Single-Use Plastic Bag.
Retail Establishment: any commercial establishment that sells perishable and
nonperishable goods including but not limited to, clothing, food, and personal items
directly to the Customer and is located within or doing business within the City. Retail
Establishments do not include Food Service Establishments, Nonprofit Charitable
Reusers, or Pharmacies.
Reusable Plastic Bag: a sewn woven or non-woven nylon, polypropylene, polyethyleneterephthalata,
or Tyvek bag capable of being used one hundred (100) times, is machine
washable, and has stitched or woven handles that are not fused. A Reusable Plastic Bag is
a form of Reusable Bag.
Reusable Bag: a bag capable of being used one hundred (100) times, is machine
washable, and has stitched or woven handles that are not fused. Usable Bags include
Reusable Plastic Bags.
Single-Use Carryout Bag: a bag made of plastic, paper, or other material that is provided
by a Store to a Customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of
departure for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the Store. Single-Use
Carryout Bags include Single-Use Plastic Bags and Single-Use Recycled Paper Bags.
Single-Use Carryout Bags do not include Produce bags, Reusable Bags, or bags without
handles provided to the Customer to hold prescription medication dispensed from a
Pharmacy.
Single-Use Compostable Plastic Container: a container that is composed of one hundred
percent (100%) Polylactic Acid and distributed for the purpose of transporting Prepared
Food on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store. A Single-Use Compostable Plastic
Container is a form of a Single-Use Plastic Container.
Single-Use Compostable Plastic Cup: a cup composed of one hundred percent (100%)
Polylactic Acid and is distributed for the purpose of transporting a beverage on a single
occasion inside or outside of a Store. A Single-Use Compostable Plastic Cup is a form of
a Single-Use Plastic Cup.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 3
Single-Use Compostable Plastic Straw: a disposable tube that is composed of one
hundred percent (100%) Polylactic Acid and is distributed to transfer a beverage from a
cup or container to the mouth of a person drinking the beverage on a single occasion. A
Single-Use Compostable Plastic Straw is a form of a Single-Use Plastic Straw.
Single-Use Container: a container that is distributed for the purpose of transporting
Prepared Food on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store.
Single-Use Cup: a cup that is distributed for the purpose of transporting a beverage on a
single occasion inside or outside of a Store.
Single-Use Plastic Bag: a bag that is made predominantly of plastic derived from either
petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, and is
provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the
purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the Store. A Single-Use Plastic Bag is
a form of a Single-Use Carryout Bag.
Single-Use Plastic Container: a container that is made predominantly of plastic derived
from either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant
sources, and is distributed for the purpose of transporting Prepared Food on a single
occasion inside or outside of a Store. A Single-Use Plastic Container is a form of a
Single-Use Container.
Single-Use Plastic Cup: a cup that is made predominantly of plastic derived from either
petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, and is
distributed for the purpose of transporting a beverage on a single occasion inside or
outside of a Store. A Single-Use Plastic Cup is a form of a Single-Use Cup.
Single-Use Polystyrene Container: a container composed of syntheticaromatic
hydrocarbon polymers that is made from the monomer styrene and distributed for the
purpose of transporting Prepared Food on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store. A
Single-Use Polystyrene
Container is a form of a Single-Use Container.
Single-Use Polystyrene Cup: a cup composed of synthetic aromatic hydrocarbon
polymers that is made from the monomer styrene and distributed for the purpose of
transporting a beverage on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store. A Single-Use
Polystyrene Cup is a form of a Single-Use Cup.
Single-Use Plastic Straw: a disposable tube made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, that
is distributed to transfer a beverage from a cup or container to the mouth of a person
drinking the beverage. A Single-Use Plastic Straw is a form of a Single-Use Straw.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 3
Single-Use Recycled Paper Bag: a paper bag provided at the check stand, cash register,
point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or
merchandise out of the establishment that contains no old growth fiber and a minimum of
forty percent (40%) post-consumer recycled content; is one hundred percent (100%)
recyclable; and has printed in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag the word
“Recyclable,” the name and location of the manufacturer, and the percentage of postconsumer
recycled content. The Single-Use Recycled Paper Bag is capable of
composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of
Testing and Material (ASTM) Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics D6400, as
published in September 2004. A Single-Use Recycled Paper Bag is a form of a Single-
Use Carryout Bag.
Single-Use Straw: a disposable tube that is distributed to transfer a beverage from a cup
or container to the mouth of a person drinking the beverage on a single occasion. Single-
Use Straws include a straw made from both plastic materials and non-plastic materials
such as paper, pasta, sugar cane, wood, or bamboo.
Store: any Food Service Establishment, Pharmacy, or Retail Establishment located within
the City. Stores do not include Medical Facilities.
3.903 CARRYOUT BAGS
A. Prohibited Carryout Bags:
1. No Store on City property shall provide a Single-Use Carryout Bag to a Customer,
at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the
purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the Store except as provided in
this Section.
2. No Person shall distribute a Single-Use Carryout Bag at any City facility, Citymanaged
concession, City-sponsored event, or City--permitted event unless a Store on
City property is also otherwise allowed to in this Section.
B. Permitted Carryout Bags:
1. Stores on City property are allowed to distribute Single-Use Carryout Bags or
Reusable Bags to Customers subject to the terms of this Section.
2. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Plastic Bag inventory.
3. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using bags of any type that they
bring to the Store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a
bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the Store.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 3
C. Exemptions:
1. Stores on City property are allowed to distribute only Single-Use Recycled Paper
Bags or Reusable Bags to Customers for the purpose of carrying away goods or other
materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this Section.
2. Food Service Establishments on City property are allowed to distribute Single-Use
Plastic Bags to Customers only for the purpose of safeguarding health and safety
during the transportation of Prepared Foods, including take-out foods and liquids
intended for consumption away from the food provider’s premises, subject to the
terms of this Section.
3. A Customer shall be charged a minimum of a ten cents ($.10) Cost Pass-Through
for each Single-Use Carryout Bag provided by the Store on City property. The sale of
each bag shall be separately itemized on the sale receipt. The Cost Pass-Through will
remain with the Operator of the Store.
4. A Store on City property may provide a Customer participating in Special
Supplement Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) or
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) with one (1) or more Single-Use
Carryout Bag or Reusable Bags at no cost.
5. A Store on City property may provide a Customer with (1) Single-Use Recycled
Paper Bag 6 inches across or less without handles at no cost.
3.904 DISPOSABLE CUPS
A. Prohibited Disposable Cups:
1. No Store on City property shall provide a Single-Use Plastic Cup to a Customer, at
the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or any other location for the purpose of
transporting a beverage that will be drank inside or outside of the Store except as
provided in this Section.
2. No Store shall provide a Single-Use Polystyrene Cup to a Customer at the check
stand, cash register, point of sale, or any other location for the purpose of transporting
a beverage that will be drank inside or outside of the Store.
3. No Person shall distribute a Single-Use Plastic Cup or Single-Use Polystyrene Cup
at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored event, or Citypermitted
event unless a Store on City property is also otherwise allowed to in this
Section.
B. Permitted Disposable Cups:
1. Stores on City property are allowed to distribute Single-Use Cups to Customers for
the purpose of transporting a beverage that will be drank inside or outside of the
Store, subject to the terms of this Section.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 3
2. A Customer shall be charged a minimum of a ten cents ($.10) Cost Pass-Through
for each Single-Use Cup provided by the Store on City property. The sale of each
Single-Use Cup shall be separately itemized on the sale receipt. The Cost Pass-
Through will remain with the Operator of the Store.
3. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Cup inventory.
4. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using cups of any type that they
would otherwise be allowed to bring to the Store themselves under the Ordinances of
the City of Portsmouth in lieu of using cups provided by the Store.
C. Exemptions:
1. The only Single-Use Plastic Cups that Stores on City property are allowed to
distribute are Single-Use Plastic Compostable Cups if the Store on City property
provides customers the option to dispose of the Single-Use Compostable Plastic Cups
in a specifically designated composting receptacle that is both on the premise and its
contents will be transported to a Composting Facility to be composted.
2. A Store may provide a Customer participating in the Special Supplement Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) or the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) with one (1) or more Single-Use Cup at no cost.
3.905 DISPOSABLE CONTAINERS
A. Prohibited Disposable Containers:
1. No Store on City property shall provide a Single-Use Plastic Container to a
Customer, at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or any other location for the
purpose of transporting Prepared Food that will be consumed inside or outside of the
Store except as provided in this Section.
2. No Store shall provide a Single-Use Polystyrene Container at the check stand, cash
register, point of sale, or any other location for the purpose of transporting Prepared
Food that will be eaten inside or outside of the Store.
3. No Person shall distribute a Single-Use Plastic Container or a Single-Use
Polystyrene Container at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored
event, or City-permitted event unless a Store on City property is also otherwise
allowed to in this Section.
B. Permitted Disposable Containers:
1. Stores on City property are allowed to distribute Single-Use Containers to
Customers for the purpose of transporting Prepared Food that will be eaten inside or
outside of the Store, subject to the terms of this Section.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 3
2. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Container inventory.
3. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using containers of any type that
they would otherwise be allowed to bring under the Ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth to the Store themselves in lieu of using containers provided by the Store.
C. Exemptions:
1. The only Single-Use Plastic Containers that Stores on City property are allowed to
distribute are Single-Use Plastic Compostable Containers if the Store provides
customers the option to dispose of the Single-Use Compostable Plastic Containers in a
specifically designated composting receptacle that is both on the premise and its
contents will be transported to a Composting Facility to be composted.
3.906 DISPOSABLE STRAWS
A. Prohibited Disposable Straws:
1. No Store on City property shall provide a Single-Use Plastic Straw to a customer
for the purpose of transferring a beverage from a cup or container to the mouth of a
person drinking the beverage on a single occasion inside or outside of the Store,
except as provided in this Section.
2. No Person shall distribute a Single-Use Plastic Straw at any City facility, Citymanaged
concession, City-sponsored event, or City-permitted event unless a Store on
City property is also otherwise allowed to in this Section.
B. Permitted Disposable Straws:
1. Stores on City property are allowed to distribute Single-Use Straws to Customers
for the purpose of transferring a beverage from a cup or container to the mouth of a
person drinking the beverage on a single occasion inside or outside of the Store,
subject to the terms of this Section.
2. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Straw inventory.
3. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using straws of any type that they
bring to the Store themselves in lieu of using containers provided by the Store.
C. Exemptions:
1. Stores on City property are only allowed to distribute Single-Use Straws at the
explicit request of the customer for the purpose of transferring a beverage from a cup
or container to the mouth of a person drinking the beverage on a single occasion
inside or outside of the Store.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 32 Chapter 3
2. The only Single-Use Plastic Straws that Stores on City property are allowed to
distribute are Single-Use Plastic Compostable Straws if the Store provides customers
the option to dispose of the Single-Use Compostable Plastic Straws in a specifically
designated composting receptacle that is both on the premise and its contents will be
transported to a Composting Facility to be composted.
3.907 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
In addition to any other penalty or remedy permissible by law for violation of this
Section, the following shall apply:
1. If the City determines that a violation of this Section has occurred, a written
warning that includes the potential penalties for future violations will be issued to the
Operator.
2. Upon a second or subsequent infraction of this Section, the City is authorized to
issue citations to persons, firms, or corporations violating this Section in accordance
with the ordinances of the City of Portsmouth. The amount of the fee that will
accompany the citation will be determined by the Fee Schedule Study Committee of
the City of Portsmouth.
3. The City Attorney is authorized to file any appropriate legal proceedings, including
but not limited to requests for injunctive relief, necessary to prevent violation of this
Section.
SEVERABILITY
Any portion of this ordinance that is found to be void shall be unenforceable
without invalidating the remainder of the ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 33 Chapter 3
ARTICLE X: DISTRIBUTION OF SINGLE-USE DISPOSABLES – CITYWIDE
(Adopted 10/07/2019; Effective 12/31/2020)
3.1001: PURPOSE
The City of Portsmouth recognizes that limiting the distribution of single-use disposables
through source reduction is necessary to protect human health, to preserve the natural
environment, and to conserve precious and dwindling natural resources through the
proper and integrated management of solid waste.
3.1002: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions apply:
Customer: any Person obtaining goods from a store.
Food Service Establishment: any restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other
business that is required to obtain a valid food service license from the Public Health
Department of the City of Portsmouth. Food Service Establishments do not include
Nonprofit Food Establishments.
Nonprofit Food Establishment: a charitable entity that prepares or serves food directly to
the Customer or otherwise provides food or meals for consumption by humans. The term
includes central food banks, soup kitchens, and nonprofit food delivery services. To be
considered a Nonprofit Food Establishment, the entity must meet the terms of section
501©(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3)).
Operator: the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a
Store, which may include, but not limited to, the owner of the Store.
Person: any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group
however organized.
Prepared Food: foods or beverages which are prepared on the premises by cooking,
chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further
preparation to be consumed. Prepared Food does not include any raw, uncooked meat
product or fruits or vegetables which are copped, squeezed, or mixed.
Retail Establishment: any commercial establishment that sells perishable and
nonperishable goods including but not limited to, clothing, food, and personal items
directly to the Customer and is located within or doing business within the City. Retail
Establishments do not include Food Service Establishments, Nonprofit Charitable
Reusers, or Pharmacies.
Single-Use Container: a container that is distributed for the purpose of transporting
Prepared Food on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 34 Chapter 3
Single-Use Cup: a cup that is distributed for the purpose of transporting a beverage on a
single occasion inside or outside of a Store.
Single-Use Polystyrene Container: a container composed of synthetic aromatic
hydrocarbon polymers that is made from the monomer styrene and distributed for the
purpose of transporting Prepared Food on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store. A
Single-Use Polystyrene Container is a form of a Single-Use Container.
Single-Use Polystyrene Cup: a cup composed of synthetic aromatic hydrocarbon
polymers that is made from the monomer styrene and distributed for the purpose of
transporting a beverage on a single occasion inside or outside of a Store. A Single-Use
Polystyrene Cup is a form of a Single-Use Cup.
Store: any Food Service Establishment, Pharmacy, or Retail Establishment located within
the City. Stores do not include Medical Facilities.
3.1003 DISPOSABLE CUPS
A. Prohibited Disposable Cups:
1. No Store shall provide a Single-Use Polystyrene Cup to a Customer at the check
stand, cash register, point of sale, or any other location for the purpose of
transporting a beverage that will be drank inside or outside of the store.
B. Permitted Disposable Cups:
1. Stores are allowed to distribute Single-Use Polystyrene Cups to Customers for the
purpose of transporting a beverage that will be drank inside or outside of the
Store, subject to the terms of this Section.
2. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Polystyrene Cup
inventory.
3. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using cups of any type that they
would otherwise be allowed to bring to the Store themselves under the Ordinances
of the City of Portsmouth in lieu of using cups provided by the Store.
3.1004 DISPOSABLE CONTAINERS
A. Prohibited Disposable Containers:
1. No Store shall provide a Single-Use Polystyrene Container at the check stand,
cash register, point of sale, or any location for the purpose of transporting
Prepared Food that will be eaten inside or outside of the Store.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 35 Chapter 3
B. Permitted Disposable Containers:
1. Stores are allowed to distribute Single-Use Polystyrene Containers to Customers
for the purpose of transporting Prepared Food that will be eaten inside or outside
of the Store, subject to the terms of this Section.
2. All Stores may distribute their remaining 2020 Single-Use Polystyrene Container
inventory.
3. Nothing in this Section prohibits Customers from using containers of any type
that they would otherwise be allowed to bring to the Store themselves under the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth in lieu of using containers provided by the
Store.
3.1005 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
In addition to any other penalty or remedy permissible by law for violation of this
Section, the following shall apply:
1. If the City determines that a violation of this Section has occurred, a written
warning that includes the potential penalties for future violations will be issued to
the Operator.
2. Upon a second or subsequent infraction of this Section, the City is authorized to
issue citations to persons, firms, or corporations violating this Section in
accordance with the ordinances of the City of Portsmouth. The amount of the fee
that will accompany the citation will be determined by the Fee Schedule Study
Committee of the City of Portsmouth.
3. The City Attorney is authorized to file any appropriate legal proceedings, including
but not limited to requests for injunctive relief, necessary to prevent violation of
this Section.
SEVERABILITY
Any portion of this ordinance that is found to be void shall be unenforceable
without invalidating the remainder of the ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 4
CHAPTER 4
FOOD LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Article I Food Licensing and Regulations 4.101 – 4.107
ARTICLE I FOOD LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Section 4.101 Adoption of the FDA 2009 Food Code
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire being marked and designated as the
Food Code, 2009 Recommendations of the United States Public Health Service/Food
and Drug Administration and Annexes “FDA Food Code” as published by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Services, Food and Drug
Administration be, and is hereby adopted, subject to the following amendments,
additions and deletions.1
If specific provisions of the FDA Food Code are not referenced below, the text
remains as written.
Section 4.102: Amendments, Additions and Deletions to Food Code
Change subsection to read as follows:
1-201.10 Statement of Application and Listing of Terms.
Temporary food establishment" means a food establishment that operates for a
period of no more than 3 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or
celebration.
Add sentence at the end of paragraph to read as follows:
1-201.10 Food Establishment.
(2) (B) These facilities must be in compliance with Portsmouth Health
Department’s Guidelines.
Delete following subsections:
1-201.10 Food Establishment.
(3) (e) – (g) Delete
1 For a copy of the FDA Food Code, 2009 go to
https://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/retalifoodprotection/foodcode/ucm2019396.htm.foodcode2009
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 4
Change subsection to read as follows:
3-301.11 Preventing Contamination from Hands.
(B) Except when washing fruits and vegetables as specified under 3-302.15
Food Employees may not contact exposed, READY-TO-EAT FOOD with
their bare hands and shall use suitable UTENSILS such as deli tissue,
spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves, or dispensing EQUIPMENT.
(D) Delete
Delete following subsection in its entirety:
3-305.13 Vended Potentially Hazardous Food (Time/Temperature Control for
Safety Food), Original Container.
Delete following subsection:
3-306.12 Condiments Protection.
(B) Delete
Delete following subsection:
3-801.11 Pasteurized Foods, Prohibited Re-Service, and Prohibited Food.
(D) Delete
Delete following subsection:
4.204.14 (A) (B) Vending Machines, Vending Stage Closure.
Delete following subsection:
4-204.19 Can Openers on Vending Machines.
Delete following subsection:
4-204.111 Vending Machines, Automatic Shutoff.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
4-301.16 Food Prep Sink.
A Food Prep sink that meets the requirements specified in 4-205.10, 5-202.13 and 5-
402.11 shall be provided for washing/thawing of foods, and drawing of potable water,
to be used for no other purposes.
Delete following subsections:
4-301.12 Manual Warewashing, Sink Compartment Requirements.
(C)(5) Delete
(C)(6) Delete
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 4
(D) Delete
Add new subsection to read as follows:
4-302.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices.
(A) Digital food temperature measuring devices shall be provided and readily
accessible for use in ensuring attainment in maintenance of food temperatures
as specified under Chapter 3.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
4-302.13 Temperature Measuring Devices, Manual Warewashing.
(B) In hot water mechanical WAREWASHING operations, an irreversible registering
temperature indicator shall be provided and readily accessible for measuring the
UTENSIL surface temperature.
Change subsection to read as follows:
4-501.16 Warewashing Sinks, Use Limitation.
(A) A warewashing sink may not be used for handwashing as specified under
§2-301.15, and drawing potable water, wash produce, or thaw foods.
Delete following subsections:
4-603.16 Rinsing Procedures.
(C) Delete
(D) Delete
(E) Delete
Change subsection to read as follows:
5-104.12 Alternative Water Supply.
Water meeting the requirements specified under Subparts 5-101, 5-102, and 5- 103
shall be made available for a mobile facility, for a temporary food establishment without
a permanent water supply, and for a food establishment with a two hour interruption of
its water supply through:
Change subsections to read as follows:
5-203.11 Handwashing Sinks.
A handwashing sink shall be located within 20 unobstructed feet:
(A) To allow convenient use by employees in food preparation, food
dispensing, and warewashing areas; and
(B) In toilet rooms.
Change subsection to read as follows:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 4
5-501.12 Outdoor Enclosure.
(A) If used, an outdoor enclosure for refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be
constructed of durable, and cleanable materials with tight-fitting lids, and in a
clean and cleanable manner, that does not attract pests.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
6-202.15 Outer Openings; Protected.
(F) Permanently located outdoor beverage bars shall be fully enclosed during nonoperating
hours with a sturdy, permanent structure capable of withstanding
wind, weather, be rodent, bird, insect-proof, and seal out any and all intentional
and unintentional sources of contamination and adulteration. If adequate
protection can be provided by other effective means a variance may be issued
pursuant to 8-103.10 through 8-103.12.
Change subsection to read as follows:
6-303.11 Intensity.
The light intensity shall be:
(A) At least 216 lux (20 foot candles) at a distance of 75 cm (30 inches) above the
floor, in walk-in refrigeration units and dry food storage areas and in other areas
and rooms during periods of cleaning;
Change subsection to read as follows:
6-501.115 Prohibiting Animals.
(A) Except as specified in (B) and (C) of this section, live animals may not be
allowed on the premises of a food establishment, unless allowed by variance
pursuant to 8-103.10 through 8-103.12 for outdoor decks.
Delete following subsection:
7-202.12 Conditions of Use.
(A) (2) Delete
Change subsections to read as follows:
8-101.10 Public Health Protection.
(B) (1) Whether the facilities or equipment are in good repair and capable
of being maintained in a sanitary condition and used as intended by the
manufacturer;
Change subsection to read as follows:
8-103.11 Documentation of Proposed Variance and Justification.
(C) A HACCP plan if required as specified under 8-201.13(A) that includes the
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 4
information specified under 8-201.14 as it is relevant to the variance requested,
and reviewed by a 3rd party acceptable to the Health Department or Special
Process Review if requested.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
8-201.11 When Plans Are Required.
(D) Change of owner.
Delete following subsections:
8-201.12 Contents of Plans and Specifications.
(B) Delete
(D) Delete
(E) Delete
Add new subsection to read as follows:
8-201.14 Contents of a HACCP Plan.
(F) Verified by a qualified 3rd party reviewer acceptable to the Health
Department if requested.
Delete following subsection:
8-404.11 Ceasing Operations and Reporting.
(B) Delete
Delete following subsection:
Annex 2009, Annex 1, Sections 8-905.10 through 8-908.20 and replace with the following:
Section 8-905.10 FOOD LICENSING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION 8.905.11 GENERAL PURPOSE AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF
APPEALS
In order to hear and decide appeals from the denial, suspension or revocation of a Food
License made by the Health Officer or Health Department staff, there shall be created a Food
Licensing Board of Appeals. The members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the
City Manager for a term of two years from the date of appointment.
SECTION 8.905.12 LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY
An appeal shall be based on a claim that the Health Officer or Health Department staff
improperly interpreted or applied the 2009 FDA Food Code as adopted in this Chapter. The
Board may hear and decide appeals from the denial, suspension or revocation or a Food
License but shall have no authority to waive requirements of the 2009 FDA Food Code as
adopted in this Chapter.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 4
SECTION 8.905.13 COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD MEMEBERS
8.905.13.1 The Board of Appeals shall consist of 3 voting members who are not
employees of the City. The Board shall consist of three members who have the
following qualifications:
One member shall be a current or former Health Officer, Health Inspector or Environmental
Health Specialist with knowledge of and experience applying the FDA Food Code; and
One member shall be a current or former doctor or nurse practitioner or nurse with public health
experience; and
One member shall have experience as a Restaurant Manager or Food Service Manager.
8.905.13.2 Alternate members. The City Manager may appoint an alternate for each
Board member with the same qualifications for each position listed above. The Board
Chairperson may call alternative members to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualifications of a member.
8.905.13.3 The Board shall adopt policies and procedures necessary to carry out its
duties and be subject to all conflict of interest and ethics rules of the City of
Portsmouth.
SECTION 8.905.14 TIMING FOR APPEAL
The application for an appeal shall be filed on a form obtained by the Health Department
within ten (10) days after the receipt of a denial, revocation or suspension of a Food License
from the Health Department.
SECTION 8.905.15 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING AND DECISION
8.905.15.1 The Board shall meet within 15 days of the receipt of an appeal.
8.905.15.2 The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Health Officer and other
City staff or any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
8.905.15.3 The Board’s decision shall be in writing and shall be issued within 5
business days after the hearing.
8.905.15.4 Any decision of the Board may be appealed by the appellant or the City to
the Superior Court.
Add the following as first paragraph of subsection:
Annex 2009, Annex 7, Model forms Guides and Other Aids.
Model forms are adopted as amended by the Portsmouth Health Department.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 4
Section 4.103 Adoption of Specific Parts He-P 2300, as amended:
Specific parts of the N.H. Code of Administrative Rules, Part He-P 2300, Sanitary
Production and Distribution of Food (“He-P 2300”) published as of the date this Chapter is
adopted, are hereby adopted subject to the following amendments, additions and deletions.
Any section not referenced is not adopted.
Adopt the following definitions:
He-P 2301 DEFINITIONS
(a) “Acid foods”
(b) “Acidified foods”
(c) “Applicant”
(d) “Bed and breakfast”
(e) “Beverage”
(f) “Bulk food”
(g) “Caterer”
(h) “Change of ownership” Change of ownership means any time a controlling
interest in a sole proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, or any other kind of entity is transferred to another sole
proprietor, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or any
other kind of entity. The transfer of a business entity to a trust and its controlling
interest to a trustee for estate planning purposes will not be deemed a change of
ownership, provided that the transfer is not made to avoid compliance with this
Chapter.
(i) “Continental breakfast”
(k) “Corrective Action Plan (CAP)”
(l) “Critical control point”
(m) “Critical limit”
(ab) “Low acid foods”
(av) “Soup kitchen”
(aw) “Time/Temperature Control for Safety (TCS) food”
(p) “Food”
(q) “Food Code”
(s) “Food processing plant”
(u) “Foodborne disease outbreak”
(x) “Immediately endangers public health or safety”
(y) “Imminent health hazard”
(z) “License”
(aa) “License holder”
(ac) “Major food allergen”
(af) “Package”
(ah) “Potentially hazardous food”
(al) “Public water system” means” public water system” as defined in
RSA 485:1-a, XV
(ap) “Regulatory authority”
(aq) “Remodeled”
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 4
(as) "Sanitization”
(au) “Sewage”
Adopt and amend the following definitions to read as follows:
(n) “Department” means the Portsmouth Health Department.
(ad) “Mobile food unit” means a food service establishment mounted on wheels or
otherwise designed to be immediately moveable.
Adopt the following subsection in its entirety and add new subsection to read as follows:
He-P 2302.02 Soup Kitchens Exempt from Licensure. (5) Person-in-charge must attend food safety training to be provided by
the Department.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 4
Adopt the following subsection in its entirety:
He-P 2304.13 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Plan
Requirements.
Adopt the following subsection in its entirety and amend subsections (a), (c)(6), (g) and
(i) as follows:
He-P 2305.01 Inspections.
(a) For the purpose of determining compliance with this Chapter, the
Department or its inspectors, or special agents designated for that
purpose, shall have full power and authority at all times to enter and
inspect every building, room or other place occupied or used for the
production, storage, sale or distribution of food, and all utensils and
appurtenances and records relating thereto, including shellfish tags, or
other records pertaining to food supplies purchased and distributed by
the food establishment. The applicant or licensee shall admit and
allow any department representative at any time to enter and inspect
the following:
(c) (1) Delete
(c) (4) Delete
(c) (6) Occupation of space after construction, renovations or structural
alterations or a period of closure that exceeds 90 days; or
(g) Upon completion of the inspection, the Department shall provide a
written or electronic copy of the inspection report. The inspection
report shall contain:
(i) Except for Food Processing Plants, numerical scoring shall be on a
100 point scale, with:
(1) A+ with a score of 95-100 with no critical item violations
(2) A with a score of 90-100 and one or more critical item violations
(3) B+ with a score of 85-89
(4) B with a score of 80-84
(5) C+ with a score of 75-79
(6) C with a score of 70-74
(7) F score below 70 is a failing score.
(8) Scoring shall be assigned as Priority Items are valued at 5 points,
Priority Foundation items are valued at 3 points and Core items
shall be valued as 1 point. The value of the inspection categories
shall be that of the highest point item in that category.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 4
Adopt and amend subsection to read as follows:
He-P 2308.02 Basic Requirements.
b (2) A residential model sanitizing dish machine and a one compartment sink:
Adopt the following subsection in its entirety and amend to read as follows:
He-P 2309 Special Requirements for Food Processing Plants
(a) Apply as “Processors,” Class E on the food service permit
application and comply with the License, Application and Terms
of License requirements;
Section 4.104 Temporary Events.
Food preparation and handling practices for food establishments are to be in
compliance with this Chapter. Event Coordinators must submit completed application
to the Department for approval no later than one month prior to the date of the event.
Section 4.105 License.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a Food Service
Establishment or Food Processing Plant within the City of Portsmouth without
obtaining a valid food service license issued by the Department. Only a person or
entity who complies with the requirements of this Chapter shall be entitled to receive
and retain such a license. A food service license shall be posted in public view.
Licenses are not transferable between entities or locations. Any change in ownership
shall require a new food service license subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 4.106 Application.
The Health Department may issue a food service license to any Food Service
Establishment upon receipt of a written or electronic application. A food service
license shall be granted upon the express condition that the Food Service
Establishment complies with all the requirements of this Chapter, and the applicant
agrees at all times to conduct their operation and maintain their facilities in
accordance with the requirements of this Chapter and those Guidelines promulgated
hereunder. The application procedure and issuance shall be in keeping with this
Chapter and administrative polices of the Department, with the fees approved by City
Council through its budgetary processes.
Section 4.107 Term of License.
Food service licenses shall be issued upon compliance with all of the provisions
of this Chapter: All annual licenses expire September 30th. Seasonal licenses are valid
from April 15 through October 15 of the calendar year. Temporary licenses are valid
for the length of the event.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 5
CHAPTER 5
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND PREVENTION REGULATIONS
Article I Fire Department 5.101 - 5.102
Article II Reserved for future use 5.201
Article III Reserved for future use 5.301
Article IV Reserved for future use 5.401
Article V Reserved for future use 5.501
Article VI Fire Department Emergency Medical Services Costs 5.601
Article VII Blasting 5.701
Article VIII Alarm Systems 5.801 - 5.802
Article IX Adopted Fire Codes
ARTICLE I: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section 5.101: PERSONNEL
The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, Deputy Chiefs, fire officers, firefighters, and
administrative personnel as recommended by the Fire Chief and approved by the Board of Fire
Commissioners.
Section 5.102: AID OUTSIDE CITY
The Fire Chief is authorized to allow department apparatus, vehicles, and/or personnel to provide
aid outside the City, in or out of state, for the purposes of extinguishing a fire, rendering other
emergency assistance, or performing any detail as requested.
ARTICLE II ARTICLE III, ARTICLE IV and ARTICLE V – RESERVED FOR FUTURE
USE
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 5
ARTICLE VI: FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE COSTS
Section 5.601: FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE COSTS
The rates to be charged for Emergency Medical Services shall be established and adjusted as
necessary by the City Manager with approval of the Board of Fire Commissioners. Where
applicable, the rates shall be equal to or less than the usual and customary rates, which are
charged for those services by private service providers in the geographic area. The rates shall be
established pursuant to the following terms and conditions:
A. Medicare patients shall be charged the current Medicare allowable rate for any Medicare
covered service, and Medicare patients are to be responsible for co-pays and deductibles.
B. The rates may include a fee for mileage traveled by municipal vehicles.
C. The rates may include a fee for special services provided by the Fire Department such as
extrication of individuals from motor vehicles or similar services.
D. The rates may include a fee for non-emergency transfer of patients from one location to
another location.
E. The rates may contain a provision allowing for a reduction or waiver of the established
rates in the case of need or other good cause shown by the recipient of the service.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 5
ARTICLE VII: BLASTING
Section 5:701 BLASTING PERMIT REQUIRED
No person shall perform or cause to be performed any blasting within the City limits unless a
Blasting Permit is obtained from the City Engineer. This permit shall not be issued until the
following terms and conditions have been satisfied by the applicant:
A. All abutters within five hundred (500) feet of the area where the blasting will occur shall
receive notice by certified mail two full business days (excluding Saturday, Sunday and
holidays) in advance of the blasting. The term “abutter” shall be defined in the manner
used for the notification of zoning abutters.
B. That the City Engineer’s office as well as the Building Inspector shall receive the same
notice, also sent by certified mail, at least two full business days (excluding Saturday,
Sunday and holidays) in advance of the blasting.
C. The name and address of the blasting company be provided.
D. The name of a company representative be provided and the twenty-four (24) hour
telephone number of the representative; such representative being a person who is
capable of responding to claims and issues arising from the blasting performed.
E. A pre-blast survey shall be completed by the blasting company for an area within five
hundred (500) feet of the proposed blasting.
F. Any reports, measurements or video tapes made in connection with this pre-blast survey
or with the subsequent blasting shall be made available upon request to all abutters within
five hundred (500) feet of the area.
G. That the cost of such a pre-blast survey shall be borne by the blasting company.
H. The Use and Transport License of the hauler shall be designated.
I. The route of removing blasting material shall be designated.
J. The location of the blasting shall be designated.
K. The blasting shall take place within the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through
Friday.
L. An Insurance Certificate shall be posted with the City Engineer in an amount and type
deemed appropriate by the City Engineer and the City Attorney.
M. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized to promulgate blasting rules consistent
with the intent of this ordinance, such rules shall become effective on acceptance by the
City Council.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 5
ARTICLE VIII: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section 5.801: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
Alarm System: Any assembly of equipment and/or devices which, with or without human
involvement, is reasonably calculated to notify either police or fire officials
and lead them to believe that there is a situation requiring their urgent
attention.
Unfounded Emergency Call: Any response by police or fire officials to the activation of an
alarm system, when no objective indication of a situation requiring their
urgent attention is found by the responding police or fire offices; false alarm.
Section 5.802: SERVICE FEE
The owner of any premises served by an alarm system shall be obligated to pay a service fee to
the City of Portsmouth for unfounded emergency calls to that premises in accordance with the
adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article
XVI of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 5
ARTICLE IX: ADOPTED FIRE CODES
The City of Portsmouth formally adopts the “New Hampshire Fire Code”. This
includes the N.H. Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter Saf-C 6000 and is defined in NH
RSA 153:VI-a as the adoption by reference of the Life Safety Code 2015 Edition and the
Uniform Fire Code NFPA1, 2015 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association and as amended by the State Board of Fire Control.
The City of Portsmouth adopts the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition (IFC) and the
provisions of any other national code, model code or standard referred to in the IFC as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as Chapter 5, Article IX, of the ordinances
of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire, subject to the following amendments, additions and
deletions:
SECTION 101 GENERAL
Insert in blank space:
101.1 Title: “the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire”
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
Add new subsections to read as follows:
102.7.3 Specific electrical code reference. Wherever this Code references the International
Electric Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Electric Code, NFPA 70
as adopted by the State of New Hampshire.
102.7.4 Specific gas code reference. Wherever this Code references the International Fuel Gas
Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54.
Change section title to read as follows:
SECTION 103 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
Change subsection to read as follows:
103.1 General. The Bureau of Fire Prevention and Control is hereby created within the City of
Portsmouth, New Hampshire Fire Department. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Fire
Chief, or any duly authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this Code. The
designated enforcement officer of this Code shall be referred to as the fire code official.
Add new sentence to end of subsection to read as follows:
103.3 Deputies. “Deputy officials shall include but not be limited to: the Deputy Fire Chief, Fire
Inspector, all Fire Officers, Chief Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector, Electrical
Inspector, Plumbing/Mechanical Inspector, Public Works Director or City Engineer.”
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 5
SECTION 105 PERMITS
Change subsections to read as follows:
105.2.3 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit shall be deemed to have
been abandoned one year after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit has been issued, except that the fire code official shall grant one (1)
extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there is reasonable cause and only when
requested in writing prior to the application expiration date.
105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed,
revoked or for such a period of time as specified on the permit. Construction/installation permits
issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within one year after
issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one
year after the time of commencing work
105.3.2 Extensions. The fire code official shall grant one (1) extension of time not exceeding
twelve (12) months, if there is reasonable cause and only when requested in writing prior to the
expiration date. Said extension will only be authorized when it does not conflict with any
Federal, State, Local Laws or Ordinances.
105.4.1 Submittals. Construction documents and supporting data shall be submitted with each
application for a permit and in such form and detail as required by the fire code official. The
construction documents shall be prepared and stamped by a licensed professional engineer
acceptable to the fire code official.
105.4.6 Retention of construction documents. The fire code official shall mark-up one (1) set
of plans with the necessary comments. This set shall become the official permit plan set. It is the
responsibility of the permit holder to transfer these comments to whatever medium he/she
wishes. The permit holder is responsible for complying with the comments as shown on the
official permit construction documents kept by the fire code official. Upon project completion, a
complete set of “as built” construction documents will be provided to the fire code official in an
approved electronic format.
105.6.32 Open Burning. The City of Portsmouth Fire Department shall issue open burning
permits under the requirements of Section 307.
105.6.36 Places of Public Assembly. The City of Portsmouth Fire Department shall issue places
of public assembly permits under the requirements of State RSA 155:17 and 155:18.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 5
SECTION 108 BOARD OF APPEALS
Add sentence to end of subsection to read as follows:
108.1 Board of appeals established. Refer to Appendix A of this Code and Chapter 12 of the
Portsmouth City Ordinances (International Building Code) for the establishment of the Board of
Appeals.
SECTION 109 VIOLATIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
109.4 Violations penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions prescribed by RSA 155-A:8. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. Reference New Hampshire RSA's 625:8 I(c), 651:2 IV(a) and 676:17 for further
penalty provisions.
SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING
Change subsections to read as follows:
307.1 General All open burning shall conform to all applicable State Laws (RSA 227-L) and
Administrative Rules of the NH Department of Resources and Economic Development, Division
of Forests and Lands and any other Federal, State, Local laws or ordinances which are applicable.
307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Due to narrow roadways, restricted access to rear yards, and
the proximity of structures, open burning is prohibited in the “South End” of the City. This area
is defined as south of State Street, east of Pleasant Street, east of Junkins Avenue, and north of
South Street. Also included is the area along Marcy Street to New Castle Avenue.
307.2 Permit required. Open burning shall be allowed after obtaining a permit from the Fire
Department.
Delete subsections 307.4 through 307.5 without substitution.
SECTION 503 FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Add new subsection to read as follows:
503.7 Fire Lanes. Fire lanes shall be maintained in areas so posted. All fire lanes shall conform
to Chapter 7, Article XV, of the City Ordinances; Vehicles, Traffic & Parking: Emergency Lanes.
SECTION 605 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT, WIRING AND HAZARDS
Change subsection to read as follows:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 5
605.11 Solar photovoltaic power systems. Solar photovoltaic power systems shall be installed
in accordance with Sections 605.11.1 through 605.11.2, the International Building Code, and
NFPA 70.
605.11.1.2 Solar photovoltaic systems for Group R-3 buildings.
Delete Exception without substitution.
Change subsection to read as follows:
605.11.1.2.2 Hip roof layouts. Panels and modules installed on Group R-3 buildings with hip
roof layouts shall be located in a manner that provides a 3.5-foot-wide (1067 mm) clear access
pathway from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels and modules are located.
The access pathway shall be at a location acceptable to the fire code official.
Delete Exception and replace with the following:
Exceptions:
1. Access pathway requirement may be waived when the structure is protected by a
code compliant automatic sprinkler system.
2. Where the strict application of this section is impractical, modifications in
accordance with section 104.8 may be approved by the fire code official.
Change subsection to read as follows:
605.11.1.2.3 Single-ridge roofs. Panels and modules installed on Group R-3 buildings with a
single ridge shall be located in a manner that provides one, 3.5-foot-wide (1067 mm) access
pathway from the eave to the ridge on each slope where panels and modules are located. The
access pathway shall be at a location acceptable to the fire code official.
Delete Exception and replace with the following:
Exceptions:
1. Access pathway requirement may be waived when the structure is protected by a
code compliant automatic sprinkler system.
2. Where the strict application of this section is impractical, modifications in
accordance with section 104.8 may be approved by the fire code official.
Edit subsection as follows:
605.11.1.2.4 Roofs with hips and valleys.
Delete Exception without substitution.
SECTION 609 COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOODS
Change subsection to read as follows:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 5
[M] 609.1 General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements of
the International Mechanical Code and NFPA 96, Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of
Commercial Cooking Operations.
SECTION 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Change subsection to read as follows:
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing
Group A-1 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following
conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet (928 m2)
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such
occupancies.
4. The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.
Change subsection to read as follows:
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group A-2
occupancies and intervening floors of the building.
Change subsection to read as follows:
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings
containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exist:
1. A Group M fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2)
2. A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any
mezzanines, exceeds 10,000 square feet (928 m2).
4. A group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or
mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2)
Change subsection to read as follows:
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:
1. A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet (928 m2)
2. A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above or any number of
stories below grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any
mezzanines, exceeds 20,000 square feet (1856 m2)
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial motor vehicles where
the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (232 m2)
5. A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses
exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2)
Change subsection to read as follows:
903.4.3 Floor Control Valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided
at the point of connection to each floor at the direction of the Fire Code Official.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 5
SECTION 905 STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
Add new subsection to read as follows:
905.12 Threads. Threads provided for fire department connections to standpipe systems shall be
compatible with equipment used by the Portsmouth Fire Department. Hand line hose threads for
2-1/2” diameter hose shall be National Standard thread. Hand line hose threads for 1-1/2” or 1-
3/4” diameter hose shall be Iron Pipe thread.
SECTION 907 FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.1 Group A.
Delete Exception without substitution.
Change subsection to read as follows with Exception remaining unchanged:
907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more.
Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 300 or more shall
initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with
Section 907.5.2.2.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.2 Group B.
Delete Exception without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.3 Group E.
Delete Exception 3 and 4 without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.4 Group F.
Delete Exception without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.6.1 Group I-1.
Delete Exception 1 without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.6.2 Group I-2.
Delete Exceptions 1 and 2 without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 5
907.2.6.3.3 Automatic smoke detection system.
Delete Exceptions 2 and 3 without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.7 Group M.
Delete Exceptions 1 and 2 without substitution.
Edit subsection as follows:
907.2.8.1 Manual fire alarm system.
Delete Exception 2 without substitution.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
907.2.8.2.1 Automatic fire alarm system. System smoke detectors shall be installed in all
common spaces and in means of egress components such as exit access corridors, exit enclosure
stairs and basements and shall be installed to provide coverage based on the manufacturers listing
for the device.
Change subsection to read as follows:
907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system.
3. The building contains more than 11 dwelling units or sleeping units.
Exceptions:
1. This exception remains unchanged.
2. Delete this exception without substitution.
3. This exception remains unchanged.
Change subsection to read as follows:
907.2.9.3 Smoke detector coverage. System smoke detectors shall be installed in all common
spaces and in means of egress components such as exit access corridors, exit enclosure stairs and
basements and shall be installed to provide coverage based on the manufacturers listing for the
device.
Change item 4 of subsection to read as follows:
907.2.11.1 Group R-1.
4. In all exit access corridors, all exit enclosure stairs and in common areas on each floor level,
including basements, when the building is not equipped with an automatic fire alarm system.
Single-or multiple-station smoke alarms in common areas shall be interconnected but shall not be
interconnected with guest room smoke detectors.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 5
Change item 4 of subsection to read as follow:
907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4, and I-1.
4. In all exit access corridors, all exit enclosure stairs and in common areas on each floor level,
including basements, when the building is not equipped with an automatic fire alarm system.
Single-or multiple-station smoke detectors in common areas shall be interconnected but shall not
be interconnected with dwelling unit smoke detectors. In some Group R-2 or R-3 occupancies, as
determined by the fire official, additional single-or multiple-station smoke alarms may be
required in the basement, interconnected with a dwelling unit(s) alarm(s).
Change subsection and Exception to read as follows:
907.2.11.2.1. Groups E, I-2 and I-4. Single-or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed
and maintained on all stories and all sleeping rooms of Group E day care facilities, Group I-2
child care facilities, Group I-4 day care facilities and Group I-4 child care facilities as defined in
Section 202.
Exception: Single-or multiple-station smoke alarms shall not be required when the
building is equipped with an automatic fire alarm system with smoke detection in all
sleeping rooms.
SECTION 915 CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTION
Change subsection to read as follows:
915.1 General. Carbon monoxide detection shall be installed in new buildings in accordance
with Section 915.1.1 through 915.6 and Saf-C 6015. Carbon monoxide detection shall be
installed in existing buildings in accordance with Section 1103.9 and Saf-C 6015.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 5
SECTION 3310 ACCESS FOR FIREFIGHTING
Change subsection to read as follows:
3310.1 Site access and hydrant operation. When roads are created or extended during the
construction of new developments and subdivisions, adequate site access for emergency vehicles
shall be maintained at all times during construction. The fire department will be the determining
agency when evaluating the adequacy of site access. As construction progresses, water hydrants
required by the site plan shall be installed, activated, tested and maintained with adequate hydrant
access as determined by the fire department. The City of Portsmouth reserves the right to “call”
the site bond at any time during construction, when the owner refuses to provide adequate site
access and water supply, as deemed necessary by the fire department, for the protection of life
and property.
SECTION 5601 GENERAL
Amend subsection as follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks. Delete exception 4 with remainder of subsection unchanged.
Change subsection to read as follows:
5601.2.4.1 Blasting. Blasting operations are regulated in Chapter 5, Article VII, Section 5:702 of
the Portsmouth City Ordinances. Refer to this ordinance for additional blasting regulations and
the permitting process.
SECTION 5608 FIREWORKS DISPLAYS
Add sentences to end of subsections to read as follows:
5608.1 General. The display, sale and discharge of 1.4G fireworks is prohibited within the City
of Portsmouth, NH. The display and discharge of 1.3G fireworks shall meet the requirements of
all Federal, State, Local Laws, Ordinances and Administrative Rules.
Outdoor displays. Application for fireworks displays shall be made in writing at least 15
working days in advance of the date of the display or discharge of 1.3G fireworks, on the current
version of the State of NH approved form. The discharge of fireworks shall be lawful under the
terms and conditions approved. Approval granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall
any approval be extended beyond the dates set out therein.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 5
CHAPTER 80 REFERENCED STANDARDS
Insert the following Codes and Standards:
New Hampshire State Building Code
Department of Safety
33 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03305
(603) 271-7965
New Hampshire Architectural Barrier Free Design Code
Governor’s Commission on Disability
121 South Fruit Street, Suite 101
Concord, NH 03301
(603) 271-2773
1-800-852-3405 (NH)
New Hampshire Energy Code
Public Utilities Commission
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 10
Concord, NH 03301-2429
(603) 271-2431
New Hampshire Elevator and Accessibility Lift Law, RSA 157-B
NH Department of Labor
Boiler & Elevator Division
PO Box 2076
Concord, NH 03302-2076
(603) 271-2585
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 5
Amend in the NFPA Section the following referenced Standards:
54-15 National Fuel Gas Code
70-17 National Electric Code
96-14 Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations
APPENDIX A - BOARD OF APPEALS
Appendix A is adopted as part of this ordinance subject to the following amendments:
Delete all subsections and replace with the following subsection to read as follows:
SECTION A101 GENERAL
A101.1 Scope. Refer to City Ordinance Chapter 12, Part 1, Appendix B as amended, (City
Building Code), for the establishment of the Board of Appeals.
APPENDIX B – FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS
Appendix B is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX C – FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
Appendix C is not adopted as part of this ordinance. New water hydrant locations are regulated
through the City Planning / Site Development process.
APPENDIX D - FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Appendix D is adopted as part of this ordinance.
APPENDIX E – HAZARD CATEGORIES
Appendix E is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX F – HAZARD RANKING
Appendix F is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX G – CRYOGENIC FLUIDS-WEIGHT AND VOLUME EQUIVALENTS
Appendix G is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 6
CHAPTER 6
LICENSES
Article I General Provisions 6.101 - 6.111
Article II Billiards and Bowling 6.201 - 6.203
Article III Model Car Slot Racing 6.301 - 6.305
Article IV Coin Operated Amusement Devices (adopted 1/17/83) 6.401 - 6.405
Article V Boxing and Wrestling 6.501 - 6.503
Article VI Reserved
Article VII Dogs and Other Pets 6.701 - 6.715
Article VIII Reserved
Article IX Circus 6.901 - 6.903
Article X Theatricals/Parades/Open Air Meetings 6.1001- 6.1004
Article XI Reserved
Article XII Hotels, Etc. 6.l201- 6.1202
Article XIII Hawkers and Peddlers 6.1301- 6.1318
Article XIV Pawn Brokers 6.1401- 6.1404
Article XV Rolling Skating Rinks 6.1501- 6.1505
Article XVI Solicitors/Magazine Subscriptions 6.1601- 6.1608
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 6:101: SHORT TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "General Licensing Ordinance of the City
of Portsmouth".
Section 6.102: SCOPE
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere
with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this
Ordinances, where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, or
personal property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinances,
contract or deed, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Section 6.103: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations all
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
A. "City" is the City of Portsmouth.
B. "City Council" is the City Council of the City of Portsmouth.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 6
C. "City License Officer" or "License Officer" is the License Officer of the City of
Portsmouth.
D. "License" or "Licensee" as used generally herein shall include respectfully the words
"Permit" or "Permittee" or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this Ordinance or other law or ordinance.
E. "Person" is meant to include individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trust or corporations, or any officers, agents,
employees, factors, or any kind of person representatives of any thereof, in any capacity
acting either for himself or any other person, under personal appointment or pursuant to
law.
Section 6.104: APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit
enterprise, or to use in connection therewith any machine or device, in whole or in part, for
which a license or permit is required by law or ordinance of this City, without a license or permit
therefore being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by this Ordinance or other
law or ordinances of this City.
Section 6.105: CITY LICENSE OFFICER
The City License Officer shall be the City Clerk. The City License Officer shall collect all
license fees and shall issue licenses in the name of the City to all persons qualified under the
provisions of this Ordinances and shall:
A. Make rules, promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary to the
operation and enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. Adopt Forms: Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein as to
character and other relevant matters for all necessary papers.
C. Require Affidavits: Require applicants to submit all oaths and affidavits necessary to the
administration of this Ordinance.
D. Obtain Endorsement: Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested City
Officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with all City
regulations and ordinances which they have a duty of enforcing.
E. Investigate: Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as
prescribed herein.
F. Examine Records: Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when
reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 6
G. Give Notice: Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his applicant and shall
upon his refusal of any license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the
reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant.
Section 6.106: QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS
The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a City
license shall be applied by the City License Officer. The applicant shall:
A. Citizenship: Be a citizen of the United States or a declarant.
B. Loyalty: Not, either individually, or as a member of any party, group or organization, at
the time of such application for a license of permit, advocate or resort to any practices
subversive of or designed for the overthrow, destruction, or sabotage of the government
of the United States.
C. Good Moral Character: Be of good moral character. In making such determination, the
City License Officer shall consider:
l. Penal History: All convictions, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the
applicant subsequent thereto.
2. License History: The license history of the applicant; whether such person, in
previously operating under a license has had such license revoked or suspended,
the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action.
3. General Personal History: Such other facts relevant to the personal history of the
applicant as he shall find necessary to the fair determination of the eligibility of
the applicant.
D. No Obligations to the City: Not to be in default under the provisions of this Ordinances
or indebted or obligated in any manner to the City except for current taxes.
Section 6.107: PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
A. Formal Application Required: Every person required to procure a license under the
provisions of any Ordinance or law of the City shall submit an application for such
license to the City License Officer. The application shall:
l. Form of Application: Be a written statement of forms provided by the licensing
authority; such form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant
before a Notary Public of this State.
2. Contents of Application: Require the disclosure of all information required under
regulations promulgated by the Licensing Officer pertaining to citizenship,
loyalty, good moral character as the Licensing Officer shall find to be reasonably
necessary to the fair administration of this Ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 6
3. Payment of Fees: Be accompanied by the full amount of the fee as chargeable for
such license.
B. Renewal License Procedure: The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an
application for such license to the License Officer. The application shall:
l. Form of Application: Be a written statement upon forms provided by the License
Officer; such form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant
before a Notary Public of this State.
2. Contents: Require the disclosure of such information concerning the applicant's
demeanor and the conduct affecting the purpose for which the license was
originally issued and such other information relating to the preceding licensing
period as is reasonably necessary to the determination by the Licensing Officer of
the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license.
C. Non-Approval of License: The License Officer shall, upon disapproving any application
submitted under the provisions of this Ordinance, refund all fees paid in advance to the
applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the City.
Section 6.108: CONTENTS OF LICENSE
A. Information Required: Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the
following:
l. The name of the Licensee and any other name under which such business is to be
conducted.
2. The kind and address of each business so licensed.
3. The amount of license fee therefor.
4. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
5. Such other information as the License Officer shall determine.
Section 6.109: DUTIES OF LICENSEE
A. General Standards of Conduct: Every licensee under this Ordinance shall:
l. Permit Inspection: Permit all reasonable inspections of his business and
examinations of his books by public authorities as authorized by law.
2. Comply with governing law: Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and
regulations applicable to such licensed business.
3. Operate Properly: Avoid all forbidden, improper, or unnecessary practices or
conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 6
4. Cease Business: Refrain from operating the licensed business on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period his license is revoked or suspended.
B. Display of License: Every license under this Ordinance shall:
l. Post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises in a place where it may
be seen at all times.
C. New Location Desired: A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the
licensed business provided he shall:
l. Approval of License Officer: Obtain written permission from the License Officer
for such change of location.
2. Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar
wording. (Amended 3/18/2002).
D. Keep Records: Keep all records and books necessary to the computation of his license
fee and to the enforcement of this Ordinance.
l. Where Applicant Fails to Record: The License Officer shall make his own
determination as to the financial statement for any business where the licensee has
failed to keep books and records as required herein.
Section 6.110: TRANSFER OF LICENSE
A. When Authorized: A license hereunder shall have the right to transfer his license to
another person provided he shall:
l. Approval of the License Officer: Obtain written permission from the License
Officer for such transfer.
2. Method of Transfer: Execute the transfer in the form and under the conditions
required by law and as prescribed by the License Officer.
3. Notification: Promptly report the completed act of transfer to the License Officer.
4. Surrender of License: Promptly surrender any license certificate.
B. New License Issued: Upon the completion of a transfer of license in compliance with
Subsection A. above, the License Officer shall issue a new license to the transferee for the
unexpired term of the old license.
l. Effect of New License: The new license issued hereunder shall authorize the
transferee to engage in the same business at the same location or at such other
place as shall be approved by the License Officer and named in the new license.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 6
2. Transfer Fee: The License Officer shall collect a transfer fee to be determined in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.111: ENFORCEMENT
A. Inspections
l. Persons Authorized: The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections
in the manner prescribed herein:
a. License Officer: The License Officer shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this Ordinance.
b. Officials Having Duties: The License Officer shall have the authority to
order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises by all City
Officials having duties to perform with reference to such licensees or
businesses.
c. Police Officers: All police officers shall inspect and examine businesses
located within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance
with this Ordinance.
2. Authority of Inspectors: All persons authorized herein to inspect licenses and
businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without a search warrant, at all
reasonable times, the following premises:
a. Those for which a license is required;
b. Those for which a license is issued and which, at the time of inspection,
are operating under such a license;
c. Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
3. Reports by Inspectors: Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses, or premises
as herein authorized shall report all violations of this Ordinance or of either laws
or ordinances to the License Officer and shall submit such other reports as the
License Officer shall order.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 6
ARTICLE II: BILLIARDS AND BOWLING
Section 6.201: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall open, keep, maintain, or continue any billiard room or place where the game of
billiards is played or any bowling alley in this City or place wherein the game of nine pins or ten
pins is played or keep any billiard table or bowling alley in this City for public use unless the
City License Officer shall have granted a license therefor and said license is endorsed by the
Chief of Police.
Such license is valid only until May 1 following the date of issue, and the fee to be determined in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. The penalty for keeping a billiard
room and bowling alley without a license is $20.00 for each billiard table, pool table, or bowling
alley. (Amended 4/1/96) (Amended 3/18/2002).
Section 6.202: HOURS
A. Any person who keeps a billiard room or billiard table as aforesaid or has the care or
control thereof shall not allow or permit the same to be kept open or used between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. (Adopted 9/25/89)
B. Any person who keeps a bowling alley as aforesaid or has the care or control thereof shall
not allow or permit the same to be kept open or used between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. (Adopted 9/25/89)
Section 6.203: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION BY LICENSEE
If the holder of such a license violates the provisions of Section 6.202 of this Ordinance, he shall
be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 6
ARTICLE III: MODEL SLOT CAR RACING
Section 6.301: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall open, keep, maintain or continue any room or place in this City wherein there are
lanes or places for the slot racing of model cars unless the City License Officer shall have granted
a license therefor and said license is endorsed by the Chief of Police and the City Electrical
Inspector.
Section 6.302: FEE
Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.303: TERM
Such license shall be valid for the period of one year from the date of issuance.
Section 6.304: HOURS
The hours of operation for such licensed places shall be the same as is provided in Section 6.202
of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth.
Section 6.305: PENALTY
Any person violating the provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not more than $100.00 for
each offense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 6
ARTICLE IV: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section 6.401: DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall govern the use of the terms defined whenever such terms are used
in this Ordinance:
A. "Amusement Device" as used herein means any amusement machine or device operated
by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of amusement
or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending
machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement features, nor does the term
include any coin operated mechanical musical devices.
B. "Proprietor" is hereby defined to be any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, or club who as the owner, lessee, or proprietor has under his or its control any
establishment, place or premises in or at which an amusement device is placed or kept for
use of play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
Section 6.402: LICENSE REQUIRED
A. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of being a proprietor of
amusement devices unless said person, firm or corporation is properly licensed under the
provisions of these Ordinances.
B. Each license issued under this Article shall commence on the date of issue and shall
expire one calendar year from the date of issue.
C. Each license issued under this Article shall be evidenced by a certificate issued by the
City Clerk stating the number and general type of devices licensed, which certificate shall
be posted in a conspicuous location in the place where the machines are located.
D. Each license issued under this Article shall be non-assignable and non-transferable.
Section 6.403: LICENSE APPLICATION, PROCEDURE AND FEES
A. Application for License (Non-Transferable): Application for license hereunder shall be
filed in writing with the City Clerk on a form to be provided by the City, and shall specify
the following:
l. The name and address of the applicant and if a firm, corporation, partnership, or
association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses.
2. The address of the premises where the licensed device or devices are to be
operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place.
3. A general description of the type of amusement devices to be licensed; for
example, pinball machines, pool tables, video games, etc.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 6
4. The number of each such type of amusement device for which the applicant seeks
to be licensed.
B. Licensing Procedure
The City Clerk shall refer a copy of the application to the Chief of Police, who shall
promptly investigate the premises in which the amusement devices are to be kept as well
as the applicant's record; and refer one copy to the Electrical Inspector who shall
promptly inspect all wiring and connections for the amusement devices to determine that
they comply with the Electrical Code of the City of Portsmouth. The Chief of Police and
Electrical Inspector shall report their findings to the City Clerk who shall issue a license
following a favorable report from each.
C. License Fees
Fees to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. In
no case shall any portion of said fee be repaid to the licensee. (Amended 3/18/2002)
D. Increasing the Number of Devices
Any proprietor licensed under the provisions of this ordinance may file an application
with the City Clerk to increase the number of amusement machines so licensed. Such
application for increase shall be acted upon in the manner of acting upon an original
application. Upon the granting of such an increase the application shall surrender his
existing license to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall, upon payment of a fee increase
calculated by multiplying the increase in amusement devices by $75.00, issue a new
license for the remainder of the term of the original license showing the number and types
of devices licensed thereunder.
Section 6.404: GENERAL OPERATING REGULATIONS
No proprietor shall allow any person under the age of sixteen years to operate or play any
amusement device during regular public school hours.
Section 6.405: VIOLATIONS
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this Article shall be guilty
of a violation and be subject to a fine of up to $100.00 per day each day on which such a
violation occurs.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.405, the Mayor and City Council may
suspend or revoke the amusement device license or licenses of any person, firm, or
corporation who violates or allows the violation of any provisions of this Article. A
public hearing shall be held by the Mayor and City Council prior to any such suspension
or revocation.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 6
ARTICLE V: BOXING AND WRESTLING
Section 6.501: LICENSE REQUIRED
No boxing match or wrestling match at which an admission price is charged shall take place
unless a license therefor shall first be obtained from the City License Officer and said license is
endorsed by the Chief of Police.
Section 6.502: FEE
Every such license shall be in writing and shall specify the days upon which such match may take
place. Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording.
(Amended 3/18/2002).
Section 6.503: PENALTY
If the holder of such a license shall violate the provisions of Section 6.501 and Section 6.502, he
shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense.
(Article IV Adopted 1/17/83)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 6
ARTICLE VI: (Reserved for Future Use; Deleted in entirety 10/22/2012)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 6
This page intentionally left blank
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 6
ARTICLE VII: DOGS AND OTHER PETS
Regulation of Animals in General
Section 6.701: ANIMAL BITES
It shall be the duty of every person bitten by an animal, or his or her parent or guardian, and any
attending physician, to report to the Animal Control Officer the bite within twenty-four (24) hours.
The report shall describe the circumstances of the bite and the name, address and telephone
number of the owner or keeper of the animal to the extent known.
Section 6.702: NUISANCE ANIMALS
No owner, keeper or other person having control shall permit an animal to be a nuisance animal.
For the purposes of this section, nuisance animal means any animal or animals which:
1. Molests or harasses passersby, domestic animals or passing vehicles in the public
way;
2. Attacks or threatens persons or other domestic animals;
3. Punctures the skin of any person or domestic animal;
4. Damages property other than that of its owner;
5. Defecates off the premises of the animal's owner, and the owner, or other
individual in control of the animal, fails to remove such deposit immediately;
6. Barks, whines, howls or cries in a continuous fashion for more than thirty (30)
minutes.
Section 6.703: CRUELTY
It shall be unlawful to torture, torment or neglect any animal as provided in RSA 644:8 and the
penalties set forth therein shall apply.
Section 6.704: RABIES VACCINATION
Every owner or keeper of any dog, cat or ferret shall be required to obtain such rabies vaccination
as may be proscribed by RSA 436-100 as it may from time to time be amended.
Regulation of Dogs
Section 6.705: DEFNITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
At-large. At-large shall mean not under the control of the owner, or another individual
either by leash, cord, chain or other similar means of physical restraint.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 6
Dog. Dog shall include both male and female of the canine species. Dog shall also mean
any animal which is considered to be a wolf-hybrid as defined in RSA 466-A.
Enforcement official. Enforcement official when used herein shall mean any Animal
Control Officer, Police Officer, or other individual authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and such state statutes pertaining to animals.
Keeper. A keeper shall be any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who
has temporary control or responsibility for a dog with the permission of the Owner.
Owner. Owner shall include any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog. The owner identified on any current dog license
shall be prima facie evidence of the ownership of the dog.
Vicious dog. Vicious dog shall mean a dog that, without provocation, attacks or bites a
person or other domestic animal.
Section 6.706: AT-LARGE PROHIBITED
a. Prohibition. Except as exempted below, no person shall permit a dog owned
by him or her or under his or her control to be at-large as defined by this
Ordinance or to trespass upon the property of another, public or private.
b. Exemptions. A dog shall not be deemed at-large if it is:
1. On the premises of the dog's owner;
2. On the premises of the person under whose control the dog is
supervised ;
3. On the premises of another person as long as that person has given
permission for the dog to be at-large;
4. In any designated off-leash dog area managed and regulated by the
City of Portsmouth. Designated off-leash areas shall be any City property
posted under the authority of the Public Works Department as an off-leash
area.
c. No Defense. Failure of a Keeper to comply with this provision shall not relieve
the Owner of responsibility from compliance.
Section 6.707: CONDUCT IN OFF-LEASH AREAS
a. Voice Control and Observation on Private Property. Every person who allows a
dog to be off-leash in the designated areas under section 6.706(b)(1)- (3) shall
maintain voice control over the dog and shall keep the dog under observation at
all times unless the dog is contained by an invisible fence system or enclosure
sufficient to prevent the dog from leaving the premises.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 6
b. Voice Control and Observation on Public Property. Every person who allows a
dog to be off-leash in a designated area under section 6.706(b)(4) shall, unless
excepted under subsection c below, maintain voice control over the dog and shall
keep the dog under observation at all times.
c. South Mill Pond Dog Park Rules: Dogs are permitted to be off-leash and not
under voice control in the dog park. Due to the risks associated with this activity,
the following shall apply:
1. Entry into the dog park is restricted to persons age 12 and older
2. Dogs must have current licenses and vaccination tags;
3. Dogs must be under observation;
4. Dogs must be spayed or neutered that are one year or older;
5. Spike and choke collars must be removed; and
6. Dog owners are responsible for their dogs’ actions.
Section 6.708: LICENSE
Every owner of a dog more than four (4) months old shall be required to license such dog within
30 days of ownership and annually thereafter with the City Clerk in the manner proscribed by RSA
466 as it may be from time to time amended. The fee for this license shall be set at the maximum
amount permitted by state law. Failure to license any dog as provided in this section shall be a
violation and the penalty shall be $25.00 and not those penalties set forth in Section 6.710.
[Amended 04/16/2012]
Section 6.709: REMOVAL OF DOG WASTE REQUIRED
The owner, keeper or person in control of any dog shall be responsible for the removal of any
defecation deposited by such dog on any public or private property.
Penalties, Impoundment and Enforcement
Section 6.710: PENALTIES
An offense of any provision of this chapter by any person shall be deemed a violation and shall be
punishable by the following penalties:
1. First offense. A first offense of any provision of this chapter in any twelve-month
period shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00)
2. Second offense. A second offense of any provision of this chapter in any twelvemonth
period shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
3. Third and subsequent offenses. A third or subsequent offense of any
provision of this chapter in any twelve-month period shall be punishable by a fine of
two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 6
In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any animal found in violation of this chapter
may be impounded as provided in Section 6.711 of this chapter.
Section 6.711: IMPOUNDMENT
a. Authority to Impound. Animals who have bitten or are in violation of any provision of
this chapter may be taken by any enforcement official and impounded in a humane
manner.
b. Place of Impoundment. Animals shall be impounded with such area veterinarians
and/or animal welfare organizations as any enforcement official may deem
reasonable and appropriate.
c. Impoundment and Boarding Fees. The owner of any animal impounded under
the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for all impoundment and boarding
fees. Owner shall make payment directly to the veterinarian or animal welfare
organization to obtain release of the animal.
d. Disposition of Unredeemed Animals. If any impounded animal is not redeemed
within (7) days of its impoundment, it may be adopted or given away in accord with
the policies and practices of the veterinarian or organization responsible for
impoundment. If any unredeemed animal is not adopted or given away because of
disease, temperament or other cause, it shall be euthanized in a humane way. The
impoundment period may be waived by the enforcement official in case of a
severely injured animal whose owner cannot be located or is unwilling to claim
the animal.
e. Collection. Any sums owed under this chapter may be collected in a civil action
brought under this section.
f. Interference with Impoundment. Any person who interferes with the impounding of
an animal or releases, or who attempts to release, an impounded animal contrary
to this article shall be in violation of this chapter and may be subject to such
additional charges as may be applicable under the criminal code.
g. Notice of Impoundment. Within twenty-four (24) hours of the impoundment of any
animal, the enforcement official shall make every reasonable attempt to notify the
owner of the impounded animal of such impoundment. Such notice shall include
either personal contact with the owner or a written notice posted at the dwelling
house of the owner.
h. Surrender for Impoundment. The enforcement official may elect to demand the
surrender of any animal when there are reasonable grounds to believe the safety of the
public or the animal will be benefited by such action. Reasonable grounds shall
include without limitation: the impoundment of any animal that has bitten; risk of
flight with the animal; or that the animal is or will within 48 hours be the subject of
any complaint filed with the Animal Control Committee. The enforcement official
shall provide a written summary to the Owner of the reasons for the demand for
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 6
surrender. Failure to surrender any animal upon demand shall be a violation of this
ordinance the penalty for which is $100 per day and not the penalties set forth under
6.710.
Section 6.712: ANIMAL CONTROL COMMITTEE
a. Animal Control Committee Established. For purposes of this section, an Animal
Control Committee is established. The Animal Control Committee shall be
comprised of the Police Chief or his/her designee a veterinarian who shall be paid
for his/her time, and a resident of Portsmouth appointed by the Mayor. The Police
Chief or his/her designee shall be the Chair of the Committee. The designated
Animal Control Officer shall be the prosecuting officer for any complaint brought
before the Committee.
b. Vicious Dogs. The Animal Control Officer or a City resident may make a written
complaint directed to the Chair of the Animal Control Committee that a dog is
alleged to be vicious as defined in Section 6.705.
c. Repeated Dog at Large. In the event that any dog shall be found to be at-large
three (3) or more times in a twelve-month period, the Animal Control
Officer or a City resident may make a written complaint directed to the
Chair of the Animal control Committee.
d. Repeated Nuisance Animals. In the event that any animal shall be found to be a
nuisance three (3) or more times in a twelve-month period, the Animal Control
Officer or a City resident may make a written complaint to the Chair of the Animal
Control Committee.
e. Procedure. The Committee shall hear all complaints described in paragraphs b, c
and d of this section. All hearings shall be public and the rules of evidence shall
not apply. If the animal is impounded when the written complaint is filed, the
hearing shall be within fourteen (14) days. All other complaints shall be heard
within thirty (30) days.
f. Orders. The Animal Control Committee may issue such orders as are
necessary to protect the public and/or the animal. Such orders may include,
but are not limited to: confinement in a secure enclosure or other similar
restriction; muzzling; training; adoption; restricting the sale or transfer of
the animal; requiring permanent identification; or euthanization in a humane
manner. The Committee shall also have the authority to require proof of
owner’s adequate insurance or resources in the event of any future claims
for damage by the subject animal. In addition, the Animal Control
Committee may revoke the privilege of any owner to keep, harbor or have
custody of any animals while in the City and that no new privileges be
granted. The Animal Control Committee shall have the authority to modify
such orders without hearing upon the agreement of the Owner and the
enforcement official that a modification would be in the best interest of the
public or the animal.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 6
g. Penalty For Violation Of Orders. Any person who violates any provision of any
order of the Animal Control Committee shall be in violation of this
ordinance and subject to a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day of
non-compliance.
Section 6.713: INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS
Any person or persons who hinders, interferes with, obstructs or uses abusive or profane
language against any enforcement official when in the course of their duties shall be in
violation of this ordinance and subject to a penalty of $100.00.
Section 6.714: PAYMENT OF PENALTIES
Any penalties and fines assessed pursuant to this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of
Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial.
Section 6.715: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS
Each provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and
if any provision of this Ordinance is declared invalid, all other provisions shall remain valid and
enforceable.
(Ordinance deleted in its entirety and replaced on May 16, 2005)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 6
ARTICLE VIII:
RESERVED
(Billboards deleted in its entirety 4/1/96)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 6
ARTICLE IX: CIRCUS
Section 6.901: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct any circus or outdoor amusement of a like nature
without having first obtained a license from the City License Officer who shall require approval
and endorsement from the City Council, the Building Inspector, and the Police Chief prior to the
issuance of said license. (Adopted 3/4/85)
Be it further ordained that the sentence in Section 6.901(C) which reads, "an application shall be
filed with the City Clerk ten days prior to operating..." shall be amended to require that said
application shall be filed with the City Clerk thirty days prior to operation of the circus.
(Adopted 3/4/85)
A. Intent of Ordinance: The purpose of this Ordinance is to guard against personal injury in
the operation of amusement devices, fairs, carnivals, circus and any such type of
entertainment utilizing portable equipment and/or temporary structures.
B. Definitions:
l. Amusement Device: A contrivance or combination of contrivances designed or
intended to entertain or amuse people and which is of such nature that accidental
personal injury may be incurred in its assembly, disassembly or use.
2. Carnivals: An enterprise principally devoted to offering amusement or
entertainment to the public in, upon or by means of amusement devices or
temporary structures in any number of combination, whether or not associated
with other structures or forms of public attraction.
3. Circus: An enterprise principally devoted to offering entertainment and/or using
an enclosure such as a tent or other temporary structures to house the public
and/or animals.
4. Fair: An enterprise principally devoted to the exhibition of the products of
agriculture or industry and at or in connection with which amusement devices and
temporary structures are provided.
5. Manager: A person having possession, custody or managerial control of an
amusement device or temporary structure at a carnival, circus, fair, whether as
owner, lessee, agent, or otherwise.
6. Temporary Structures: A structure designed to be relocated from time to time
with or without disassembly and used or intended to be used for amusement
purposes for public occupation in connection with such purposes.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 6
C. Application: An application shall be filed with the City Clerk thirty days prior to
operating, containing the following information: (Amended 3/4/85)
l. Name and address or owner, sponsor and on-site manager;
2. Street location;
3. Approximate land size being utilized;
4. Approval for public property;
5. Proposed intent of such activity;
6. Number of temporary structures and types;
7. Date from beginning to end and time of operation during each day;
8. Type and amount of insurance and/or bond;
9. Age, description and date of last major overhaul for each amusement device;
10. Explain any and all equipment failures resulting in injury for the past twelve
months;
11. Number of seats, grandstands, etc.;
12. Permit fees shall be submitted with the application.
Fees to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Any false information filed on the Application shall be deemed a violation.
D. Procedure: All equipment will be inspected prior to operating. All equipment found in
violation will be labeled by a placard large enough to be seen by the public, warning that
the apparatus is hazardous. The device will be closed until corrective action to alleviate
the violations have been made and thoroughly re-inspected. Upon completion of
inspection, a permit will be issued to the Manager allowing operation for a definite
number of devices, structures and amusements. The permit is granted on the express
condition that all provisions of this Ordinance are conforming but may be revoked at any
time upon violation of any provision of said Ordinance or any other Ordinance of the City
of Portsmouth.
E. Injuries: All injuries incurred on any equipment while in the City of Portsmouth shall be
reported immediately to the Inspection Department. The Manager shall report the nature
of the injury, the equipment injured on and the cause of the injury. All equipment on
which the injuries occurred shall be reinspected prior to further operation. The Inspection
Department shall have the authority to allow or disallow any equipment not suited for
public or private use.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 6
F. Bonding: Entertainment on public property shall post a bond or the equivalent for
protection of said property. The amount and determination shall be empowered by the
governing official.
G. Inspection Criteria: The Inspection Department may adopt from time to time, such rules
and regulations as may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this
Ordinance.
H. Fencing: All exposed machinery used in operation of the activity shall be fenced or
isolated by other means to restrict the area around the equipment from the general public.
I. Electrical Code:
l. The National Electrical Code, 1971 or latest edition, by National Fire Protection
Association and supplementary codes throughout this Ordinance shall be
applicable for all electrical wiring and any electrical equipment.
2. All electrical outlets and/or circuits shall have an approved ground fault protection
system so rated for each outlet or circuit to protect against line to ground shock.
3. All equipment shall be so located that contact with any type of utility will be
avoided.
J. Tents, Grandstands and Air Support Structures: For the purpose of this Ordinance, the
provisions set forth in the National Fire Protection Association pamphlet #102, Standards
for Tents, Grandstands and Air Support Structures, sued for places of Assembly, 1967 or
latest edition, are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance.
K. Fire Extinguishers: Approved fire extinguishers shall be provided where necessary to
secure reasonable and adequate protection from fire hazards.
L. Flammable Liquids and Gases: Gasoline and other volatile liquids and flammable gases
when stored shall be kept in reasonably cool and ventilated places. Such liquids shall be
in approved safety cans. Smoking and the carrying of lighted cigars, cigarettes or pipes is
prohibited in any area where such liquids or gases are stored or are transferred from one
container to another.
M. Flammable Wastes: Flammable waste such as oily rags and other flammable materials
shall be placed in covered metal containers which shall be kept in easily accessible
locations. Such containers shall not be kept at or near exits.
N. Cleanliness: A suitable number of metal containers for refuse shall be provided in and
around amusement devices and temporary structures. Excessive accumulation of trash or
refuse shall be promptly removed. All parts of amusement devices and temporary
structures used by passengers or customers shall be maintained in a clean condition.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 6
O. Live Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person/persons, business, organization or
corporation to offer, sell, auction, exhibit, display, give or in any manner convey
ownership to any other person/persons as a premium, prize, gift or bonus of any live, wild
or domestic creature, by auction, lottery, raffle, game of chance or skill and whosoever
does so shall be guilty of violation of this Ordinance and may be punished as prescribed
in this Ordinance and each incident, or day, in violation shall constitute a separate offense
or violation.
P. Severability: If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
application of the Ordinance which can be given affect without the invalid provision or
application and to this end the provisions of the Ordinance are declared to be severable.
Q. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws
which prescribe more restrictive limitations.
R. Any violation of the requirements of this Ordinance or any amendments thereof, or of any
permit issued hereunder, except where otherwise provided by statute, the owner,
amusement manager, sponsor or agent shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $100.00
per day for each violation thereof and the permit to operate may be revoked by the
Inspection Department.
Section 6.902: FEE
Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.903: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO LICENSE
Any person who shall violate Section 6.901 of this Ordinance shall be fined not exceeding
$100.00.
PUBLIC SAFETY (STATE LAW)
Ch. 5 (HB 10) requires persons desiring to conduct a public dance, circuses or carnival to apply
for police attendance at the function. Subject to written approval of the governing or licensing
body of a community, the Police Chief determines the necessity of police attendance and assigns
officers to be paid for by the applicant. The Police Chief has authority to assign police details to
any public meetings or functions which may involve traffic problems, disturbances, or endanger
public health, safety or welfare. Communities and the police are immunized from any decision
not to detail police to any public meeting or function. (Adopted 5/31/85)
COMMENT: This law clarifies a 1983 law, in a Constitutional sense, that seemed to require
police permission and, perhaps, presence for virtually any type of meeting by anyone.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 6
ARTICLE X.: THEATRICALS, PARADES, OPEN AIR MEETINGS
Section 6.1001: LICENSE REQUIRED
No theatrical or dramatic presentation shall be performed or exhibited and no parade or
procession upon any public street or way and no open air public meeting upon any ground
abutting thereon shall be permitted unless a license therefor shall first be obtained from the City
License Officer and endorsed by the Chief of Police.
Section 6.1002: LICENSE FORM
Every such license shall be in writing and shall specify the day and hour of the permit to perform
or exhibit such parade, procession or open air public meeting.
Section 6.1003: FEE
Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.1004: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO LICENSE
Any person who violates Section 6.1001 of this Ordinance shall be fined not exceeding $100.00.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XI.:
RESERVED
(Entire Article - THEATRE deleted in its entirety 7/09/90)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XII: HOTELS, ETC.
Section 6.1201: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall carry on the business of a hotel or public house without first having secured a
permit from the City License Officer to do so and filing with the City License Officer a statement
containing the names and addresses of the officers, providing said enterprise shall be conducted
by a corporation or otherwise, the names and addresses of all persons interested in the
management of said business and the nature of their respective interests.
Section 6.1202: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO LICENSE
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not more than $100.00
for each day the hotel or public house is operating without a license.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XIII: HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
Section 6.1301: LICENSE REQUIRED
A person shall not engage in the business of peddler, as defined in RSA 320:1, within the
corporate limits of the City of Portsmouth without first obtaining a license therefore as provided
herein.
Section 6.1302: DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
Motor Vehicle: Any vehicle used for the displaying, storing, or transporting of articles offered
for sale by a vendor which is required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor
Vehicles.
Peddler: As used herein shall be as defined in RSA 320:1 and shall include any person, whether
a resident of the City of Portsmouth or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street,
carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits,
garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall
sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, stand, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other
vehicle or conveyance and includes one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes
deliveries to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall include "hawker", "vendor" and "huckster".
The definition of the term, “peddler” shall include each horse drawn carriage for hire which
operates within the City limits. (Amended 9/18/95)
Public Assembly Buildings: As used herein shall be as defined in the BOCA Basic/National
Building Code/1984, Article III, Sections 302.1 - 302.6.
Public Property: Any city owned or controlled property including but not limited to streets and
sidewalks.
Sell: Shall include any offer to sell or attempt to sell.
Stand: Any push-cart, wagon, or any other wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved
without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the
Department of Motor Vehicles, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered
for sale by a vendor. (Amended 6/21/99).
Vendor: A peddler who on public property sells food, beverages or merchandise from a stand,
motor vehicle or his person.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 6
Section 6.1303: APPLICATION
The license required by this Article shall be issued in accordance with the General Licensing
Ordinance, Article 6.107.
The application for a peddler’s license shall include, in addition to the information required by
the General Licensing Ordinance:
A. The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the name and address of the
owner, if other than the applicant, of the business and of any stand or motor vehicle to be
used in the operation of the business.
B. A description of the type of food, beverage or merchandise to be sold, and in the case of
products of farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant.
C. A description and photograph of any stand or motor vehicle to be used in the operation of
the business, including the license and registration number of any motor vehicle used in
the operation of the business.
D. A certificate of insurance or other proof acceptable to the Licensing Officer that the
applicant has been issued an insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Hampshire, protecting the licensee and the City from all
claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from
operations under or in connection with the license. The insurance policy shall provide
that the policy shall not be terminated or cancelled prior to the expiration date except with
thirty (30) days advance written notice to the City. The policy shall provide combined
single limit coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage. The City of Portsmouth shall be named as additional insured thereunder.
(Amended 6/21/99)
Section 6.1304: ISSUANCE
Not later than thirty (30) days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's license,
the applicant shall be notified by the Licensing Officer of the decision on the issuance or denial
of the license. The Licensing Officer shall consider the standards set forth in this Article and the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth in determining whether to grant a license.
If the issuance of the license is approved, the Licensing Officer shall issue the license. If the
license is denied, the applicant shall be provided with a statement of the reasons for the denial.
The reasons shall be entered in writing on the application. The applicant shall be entitled to a
hearing pursuant to Section 6.1316. All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire on June 30 annually.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be displayed by the vendor on the vending cart in a place
visible to the public.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 6
Section 6.1305: PROHIBITED CONDUCT - VENDOR
A vendor shall not:
A. Vend within one thousand (1,000) feet of the grounds of any elementary or secondary
school between one hour prior to the start of the school day and one hour after dismissal
at the end of the school day;
B. Vend within one thousand (1,000) feet of any hospital;
C. Vend within fifty (50) feet on the same street of any public assembly building while such
building is in use;
D. Vend on any street or sidewalk where vending is otherwise prohibited;
E. Leave any stand or motor vehicle unattended;
F. Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk, park any motor
vehicle other than in a lawful parking place, in conformance with City and state parking
regulations;
G. Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless he has available for public use
his own litter receptacle which is available for his patrons' use;
H. Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing all trash or refuse
remaining from sales made by him;
I. Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere
other than in, on or under the stand or motor vehicle, except as expressly indicated in the
application for a license;
J. Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack, sign, or any other
device to increase the selling or display capacity of his stand or motor vehicle, where such
items have not been described in his application;
K. Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles;
L. Sell anything other than that which he is licensed to vend;
M. Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud and raucous noise, or
use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio sound amplifier or similar
device to attract the attention of the public;
N. Vend without the insurance coverage specified in Section 6.1303(d);
O. Vend without a fire extinguisher of a type approved by the Fire Chief or his designee if
the vendor utilizes heat generation equipment.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 6
Section 6.1306: PROHIBITED CONDUCT - SIDEWALK VENDORS
In addition to the conduct prohibited by Section 6.1305, a vendor selling from a stand on the
sidewalk shall not:
A. Vend at any location where the unobstructed sidewalk area after deducting the area
occupied by the stand is less than three (3) feet in width;
B. Vend within thirty (30) feet of any driveway entrance to a police or fire station, or within
ten (10) feet of any other driveway;
C. Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the vending business to lean
against or hang from any building or other structure lawfully placed on public property,
without the owner's written permission.
Section 6.1307: PROHIBITED CONDUCT - VENDOR FROM MOTOR VEHICLE
In addition to the conduct prohibited by Section 6.1305 a vendor selling from a motor vehicle
shall not:
A. Conduct his motorized business in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the
ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, or create or become a public
nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or
property, or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police, or sanitation vehicles;
B. Stop, stand, or park his vehicle upon any street, or permit it to remain there except on the
roadway at the curb for the purpose of vending therefrom;
C. Stop, stand, or park his vehicle upon any street for the purpose of selling or sell on any
street under any circumstances during the hours when parking, or stopping or standing
has been prohibited or is prohibited by statute by signs or curb markings or Ordinance;
D. Vend from a municipal parking space except from those locations, not to exceed more
than three (3) locations, identified for vending by the Parking Committee and ratified by
the City Council through the acceptance of the Parking Committee’s minutes and subject
to the following limitations: (Amended 02/16/2010)
The vending spaces shall be available from April 15 – November 15 of each year.
In order to utilize such spaces, vendor must be the highest qualified bidder for use of such
vending space, agreeing to all terms and conditions of the bid.
The Parking Committee shall be responsible for preparing annually a bid document in
coordination with other municipal departments, including the purchasing and legal
departments.
There shall be a minimum bid price of $5,000.00 or such minimum bid price as may be
established in accord with Chapter 1, Article XVI relative to the adoption of fees by City
Council budget resolution.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 32 Chapter 6
Section 6.1308: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS
Vending or Peddling is specifically prohibited at the following locations:
A. On the sidewalk area in front of the North Church bounded by Pleasant Street, Church
Street, Congress Street and the front façade of the Church. (Adopted 12/02/02)
Section 6.1309: HEALTH AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD AND
BEVERAGE VENDING
A vendor of food and beverages shall comply with the inspection provisions and standards for
restaurants contained in the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth.
A. The equipment used in vending food and beverages shall not be used until the vendor
receives a certificate of inspection indicating compliance with this section.
B. Each food and beverage vending business shall be inspected at least quarterly by the
Health Officer.
Section 6.1310: ADVERTISING
A peddler shall not permit advertising on any stand or motor vehicle, except to identify the name
of the product or the name of the vendor and the posting of prices.
Section 6.1311: MOTORIZED FOOD VENDORS IDENTIFICATION
All motorized food vendors operating in the City of Portsmouth are required to have lettering on
both sides and rear of their vehicle(s), identifying the name of the business. The letters shall be
at least four inches (4") in height and of such color and design as to be clearly visible at a
distance of at least fifty (50) feet. The letters shall be of a material and affixed in a manner
approved by the Licensing Officer.
Section 6.1312: RENEWAL
An application to renew a license shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the
expiration of the current license in accordance with Section 6.1304.
Section 6.1313: TEMPORARY SUSPENSION FOR STREET CLOSINGS
An official temporary encumbrance or closure of a street or sidewalk by the City for purposes of
maintenance or reconstruction shall cause the suspension of all licenses to operate thereon.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 33 Chapter 6
Section 6.1314: STREET FAIRS
Any person or persons wishing to use or occupy a portion of any street or sidewalk for the
purposes of conducting thereon street fairs or other community events, including but not limited
to the sale of merchandise by commercial retailers, or by community associations conducting
street fairs or other promotions must, pursuant to the provisions of RSA 31:100, obtain a license
from City Council.
Section 6.1315: PUBLIC CELEBRATIONS
The Licensing Officer may, under conditions deemed appropriate by him, grant a temporary
vendor's license to operate during public celebrations.
Section 6:1316: LICENSE FEES
The license required by this Article shall be issued upon approval by the Licensing Officer. Fee
to be determined in accordance Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. The fee is for one (1)
year or any part thereof. (Amended 6/21/99) (Amended 3/18/2002).
Section 6:1317: LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION AND HEARING
Upon written notice to the licensee, the license issued hereunder may be suspended for the
remainder of its term, or any portion thereof, by the City Manager upon a finding that any of the
terms and conditions of this Article have been knowingly violated by the licensee.
At the request of any licensee receiving notice of suspension or revocation pursuant to this
section, the Chairperson of the Vendor's Committee shall arrange a hearing of the Vendor's
Committee. Such hearing shall be scheduled during normal business hours of City Hall within
seven (7) calendar days of the receipt by the Chairperson of the request for such hearing,
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded. The Chairperson of the Vendor's Committee shall
conduct and preside over all hearings scheduled under this section. The hearings shall be
informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. At such hearings the licensee may present any
defense of law or fact which is relevant to the issue of whether or not the license should be
suspended or revoked. The decision of the Vendor's Committee shall be final, subject only to
judicial review. No licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked shall be granted
another license during the period of suspension or revocation. (Amended 12/02/02)
Section 6.1318: PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject upon
conviction of a fine of up to Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars per violation.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 34 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XIV: PAWN BROKERS
Section 6.1401: LICENSE
No person shall be engaged as a pawn broker in this City without first obtaining a license for that
purpose from the City License Officer and endorsed by the Chief of Police. Each license shall be
in writing and shall specify the place, street and number of the street where said business is to be
conducted.
Section 6.1402: FEE
Each applicant for such license shall annually, April 1st, pay to the City a fee to be determined in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended 4/1/96) (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.1403: PENALTY
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more
than $100.00 for each offense.
Section 6.1404: PROVISIONAL ORDER
When an Inspector has reported the violation of this Ordinance or of any law or ordinance, the
City License Officer shall issue to the affected person a provisional order to comply:
A. Nature of Notice: The provisional order, and all other notices issued on compliance with
this Ordinance, shall be in writing, shall be personally served, and shall apprise the person
affected of his specific violations. In the absence of the person affected or his agent or
employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to some structure on the premises.
Depositing such notice in the United States mail shall constitute service thereof.
B. Period of Compliance: The provisional order shall require compliance within fifteen days
of personal service on the affected person.
C. Hearing: Upon written application by the person affected before the expiration of the
fifteen days period for compliance, the City License Officer shall order a hearing. Notice
of such hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner prescribed herein.
D. Modifying Authority of License Officer: Upon written application, or on his own motion,
the City License Officer shall have the authority, in a proper case, to extend the time for
compliance, to grant a new license date, and to change, modify or rescind any
recommendation or order.
E. Final Order: Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply with the provisions of
the order or with any order made after hearing, the City License Officer shall then declare
and make the provisional order final.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 35 Chapter 6
l. Authority of License Officer: The License Officer shall have the authority to
suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a provisional order final.
2. Effect of Revocation or Suspension: Upon revocation or suspension, no refund of
any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and he shall
immediately cease all business at all places under such license.
F. Summary Action: When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimicable
to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and thus give
rise to an emergency, the License Officer shall have the authority to order the cessation of
business and the close of premises or to suspend or revoke the license.
l. Special Hearing: Unless waived in writing within five days after he has acted
summarily, the License Officer shall conduct a special hearing for such action in
respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of such
hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner prescribed herein.
G. Right of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the License Officer after
hearing shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with
said City Council within thirty days following the effective date of the action or decision
complained of:
l. Contents of Appeal: Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision
appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon to avoid such
order.
2. Notification of License Officer: At the time of filing any such appeal of copy
thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the License Officer.
3. Hearings: The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and
shall personally serve a written notice, as provided herein, upon the appellant
informing him thereof. The City Council shall also give such notice to the
License Officer and such officer shall be entitled to appear and defend such order.
4. Effect of Decision: The findings of the City Council shall be final and exclusive
and shall be personally served upon the appellant as required herein.
H. Liability of Violation
l. Unpaid Fee Constitutes Debt: The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of
which is required herein, shall constitute a debt due to the City.
2. Action by the City Attorney: The City Attorney shall, at the direction of the
License Officer, institute Civil Suit in the name of the City to recover any such
unpaid fee.
3. Civil Judgment No Bar: No civil judgment or any act by the City Attorney or the
License Officer on the violation shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for
each and every violation of the Ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 36 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XV: ROLLER SKATING RINK
Section 6.1501: LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall operate, keep, maintain, or continue any roller skating rink in the City of
Portsmouth for public use unless the City License Officer shall have granted a license therefor
and said license is endorsed by the Chief of Police and Fire Chief.
Section 6.1502: FEE
Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended
3/18/2002).
Section 6.1503: TERM
Such license shall be valid for the period of one year from the date of issuance.
Section 6.1504: HOURS
The hours of operation for such licensed places shall be as follows:
A. Any person who keeps a roller skating rink as aforesaid or has the care or control thereof
shall not allow or permit the same to be kept open or used between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
B. Any person who keeps a roller skating rink as aforesaid or has the care or control thereof
shall not allow or permit the same to be kept open or used before the hour of 1:00 p.m. on
Sunday.
C. The Chief of Police may extend the hours on special occasions with his written
permission.
Section 6.1505: PENALTY
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not more than $100.00 for
each offense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 37 Chapter 6
ARTICLE XVI: MAGAZINE SUBSCRIPTION SOLICITORS
That is shall be unlawful for any solicitor as defined in Section 6.1601 to engage in such business
within the City of Portsmouth when the subject of the sale is any of the articles specified in
Section 6.1602 without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with this Ordinance.
Section 6.1601: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, a solicitor is defined as any person, firm or corporation,
whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the City or not, who takes
or attempts to take orders, goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature for
future delivery, whether or not such person has a sample of the goods, wares, merchandise or
personal property, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales.
Section 6.1602: MAGAZINE SUBSCRIPTIONS
Applicants for licenses under this Ordinance must file with the City Clerk a sworn application in
writing on a form furnished by the Clerk which shall give the following information:
A. The name or names of the person/persons having the management of applicant's business
during that time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the City. If the applicant is
an employer, the name, description and address of each employee together with a
photograph of each employee shall accompany the application;
B. Permanent home address and full local address of applicant;
C. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
D. If the applicant is an employee, the name and address of the employer together with
evidence sufficient to establish the nature of the relationship and a photograph of the
applicant.
Section 6.1603: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE
Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall cause a copy thereof to be sent to the Chief of
Police who shall investigate the truth of the facts stated in the application. No license shall be
issued on the day application is made and application shall be either granted or denied within ten
days of the application date. If as a result of such investigation, the truth of the facts stated in the
application is established, a license will be issued. Such license shall contain the following:
A. Name D. Nature of Business
B. Address E. Expiration Date
C. Photograph
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 38 Chapter 6
Section 6.1604: LICENSE FEE [Added 04/16/2012]
The fee for such license shall be determined on an annual basis by the City during its budget
process.
Section 6.1605: RENEWAL
Licenses shall expire one year after date of issuance.
Section 6.1606: BADGES
Licenses shall be displayed on the outer clothing of the solicitor when he is engaged in soliciting
door to door or in any public place. A solicitor shall recite his license number upon the request
of any citizen.
Section 6.1607: REVOCATION OF LICENSES
Permits and licenses issued pursuant to this Ordinance may be revoked by the City Clerk of the
City of Portsmouth after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business
as a solicitor;
C. Any violation of this Ordinance;
D. Conviction of any crime involving fraud, misrepresentation or violation of the Consumer
Protection Laws of this State or of the United States.
Notice of hearing for revocation of license shall be given by registered mail, postage to the local
address appearing on the application. Notice shall be mailed seven days prior to the date set for
the hearing. Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Clerk in refusing to issue a license or
in revoking a license may appeal to the City Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a
written statement with the City Council within fourteen days of notice of the action complained
of. The Council shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal and notify the applicant of the
date in the same manner as notice of revocation hearing is given.
Section 6.1608: PENALTY
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a violation.
Not an official copy
CHAPTER 7
VEHICLES, TRAFFIC and PARKING
Article I Parking Meters 7.101 - 7.114
Article II Taxis 7.201 - 7.217
Article III Traffic Ordinance 7.301 - 7.350
Article IV Off-Street Parking Areas 7.401 - 7.408
Article IVA Bus Stops and Taxicab Stands 7.A400 - 7.A408
Article V Bicycle Regulations 7.501 - 7.518
Article VA Community Center/City Hall/District Court Parking 7.A501 - 7.A503
Article VI Loading Zones 7.601 - 7.605
Article VII Truck and Bus Travel 7.701 - 7.712
Article VIII Hazardous Materials 7.801 - 7.805
Article IX Penalties/Forfeitures/Separability 7.901 - 7.903
Article X Towing 7.1000 - 7.1005
Article XI Speed Limits 7.1100
Article XII Parking for the Walking Disabled 7.1200
Article XIII Equipment Required – Snowplows 7.1300
Article XIV Registration Exemption for Prisoners of War (POW’s) 7.1400
Article XV Emergency Lanes 7.1500 - 7.1504
Article XVI Resident Only Parking 7.1601 - 7.1603
Article XVII Moped Regulations 7.1701 – 7.1704
Article XVIII Electric Vehicle Charging Station and Electric Vehicle 7.1801 – 7.1804
Parking Spaces Regulations
Article XIX Shared Active Transportation 7.1901-7.1905
ARTICLE I: PARKING METERS
Section 7.101: DEFINITION
The word "vehicle" as used herein shall mean any device by which any person or property may be
transported upon a highway except those operated upon rails or tracks.
The word “meter” shall mean any device for buying parking time that displays the length of time
for which a vehicle may remain legally parked in a parking space. Such devices include but are
not limited to public meters such as a meter at an individual parking space or a central meter, or
personal meters such as an in-vehicle meter, coupon or any other metering device including
mobile phone applications as shall be approved from time to time by the City Council. The
display of the parking time purchased may be on the meter itself, a paper receipt or by other duly
authorized means of display.
Section 7.102: PARKING METER ZONES
All of those streets, parts of streets and off-street parking lots, the time for parking upon which is
limited by any ordinance of the City of Portsmouth, and any such areas, the time for parking upon
which may at any time hereafter be limited by any ordinance of the City or any amendment
thereto are designated as parking meter zones. Parking in parking meter zones shall be for a
maximum time permitted of parking of three (3) consecutive hours, unless otherwise established
by ordinance. The rate for such parking shall be:
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 7
A. DOWNTOWN HIGH OCCUPANCY ZONE:
Parking shall be at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per hour in the following areas. Parking for
verified Portsmouth residents using an approved personal meter device, as defined in Section
7.101, shall be at a rate of $0.50 less than this rate. Proof of residency shall be determined using
standards established by the Portsmouth Revenue Administrator.
1. Daniel Street, starting at Chapel Street through to Market Square
2. Bow Street, starting at Chapel Street through to Market Street
3. Congress Street, starting at Market Square through to Chestnut Street
4. Pleasant Street, starting from Court Street through to Market Square
5. Market Street, starting from Moffatt-Ladd House through to Market Square
6. Deer Street, starting at Market Street through to Maplewood Avenue
7. Fleet Street, starting at Hanover Street through to State Street
8. Hanover Lot, at intersection with Market Street
9. Penhallow Street, starting at State Street through to Bow Street
10. Chapel Street, starting at Daniel Street through to State Street
11. Hanover Street from Maplewood Avenue to Market Street
12. Portwalk Place from Deer Street to Hanover Street
13. High Street from Deer Street to Hanover Street
14. Bow Street from Chapel Street to Daniel Street
15. Daniel Street from Chapel Street to Bow Street
16. State Street from Marcy Street to Middle Street
17. Ladd Street Lot at Hanover Garage
B. Parking in all other parking meter zones shall be at the rate of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50)
per hour. Parking for verified Portsmouth residents using an approved personal meter
device, as defined in Section 7.101, shall be at a rate of $0.50 less than this rate. Proof of
residency shall be determined using standards established by the Portsmouth Revenue
Administrator.
Section 7.103: PARKING AND TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
There is hereby created a Parking and Traffic Safety Committee under the terms and conditions
described herein:
A. The Parking and Traffic Safety Committee (“Committee”) shall consist of nine (9) regular
members and one (1) alternate appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The composition of the
Committee shall be the City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Public Works Director or their
respective designees as well as a member of the City Council and five (5) residents of the City (4
regular members and on alternate). The City Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief and Public Works
Director (or their respective designees) shall serve during their terms of employment with the City.
The City Council member shall serve co-terminus with his/her as a member of the Council. Each
of the five (5) resident members of the Committee shall serve a term of three (3) years from the
date of appointment. The Committee shall take office upon completed appointment of the five (5)
resident members. In the first instance the City Council member of the Committee shall serve as
Chairperson until the first meeting of the subsequent calendar year. Thereafter, at its first meeting
of any calendar year the Committee shall select a Chair who shall serve until another member is
selected Chair at the first meeting of the subsequent calendar year.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 7
B. The Committee shall have the authority to recommend temporary parking and traffic regulations to
the City Council by means of the presentation of written minutes. The acceptance of such minutes
by the City Council shall constitute the authorization to implement such temporary regulations for
a period not to exceed one (1) year. The implementation shall begin at the time designated in the
Parking and Traffic Safety recommendation unless otherwise determined by the City Council.
After any such change has been implemented for up to one (1) year, or such lesser time as might be
determined by the City Council, the City Council may consider making the temporary regulation
permanent by means of a duly adopted ordinance. Failure to adopt such an ordinance shall cause
the temporary regulation to expire at the end of one (1) year at which time the prior ordinance in
effect shall become operable.
C. The Committee may accept requests from any City land use regulatory body on any matter
concerning parking and/or traffic safety. In response to such requests the Committee may issue
written reports and recommendations.
D. The Committee shall have the authority on its own volition to issue reports to the City Council on
any matter related to parking and/or traffic safety. In addition, to the temporary regulations
described in item herein, the Committee may recommend ordinance changes to the City Council
addressing any parking or traffic safety issue deemed appropriate by the Committee.
Section 7.104: AUTHORITY
The City Manager is hereby vested with the authority to purchase, install and maintain public
parking meters and/or any other type of parking regulation equipment or technology necessary to
implement any action taken by the City Council or the Parking and Traffic Safety Committee.
Section 7.105: PARKING
A. When any vehicle shall be parked in a parking meter zone the owner or operator of said
vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb or street marking lines as
indicated for parallel or diagonal parking and upon entering said parking space shall
immediately deposit in said meter the required meter fee or purchase the time requested
through a central meter, in vehicle meter, coupon or other metering device including
mobile phone applications, and display proof of purchase on the vehicle’s interior
dashboard, or other approved means of display, including meter devices defined in Section
7.101. It shall be unlawful for any person parking any vehicle or permitting any vehicle
registered in his name to be parked within any designated area where parking meters are
installed, to fail or neglect to pay for parking as required. Said parking space may then be
used by such vehicle during the legal parking limit provided by the Ordinance of the City
and said vehicle shall be considered as unlawfully parking if it remains in said space
beyond the legal parking limit and/or when said parking meter displays a signal showing
such illegal parking. A vehicle shall also be considered as unlawfully parking if said
vehicle fails to move at least 500 feet from the original parking space after the legal
parking limit has expired. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any
vehicle registered in his name to be parked unlawfully as set out in this section.
B. Parking meter fees shall be enforceable Monday through Saturday, from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m., and Sunday from 12:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., holidays excepted.
C. DESIGNATED MOTORCYCLE PARKING AREA
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 7
The following location is established as an exclusive “Designated Motorcycle Parking
Area” for the months of April 1st through November 30th only:
1. Pleasant Street: On the easterly side of Pleasant Street, beginning at a point 24 feet
south of the extension of the southerly curb line of Market Square running
southerly the distance of 24 feet.
Motorcycles are subject to reduced parking meter fees for the hours of enforcement as set forth in
this Chapter in this Designated Motorcycle Parking Area. When more than one Motorcycle parks
in a regular parking space only one of the Motorcycles occupying the parking space shall be
required to pay for the parking space at the regular parking rate as set forth in this Chapter.
Section 7.106: UNLAWFUL EXTENSION
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any
additional payment for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the maximum time fixed
by the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth.
Section 7.107: SLUGS
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter, any slug, device or
metallic substitute for a coin of the United States or token approved by the City Council.
Section 7.108: TAMPERING, ETC.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper, open willfully, break or destroy any parking meter.
Section 7.109: ENFORCEMENT
The administration and enforcement of this ordinance by the Portsmouth Police Department, the
Department of Public Works, or any other municipal agencies authorized to perform those actions
by direction of the City Manager.
Section 7.110: PENALTY / VIOLATION
Whoever violates or permits or allows anyone to violate Section 7.105 or Section 7.106 of this
Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to the
penalty provided in this Chapter, Section 7.334.
Section 7.111: PENALTY/VIOLATION
Whoever violates or permits or allows anyone to violate Sections 7.107 or 7.108 of this Ordinance
shall upon conviction be fined not more than $100.00 and costs.
Section 7:112: PURPOSE
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 7
The fee required for said meters is hereby levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover
the cost of providing parking spaces, parking meters, and inspection, operation, installation and
maintenance thereof, the cost of regulation and control and use of the parking meter spaces, and
zones created therein, for the regulation and control of traffic moving in and out of and parking in
said parking spaces and zones so created and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration
expense and for the maintenance and improvement of streets and highways and for the acquisition,
construction, improvement, maintenance and management of public parking areas.
Section 7.113: SEPARABILITY
If any provision of part of any provision of this act or the application thereof, to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this act are declared to be severable. Reference Chapter 249.l of N.H. RSA.
Section 7.114: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT
The Department of Public Works may issue to a contractor or person actually engaged in
construction and repair work, a temporary permit for exclusive use of a metered parking space for
the parking of a vehicle or other equipment being used in construction or repair work. The
issuance of such temporary permits shall be in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
A. The permitee shall be issued a “meter bag” for a fee to be determined in accordance
with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording
B. The permitee shall also pay a non-refundable fee to reimburse the City for the cost
of the meter bag.
C. In the event that the permitee secures the use of the meter bag through
misrepresentation, the permitee shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
D. Any person using a meter bag other than at the times or in the manner specifically
authorized by the Department of Public Works shall be subject to a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, per meter bag, of such unauthorized use.
Section 7.115 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PRIVATE PARKING LOT
A business that provides public parking on a private lot will not be permitted unless the
owner receives a sign permit from the Department of Public Works. The sign permit will be
approved by the Department of Public Works if the sign complies with the following
requirements:
A. SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
1. The Department of Public Works shall review the location of the sign
prior to the sign being erected;
2. The sign shall be located at the entrance to the private lot;
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 7
3. The sign shall not be permanently affixed to a structure or the land;
4. Specific standards regarding sign dimensions and the style, color and size
of lettering will be determined by the Department of Public Works;
5. The sign shall state that the private lot is not owned, operated or
maintained by the City and the City does not provide for parking
enforcement;
6. The sign permit will be issued only for private lots that are in
compliance with all municipal land use regulations; and
7. Any owner of a private lot used for public parking who has not obtained
a sign permit or whose sign does not comply with the criteria set forth
above shall have their sign permit revoked and be subject to a fine of
$100 per day.
B. INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION
The Department of Public Works shall require the following information on its sign
permit application:
1. Identity of property owner, including address and telephone number for
contact person for business hours and 24 hour emergency contact;
2. Identity of operator of private parking lot, including address and
telephone number for contact person for business hours and 24 hour
emergency contact;
3. Description of parking services provided, including hours of operation,
parking rates charged and description of private parking enforcement
methods; and
4. Owner and operator must provide updated information in A – C
above to the Department of Public Works and failure to do so will
result in the revocation of the sign permit and a fine of $100 per day.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 7
ARTICLE II: TAXIS (Effective 02/01/2017)
SECTION 7.201: PURPOSE
It is the intention of this ordinance to provide a structure for the regulation of motor vehicle
operators who seek to hold themselves out as operators of a taxi, accepting the special benefits
and burdens of that particular designation.
SECTION 7.202: TAXI DEFINED
The term “Taxi” shall mean any motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire,
the destination and route of which are under the direction and control of the passenger; except
that this Ordinance shall not apply to the following:
A. Limousine services, which provide designated luxury or specialty vehicles by prior
appointment for discrete functions;
B. Limousine services whose operator is limited to the transport of passengers by prior
appointment from locations within the City of Portsmouth to destinations located outside
of the City or the reverse;
C. Transportation services that carry seven (7) or more passengers;
D. Transportation services operated by the municipality or other entity free-of-charge; and
E. Transportation network companies and their operators who are regulated under the laws
of the State of New Hampshire.
SECTION 7.203: OPERATOR AND OWNER DEFINED
A. The term “Operator” as used in this Ordinance shall mean the person driving or having
control or possession of a motor vehicle while it is being used as a Taxi.
B. The term “Owner” as used in this Ordinance shall mean the person or business entity
having the ownership or leasehold of any vehicle used or licensed to be used as a Taxi.
SECTION 7.204: MEDALLION REQUIRED
No vehicle shall be operated as a Taxi unless that vehicle has been issued a Medallion and such
Medallion has not been suspended or revoked. The word “Medallion” shall mean the permission
granted by the City of Portsmouth for a vehicle to be used as a Taxi.
SECTION 7.205: TAXI LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a Taxi within the City of Portsmouth unless such
person holds a valid Taxi License issued by the City Clerk and is operating a vehicle with a valid
Medallion.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 7
SECTION 7.206: TAXI LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
A. Any person seeking a Taxi License shall submit an application to the City Clerk. Such
application shall require the applicant to provide a residential history for the preceding
ten (10) years and submit the results of a multi-state/multi-jurisdiction criminal records
locator or other similar commercial nationwide data base with validation (primary source
search) and motor vehicle record history covering each jurisdiction in which the applicant
has resided in the 10 year time period. In addition, the applicant shall provide a passport
photograph and such other information as the City Clerk reasonably deems necessary to
determine if the applicant meets all minimal requirements for the issuance of a Taxi
License. The City Clerk has the authority to require the submission of results of criminal
background checks and motor vehicle history records from multiple jurisdictions
depending on the residency and residential history of the individual applicant.
B. The City Clerk shall have the authority to issue a Taxi License upon submission of
documentation satisfactory to the City Clerk and Taxi Coordinator that the applicant
meets the following criteria:
1. Possesses a valid motor vehicle operator’s license;
2. Maintains a satisfactory motor vehicle record as defined in Section 7.206 (C);
3. Has no disqualifying criminal conduct as defined in Section 7.206 (D); and
4. Has received no more than three (3) violations of this ordinance in the year
preceding the application and no more than six (6) total in all preceding years;
and
5. Is not a match on the United States Department of Justice National Sex Offender
Public Website.
The City Clerk reserves the right to deny a Taxi License to an unsuitable person.
C. A motor vehicle record shall be deemed not satisfactory if:
The applicant has had more than 3 moving violations in the prior 3-year period, or
one major violation in the prior 3-year period, including, but not limited to,
attempting to evade the police, reckless driving, or driving with a suspended or
revoked license.
D. Disqualifying criminal conduct is defined as:
The applicant has been convicted, within the past 7 years, of driving under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use of a motor vehicle to
commit a felony, a crime involving property damage, and/or theft, acts of
violence, or acts of terror.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 7
E. By submitting an application, applicant authorizes the City to undertake such
investigation as it deems reasonably necessary to verify the applicant’s statements and
eligibility to hold a Taxi License.
F. Administrative appeal of any decision of the City clerk relative to issuance or denial of a
Taxi License shall be made in writing and delivered to the City Attorney within thirty
(30) days of the decision. Appeals shall be to the Taxi Coordinator, with notice of the
opportunity to be heard and to respond; such opportunity to occur within thirty (30) days
of receipt of the appeal.
SECTION 7.207: MEDALLION REQUIREMENTS
A. Any Owner seeking a Medallion for a vehicle shall submit an application to the City
Clerk. Such application shall require the Owner to provide the vehicle identification
number, proof of insurance and such other information as the City Clerk reasonably
deems necessary to determine if the application meets all minimal requirements for the
issuance of a Medallion.
B. The City Clerk shall have the authority to issue a Medallion upon the submission of
documentation satisfactory to the City Clerk and Taxi Inspector that the following criteria
have been met:
1. Vehicle registration;
2. Proof that the vehicle is current in its State inspection;
3. Proof of adequate personal injury and property damage liability insurance
coverage for the term of the Medallion; and
4. Payment of Medallion Application Fee.
C. Adequate insurance shall be personal injury coverage of not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000) for injury to one person with a total coverage of not less than
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for each accident. The property damage
coverage shall be not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) per occurrence.
D. Administrative appeal of any decision of the City Clerk relative to issuance or denial of a
Medallion shall be made in writing and delivered to the City Attorney within thirty (30)
days of the decision. Appeals shall be to the Taxi Coordinator, with notice of the
opportunity to be heard and to respond; such opportunity shall occur within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the appeal.
SECTION 7.208: TAXI COORDINATOR
There shall be a Taxi Coordinator who shall be an officer of the Portsmouth Police Department
assigned by the Chief of Police. That officer, in addition to his or her regular duties, shall assist
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 7
the City Clerk with the implementation of this Ordinance, conduct background investigations
and have the enforcement powers set forth in this ordinance.
SECTION 7.209: FEES AND TERMS FOR LICENSES AND MEDALLIONS
A. All Medallions and licenses granted under this chapter shall continue to remain in full
force and effect for a period from the first day of April each year until midnight on the
31st day of March of the following year.
B. All applications for renewals of Medallions or licenses must be filed with the City Clerk
no earlier than February 1 and not later than March 1.
C. Fees shall be set by the City Council as part of its annual budget adoption process as set
forth in chapter 1, Article XVI.
D. Until such time as the fees are set by the City Council under paragraph 7.209 (C). the
fees are as follows:
1. The first time fee for a Medallion shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars
($125.00) each year or any part of a year commencing on April 1st for each Taxi
payable in advance on application for the Medallion. The renewal fee shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00)
2. The fee for restoration of any Medallion that has been revoked shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00), except when the revocation is due to failure to meet
vehicle inspection requirements, no fee shall be due if the vehicle is repaired to
the satisfaction of the Taxi Coordinator within 1 business day of the revocation.
E. If required insurance coverage terminates, expires or is suspended, Owner shall
immediately suspend service until insurance coverage is in place. All required insurance
policies shall contain a provision, which will provide for the automatic notification by the
insurer to the City of the cancellation or expiration of the policy. Notice shall be mailed
to the City Clerk.
SECTION 7.210: TAXI OPERATOR CONDUCT
A Taxi Operator shall:
A. Use only a vehicle that has been issued and displays an Medallion;
B. Display a copy of his/her Taxi License in a conspicuous place within the Taxi where it
may be seen by any passenger;
C. Not laminate, deface or alter the Taxi License;
D. Not stand or park on any street except at designated Taxi stands or bus stops, except
while actually engaging in taking on or discharging passengers;
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 7
E. Not engage in any conduct that endangers the health, welfare or safety of passengers or
the public; and
F. Report in writing to the City clerk any and all of the following:
1. Any change of address within thirty (30) days of such change;
2. Any motor vehicle moving violation within seven (7) days;
3. Any motor vehicle license suspension or revocation within (7) days; and
4. Any misdemeanor or felony arrest within seven (7) days.
Any failure to report will result in the imposition of a late fee of $50.00 and may result in the
revocation of the Taxi License and/or the finding of a violation.
SECTION 7.211: MEDALLION OWNER REQUIREMENTS
A. Each Taxi shall utilize a roof light with the firm name or the word “Taxi” inscribed
thereon and operating during evening hours when the Taxi is on duty. There shall be no
other lights on a Taxi, except those required by law.
B. Each Taxi shall display two license plates furnished by the City of Portsmouth with the
word “TAXI” on the plates; such plates shall be attached in a conspicuous place on the
front and rear of the motor vehicle operated.
C. Provide proof of vehicle inspection renewal to the City clerk within ten (10) days of the
end of the month for which inspection is due. Failure to provide such notice will result in
a $50.00 late fee for the untimely compliance and may result in the revocation of the
Medallion and/or the finding of a violation.
D. Return to the City any Medallion which has not been renewed within five (5) business
days after the expiration of the term set forth in Section 7.209.
SECTION 7.212: TAXI STANDS AND HAILS
A. The term “Taxi stand” as used in this Ordinance shall be construed to mean such portion
or portions of the public street or highway as shall be designated by the City Council of
the City of Portsmouth as a place in which Taxis may stand or park.
1. No Owner or Operator of any Taxi shall allow or permit a Taxi to remain standing
or parked unattended for longer than fifteen (15) minutes at any Taxi stand.
2. No Operator shall park a Taxi in a double line at a public stand nor shall any
Operator park a Taxi in such a manner as to interfere with traffic, either vehicular
or pedestrian, at any location.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 7
3. No more than two (2) Taxis owned by the same person or business entity shall
occupy any one Taxi stand at any one time.
B. Taxis may accept street hails.
SECTION 7.213: ADDITIONAL OPERATOR AND OWNER REQUIREMENTS
All Operators and Owners shall:
A. Ensure that fares are posted, published or otherwise available to the passenger before
engagement of the fare;
B. Provide a written receipt if requested;
C. Decline multiple fares unless each passenger consents;
D. Prohibit the use of smoking materials of any kind within the Taxi at any time; the Owner
of each Taxi shall post a notice in each Taxi, plainly visible to all occupants of the Taxi,
reading, “No Smoking”; and
E. Maintain the Taxi in a safe, clean and sanitary condition at all times.
SECTION 7.214: ENFORCEMENT
A. If the Taxi Coordinator reasonably believes that a Taxi may no longer be safe during the
term of the Medallion period, the Taxi Coordinator may order the Owner to have the Taxi
re-inspected, at Owner’s cost.
B. Any Portsmouth Police Department officer may:
1. Issue a written notice of violation of this Ordinance.
2. Issue a Defective Equipment notice to the Owner and/or Operator of the Taxi
requiring correction of the defect within five (5) business days with proof of
correction provided to the Police Department to avoid automatic suspension of
the Medallion. The Medallion will be immediately surrendered to the City Clerk
after five (5) business days if proof of correction is not provided to the Police
Department.
3. Suspend immediately an Operator’s Taxi License or an Owner’s Medallion upon
a reasonable belief that there is an imminent danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of passengers or the public.
C. Administrative appeals of any notice of violation, defective equipment notice, suspension
or revocation shall be made in writing by the Operator or Owner and delivered to the City
Attorney within fourteen (14) days of the suspension, revocation or notice of violation.
Appeals shall be to the Taxi Coordinator, with notice to the Operator or Owner of the
opportunity to be heard and to respond.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 7
D. If the Taxi Coordinator determines after notice and response that any violation of state
law or this Taxi ordinance has occurred, the Taxi Coordinator may, in addition to the
actions set forth in Section 7.214(A), take one (1) or more of the following actions:
1. Remove the Medallion from the Taxi in violation until the violation is corrected
and proof of correction is provided to the Taxi Coordinator;
2. Suspend or revoke any Medallion or License;
3. Refer for prosecution any violation of this Ordinance.
E. Any person or entity in violation may be subject to a fine of no more than $300 upon
conviction by the Portsmouth District Court.
SECTION 7.215: APPEALS
Written final decisions of the City Clerk and the Taxi Coordinator relative to the issuance,
suspension and revocation of licenses, medallions and other actions of enforcement made
pursuant to this Ordinance are final. Persons aggrieved of the decisions of the City Clerk and/or
Taxi Coordinator shall have all rights and remedies available to them in the courts of the State of
New Hampshire.
SECTION 7.216: RECIPROCITY WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES
Taxis which are licensed in other municipalities may deliver passengers from outside the City to
destinations within the City or pick up passengers by prior arrangement in the City for delivery
to destinations outside the City.
SECTION 7.217: TRANSITION PERIOD
Owners and Operators operating a Taxi upon the effective date of this Ordinance may continue
to operate while Taxi License and Medallion applications are pending under this Ordinance and
a final decision has been made to approve or deny the Taxi License or Medallion application.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 7
ARTICLE III: TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
Section 7.301: DEFINITIONS
Wherever in the Ordinance the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this Section:
A. "Street or Highway" means every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular travel.
B. "Private Road or Driveway" means every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
C. "Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established
curb lines or that part improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel.
D. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent
property lines.
E. "Intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curblines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary line of two or more streets or
highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such street or highway
crosses the other.
F. "Crosswalk" means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation
or connection of curb and property lines at intersection or any other portion of a road way
clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other marking on the surface.
G. "Safety Zone" means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is as marked or indicated by
adequate signs to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
H. "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which, any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
I. "Motor Vehicle" means every vehicle, as herein defined, which is self propelled.
J. "Authorized Emergency Vehicles" means vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments
or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
K. "Pedestrian" means any person afoot.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 7
L. "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars, and other
conveyances whether singularly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
M. "Right of Way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
N. "Parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs and signals.
O. "Official Traffic Signs" means all signs, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this
Ordinance, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction,
for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.
P. "Official Traffic Signals" means all signals, not inconsistent with this Ordinance, placed
or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
directing, warning or regulating traffic.
Q. "Traffic Control Signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.
R. "Police Officer" means every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic
regulations.
Section 7.301.l: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of the person shall
be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of
such parking.
Section 7.302: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department of this City, or civilian parking officials
where appropriate to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Officers of the Police
Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic whether in person or by means of
visible or audible signals in conformance with the provisions of the Ordinances,
provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic and
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police and fire department may direct traffic, as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Any vehicle or object parked or placed in violation of this ordinance shall be cited for
such violation and may be towed at the vehicle owners expense at direction of the
enforcement authority, the Chief of Police or the Director of Public Works.
Section 7.303: EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to
cover emergencies or special conditions.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 7
Section 7.304: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or
direction of a police officer.
Section 7.305: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States Government, this State, County or City and it shall be unlawful for
any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance, except as otherwise permitted
in this Ordinance.
Section 7.306: EXEMPTIONS
The provisions of this Ordinance regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles
shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this Ordinance while the driver of
such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public
duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the
consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
Section 7.307: PUSH CARTS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS
Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle, or an animal upon a roadway and
every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance applicable
to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this Ordinance with reference to the
equipment of vehicles and except those provisions which by their very nature can have no
application.
Section 7.308: TRAFFIC SIGNALS
No person shall drive a vehicle past any traffic signal on any highway in the City of Portsmouth
when such signal shows a red light in the direction such vehicle is being driven or otherwise
indicates that vehicles are to be stopped, and no person shall drive a vehicle past such signal
until it shows a green light in the direction such vehicle is being driven or otherwise gives
indication that traffic in the direction in question is permitted.
Section 7.309: STOP SIGNS
No person shall drive a vehicle into any street at any intersection at which a "STOP" sign or
"SLOW DOWN" sign is maintained without first having stopped or slowed down said vehicle in
accordance with the instruction given on such sign, and no person shall drive a vehicle past any
"STOP" sign or "SLOW DOWN" sign on any highway wherever such sign shall be located
without having previously stopped or slowed down such vehicle.
Section 7.310: RIGHT OF WAY
The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within
any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of the block, except at
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 7
intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or control
signals, or at any point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing has been provided.
Section 7.311: JAY WALKING
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked
crosswalk shall yield the right of way to vehicles upon the roadway, provided that this provision
shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of
pedestrians.
Section 7.312: STOPPING
Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection to permit a
pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
Section 7.313: KEEPING TO RIGHT
Pedestrians shall walk, whenever practicable, upon the right half of the sidewalk.
Section 7.314: SOLICITING RIDES OR HITCH-HIKING
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the operator of any private vehicle.
Section 7.315: STOPPING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal or in case of emergency:
A. Within an intersection;
B. On a crosswalk;
C. Within fifteen (15) feet on either side of a hydrant; (Amended 2/4/85)
D. Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance of the Fire Station;
E. In front of a private driveway;
F. On a sidewalk;
G. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing
or parking would obstruct traffic;
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 7
H. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of the curb of a street;
I. At any place where official traffic signs have been erected, prohibiting standing or
parking;
J. On the edge of any roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement so that
the wheels of the driver's side of the vehicle are adjacent to the curbing.
Section 7.316: BACK TO CURB
No vehicle shall remain backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading, and
only when same can be done without obstructing travel.
Section 7.317: ANGLE AND PARALLEL PARKING
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the driver of
a vehicle shall not stand, stop, or park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with such
roadway or curb headed in the direction of traffic except upon those streets which have been
marked or signed for angle parking where vehicle shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks or signs headed toward the curb.
Section 7.318: ANGLE PARKING
Angle parking is permitted on the following streets:
A. Bow Street: northerly side, from Ceres Street to easterly side of building #67 on
Bow Street.
B. Bow Street: parallel parking only shall be permitted only on the south side of Bow Street
between Penhallow Street and Chapel Street.
C. Market Square.
D. Pleasant Street: easterly side from Market Square to State Street.
E. Pleasant Street: westerly side from State Street to Court Street.
F. Pleasant Street: westerly side between State Street and Porter Street.
Section 7.319: DISTANCE FROM CURB
When parallel parking is permitted vehicles shall be parked not more than 12 inches from the
curb or edge of the roadway. Where angle parking is permitted, no vehicle shall be parked so as
to project more than 16 feet into the street from the curb line, measured perpendicularly from the
curb.
Section 7.320: OBSTRUCTING STREET
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 7
No vehicle shall stop or park in such a way as to obstruct any street or crossing for the purpose
of taking on or setting down a passenger or for loading or unloading freight or for any other
purpose unless in case of an accident or emergency, or when directed to do so by a police officer.
Section 7.321: SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING BAN
A. The Director of Public Works shall be empowered to declare a snow emergency for the
purpose of snow plowing during snow storms. The Director's authority to declare such
an emergency shall begin when there is an accumulation of two (2) inches or more of
snow. Once the emergency is declared, then the emergency shall continue until such time
as it is terminated pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. No person having custody or control of any vehicle shall park or cause any vehicle to be
parked on any street or highway in the City of Portsmouth when a snow emergency is in
effect. The Director of Public Works shall be empowered to cause any vehicle, which
violates this ordinance to be ticketed and towed.
C. Once the Director has declared a snow emergency, he or she shall then immediately
notify the local media, radio, newspapers, and television. Whenever feasible, the
Director shall also provide advance notification to the public of snowstorms likely to
generate snow emergencies. The Director shall give notice to the local media as to when
the snow emergency is terminated; when feasible, the Director shall provide notice as to
the anticipated termination of the emergency based upon weather predictions.
D. The Director's authority to declare a snow emergency shall be operable both during the
daytime and the nighttime.
E. The Director's authority to declare a snow emergency shall exist in addition to the
emergency powers reserved to the Chief of Police under Section 7.303, Article III of this
ordinance; however, the Director of Public Works and the Chief of Police shall consult
with each other concerning the need for and the timing of any snow emergencies.
F. The Director of Public Works shall cause appropriate signs to be posted at the City
boundaries at: all exits from I-95, NH33 (formerly known as NH Route 101), US Rte 1,
Woodbury Avenue, Ocean Road, Sagamore Avenue and US Route 1A/B. Such signage
should provide notice regarding potential snow emergencies and should advise travelers
where to seek further information on the snow emergency.
G. City residents may park in the High-Hanover Parking Facility during snow emergencies
by paying a flat fee to be determined by the City Council commencing with a declared
parking ban advanced notice until a time deemed appropriate by the Public Works
Director or his/her designee following termination of the snow ban. The time period
allowed for such parking shall not terminate less than 2 hours after the end of the snow
ban. To be eligible for the flat rate snow ban discount, drivers must provide proof of
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 7
residency by presenting a driver’s license or vehicle registration showing a Portsmouth
address. The fee is payable upon exit from the parking facility.
Section 7.322: VEHICLES FOR SALE
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle displayed for sale.
Section 7.323: ADVERTISING
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of displaying advertising, except by permit from the Chief of Police.
Section 7.324: LIMITED PARKING - ONE HOUR
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to stop
or park for longer than one hour at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday, Holidays
not included, on the following streets and locations:
1. Daniel Street: northerly side from a point 106 feet from Bow Street to a point 88
feet east of Penhallow Street.
2. Daniel Street: southerly side from Wright Avenue to a point 63 feet east of
Penhallow Street.
3. Dennett Street: southerly side from Maplewood Avenue to Myrtle Avenue.
4. Market Street: westerly side from Bow Street to the southerly side of the small
building on the premises of the Moffatt Ladd House.
5. Market Street: easterly side from Bow Street to the southerly side of the premises
known as 171 Market Street.
6. Pleasant Street: westerly side from State Street to Court Street.
7. Porter Street: southerly side from Fleet Street to Church Street.
8. Porter Street: northerly side from Church Street to Pleasant Street.
9. State Street: southerly side beginning at a point where the westerly boundary of
the lot upon which the Internal Revenue Service Building, so called, is located,
intersects with said State Street and running in an easterly direction by said side
line for a distance of 200 feet.
Section 7.325: LIMITED PARKING - THIRTY MINUTES
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to stop
or park for longer than thirty minutes at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. - 8:00
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 7
p.m. Monday through Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday,
Holidays not included, on the following streets and locations:
l. Islington Street: Northerly side from the corner of Brewster Street easterly 110’.
2. Islington Street: Northerly side easterly 70’ from Dover Street to a point 82’
westerly from Salem Street.
3. Islington Street: Northerly side from Pearl Street to Parker Street.
Section 7.326: LIMITED PARKING - FIFTEEN MINUTES
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall cause the same to stop or park
for longer than 15 minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday, Holidays not included, on the
following streets and locations:
1. Bow Street:
a. northerly side, first metered space east from Ceres Street
2. Cabot Street: northeasterly side, from a point which is sixty-five (65) feet
northwest from the intersection of Austin Street to a point which is one hundred
(100) feet northwest from the intersection of Austin Street.
3. Congress Street:
a. southerly side, first two metered spaces west from Fleet Street
b. northerly side, first two metered spaces west from High Street
4. Daniel Street:
a. northerly side, first four metered spaces west from the parking lot entrance
at 80 Daniel Street
b. southerly side, first five metered spaces east from Market Square
c. south side, first space west of Memorial Bridge Parking Lot
5. Deer Street: One space on the northerly side of the street, beginning 13 feet west
of the extension of the westerly curbline of High Street, and running 20 feet in an
easterly direction.
6. Hanover Street:
a. northerly side, first five spaces east from High Street
b. northerly side, first two spaces east from Bridge Street
c. northerly side, first space west of Bridge Street
7. High Street: easterly side, first three spaces north from Congress Street
8. Islington Street:
a. southerly side the space in front of 404 Islington Street, no person having
control or custody of any vehicle shall cause the same to stop or park for
longer than 15 minutes at any time, including Sundays and holidays.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 7
b. northerly side, the space in front of 371 Islington Street.
9. Marcy Street: beginning at the southerly curb line of South Mill Street and
running 95 feet southerly (from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm) Monday through Sunday.
10. Market Street: easterly side, third space north from Market Square.
11. Portwalk Place: westerly side, one space beginning 117 feet north of the northerly
curb line of Hanover Street.
12. State Street:
a. southerly side, first two metered spaces east from Atkinson Street.
b. southerly side, first metered space east from Pleasant Street
13. South Street: northerly side, from Mount Vernon Street easterly for a distance of
40 feet.
Section 7.327: LIMITED PARKING - TWO HOURS
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to stop
or park for longer than two hours at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday, Holidays
excluded, on the following streets and locations:
1. Doris Avenue: both sides.
2 Dunton Street:
3. Greenside Avenue: both sides.
4. Hancock Street:
a. northerly side from Marcy Street to Pleasant Street.
b. southerly side from Washington Street to Pleasant Street.
5. Islington Street:
a. northerly side from Tanner Street to Parker Street
b. northerly side from Pearl Street to a point westerly 335’
c. northerly side from Cabot Street to a point easterly 515’
6. Madison Avenue: westerly side from State Street to Lovell Street.
7. Mechanic Street: northerly side from Marcy Street intersection to Pierce Island
Bridge Approach.
8. Middle Street: northerly side from Austin Street to Summer Street.
9. Sheafe Street: northerly side from a point 40 feet easterly from Penhallow Street
to Chapel Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 7
10. Sherburne Road: both sides.
11. Summer Street:
a. both sides from Islington Street to State Street, Monday through Friday
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
b. southwesterly side between Chatham Street and Austin Street.
12. Sutton Street: both sides.
13. Witmer Avenue: both sides.
Section 7.328: LIMITED PARKING – THREE HOURS:
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to stop or
park for longer than three hours at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday, Holidays
excluded, on the following streets and locations:
1. Bow Street:
a. both sides from Penhallow Street to Chapel Street.
b. west side from point 38 feet northerly of intersection with Daniel Street to a point 445
feet northerly from said intersection.
2. Bridge Street: both sides from Hanover Street to Deer Street.
3. Ceres Street: land of the City of Portsmouth, Assessor's Plan 13, Lot 85, from
Ceres Street 48 feet of the westerly half of said lot.
4. Chapel Court: two spaces northerly side, and two spaces in the right-of-way at the end of
the roadway.
5. Church Street: easterly side, two spaces 26 feet south of State Street.
6. Congress Street:
a. southerly side from Chestnut Street to Church Street, except for the first two spaces
westerly from the intersection of Fleet Street.
b. northerly side from a point 65 feet easterly from Fleet Street to a point 75 feet westerly
from High Street.
7. Court Place: east side from Court Street to State Street.
8. Court Street: on the southerly side from Middle Street to the easterly sideline of Chestnut
Street extended.
9. Daniel Street:
a. north side from Piscataqua River to Market Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 7
b. five head-in parking spaces adjacent with the Piscataqua River commencing
30 feet from the Harbour Place property line at the northern most corner of Daniel Street
and the Piscataqua River.
10. Deer Street: all except for two spaces in front of 28 Deer Street.
11. Fleet Street: westerly side from Hanover Street to State Street with the exception of Taxi Stands
#1 and #2.
12. High Street:
a. easterly side, first two metered spaces south of Ladd Street
b. east side from Hanover Street to Deer Street.
c. west side, first two metered spaces north of Hanover Street
13. Maplewood Avenue: both sides, between Raynes Avenue and Vaughan Street
14. Marcy Street: westerly side from the intersection of State Street to a point 100 feet south of Court
Street
15. Market Square:
16. Market Street:
a. westerly side from Market Square to Bow Street, except for the first space closest to Bow
Street, which shall be designated as bicycle parking when a bicycle corral is present.
b. easterly side from Daniel Street to Deer Street, except for the first two parking spaces from
Market Square. The first of which is hereby designated for police cruiser parking only and the
second of which is designated as a taxi stand (see Section 7.A408).
c. both sides from Deer Street to Russell Street.
17. Penhallow Street:
a. westerly side from State Street to southerly entrance of Police Station grounds, from exit of
N.H. National Bank to Daniel; from a point 160 feet north of Daniel to Bow Street.
b. easterly side between Daniel Street and Bow Street.
18. Pleasant Street:
a. easterly side from #15 Pleasant Street to State Street.
b. westerly side from southerly end of the North Church to State Street.
19. Raynes Avenue: entire street, both sides
20. State Street:
a. northerly side from Middle Street 250 feet westerly.
b. northerly side from Middle Street to Marcy Street.
c. southerly side from Middle Street to Marcy Street.
21. Vaughan Street: entire street, both sides
22. Washington Street: northerly side between State Street and Court Street
Section 7.328-1: UTILIZATION OF MULTIPLE PARKING SPACES:
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 7
No person having custody or control of a single vehicle shall park or cause any vehicle to
be parked (or partially parked) on two adjacent spaces on any street in the City of Portsmouth at
a time and in a location in which a parking fee is required. Vehicles with trailers or boats may
occupy up to two spaces when parking fees are paid for both spaces.
Section 7.329: LIMITED PARKING – FOUR HOURS
No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to stop
or park for longer than four hours at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday, and between 12:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Sunday. Holidays excluded,
on the following streets and locations:
1. Bridge Street: southerly side from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
2. Deer Street: both sides between Russell Street and Maplewood Avenue.
3. Russell Street: entire length, both sides.
4. Livermore Street: westerly side, entire length.
Section 7.330: NO PARKING
A. Unless otherwise designated by ordinance, parking shall be prohibited at all times in the
following described streets and locations:
1. Alder Way: both sides, entire length.
2. Aldrich Road: both sides from Sewall Road a distance of 150 feet easterly.
3. Andrew Jarvis Drive: southerly side.
4. Atkinson Street: both sides from State Street to Court Street.
5. Austin Street: on the northerly side of Austin Street between Union Street and
Madison Street.
6. Barberry Lane: from the northerly side of Barberry Lane from Islington Street to
the first set of railroad tracks
7. Bartlett Street: easterly side from Islington Street to Clinton Street.
8. Blossom Street: both sides commencing 100 feet north of the intersection of
South and Blossom Streets.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 7
9. Borthwick Avenue: both sides, from the Route #1 By-Pass to Greenland Road,
excepting only 20 parking spaces located on the southerly side of Borthwick
Avenue, commencing at a point twenty (20) feet easterly of the western-most
driveway of the Jackson Gray Medical Building and continuing to the east with
the allowance of twenty (20) feet on either side of the Jackson Gray Medical
building driveways.
10. Bow Street:
a. southerly side, staring at the westerly corner of Penhallow Street; thence
running in a westerly direction 60 feet more or less to the easterly corner
of Market Street.
b. easterly side from Daniel Street to Chapel Street.
11. Brewster Street:
a. westerly side from Islington Street to McDonough Street
b. entire easterly side, north of Sudbury Street
c. easterly side, no parking in front of Map 138, Lot 11, except from a point
beginning 108 feet from the northerly curbline of Islington Street, and
running 20 feet in a northerly direction.
12. Bridge Street: westerly side, 35’ northerly from the intersection with Hanover
Street
13. Cabot Street: westerly side from Islington to McDonough Street.
14. Cass Street: Westerly side, 110 feet from the intersection of Cass Street and
Middle Street in a northerly direction to the first telephone pole.
15. Ceres Street:
a. both sides from Bow Street 310 feet northwesterly.
b. land of the City of Portsmouth Assessor's Plan #13, Lot 85, from Ceres
Street to the waterfront and also including that portion of the westerly half
of Lot 85 which is not included in Chapter 31(e), Article 5, Section 11,
paragraph l(c), of the Revised Ordinances of 1946 as amended.
16. Chapel Court: southerly side.
17. Chapel Street:
a. both sides from Daniel Street to Bow Street.
b. easterly side from State Street to Daniel Street.
18. Chase Drive: 30 feet on either side of the driveway located at 355 Chase Drive.
19. Chatham Street: both sides, Summer Street to Winter Street, except the first 66
feet on the southerly side from Summer Street to Winter Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 7
20. Chestnut Street:
a. westerly side starting at the corner of Congress Street and Chestnut Street,
thence running in a southerly direction to the northerly corner of Porter.
Restriction of this area to be modified to the extent that hotel arrival and
departure intervals shall be allowed.
b. easterly side from Congress Street to Porter Street.
c. both sides, entire length of street between State Street and Court Street.
21. Circuit Road: both sides.
22. Coakley Road: No parking, both sides; extending from Rt. 1 Bypass one
thousand feet to a point located at the first telephone pole (#271/5).
23. Congress Street:
a. southerly side from Middle Street to Chestnut Street.
b. northerly side starting at a point in line with the southerly corner of the
Athenaeum Building; thence running northerly a distance of 95 feet more
or less to the Market Street tangent point.
c. northerly side from Fleet Street to Maplewood Avenue.
24. Cornwall Street:
a. easterly side starting at the corner of Islington Street and Cornwall Street,
thence running northerly a distance of 95 feet.
b. westerly side starting at the corner of Islington Street and Cornwall Street,
thence running northerly a distance of 186 feet.
25. Cottage Street: both sides from Route 1 By-Pass
a. the southerly side from Route 1 By-Pass easterly three hundred feet (300’)
b. the northerly side from Route 1 By-Pass easterly four hundred feet (400’)
26. Court Street:
a. southerly side from 50 feet easterly of the easterly side of Chestnut Street
to Pleasant Street
b. both sides from Marcy Street to Pleasant Street.
c. northwesterly side from Pleasant Street to Middle Street.
27. Crescent Way:
a. south side from Kearsarge Way to 40’ west of Saratoga Way
b. south side from Porpoise Way to end of street
c. north side from Kearsarge Way to 80’ west of Porpoise Way
28. Custom House Lane: both sides (off Penhallow Street).
29. Cutts Avenue: northerly side
30. Cutts Street: easterly side, between Maplewood Avenue and Leslie Drive
31. Daniel Street:
a. southerly side from the Piscataqua River to Bow Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 7
b. southerly side from a point 63 feet easterly of Penhallow Street to a point
95 feet westerly of Penhallow Street.
c. from a point 92 feet west of Penhallow Street to Market Square provided
that trucks may load or unload in an area beginning 92 feet west of
Penhallow Street to a point 95 feet westerly of Penhallow Street.
32. Dearborn Lane: both sides, from Dearborn Street westerly to property line of 39
Dearborn Street, a distance of 60 feet.
33. Dearborn Street: westerly side from Maplewood Avenue to the easterly end of
Dearborn Lane (entire westerly side).
34. Deer Street: southerly side, an area 40 feet in length in front of the Senior Citizen
Center located at 40 Deer Street.
35. Dennett Street:
a. northerly side, beginning at the westerly pavement edge of Hunters Hill
Avenue and running 60 feet in a westerly direction.
b. both sides from Myrtle to Maplewood Avenue.
36. Dutton Avenue: both sides, from Wright Avenue to Memorial Bridge.
37. Edwards Street: both sides
38. Elm Court: on the westerly side of Elm Court
39. Elwyn Avenue: southerly side between Lafayette Road and a point 415 feet
easterly of Lafayette Road.
40. Essex Avenue: westerly side from Islington Street to a point 105’ southerly from
Islington Street.
41. Farm Lane: both sides from the Spaulding Turnpike to the driveway of Lot 56,
Map 237 now known as New England Marine & Industrial, Inc.
42. Fleet Street:
a. Easterly side from Court Street to Hanover Street.
b. Westerly side from State Street to Court Street and the parking space
nearest Hanover Street, provided that trucks may load or unload in said
parking space.
c. Westerly side, from Congress Street to a point 135 feet in a northerly
direction.
43. Franklin Drive: northerly side from Woodbury Avenue to the end of Franklin
Drive.
44. Franklin Street: southeasterly side from Pleasant Street to South Mill Pond.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 7
45. Frenchman's Lane: westerly side, 150' from Islington Street.
46. Friend Street: easterly side of Friend Street.
47. Gardner Street: both sides from Marcy Street to Mechanic Street.
48. Gates Street:
a. southerly side from Pleasant Street to Mechanic Street.
b. northerly side from Mechanic Street to Marcy Street.
49. Gosling Road: southerly side of Gosling Road from the Spaulding Turnpike to
Woodbury Avenue.
50. Granite Street: both sides.
51. Green Street: both sides from Russell Street to Vaughan Street.
52. Greenland Road: northerly side from westerly boundary of neighborhood
business zone to easterly side of I-95, including the turnaround.
53. Greenleaf Avenue:
a. both sides from Route #1 Bypass to Peverly Hill Road.
b. northerly side between Hillside Drive and Route 1 Bypass.
54. Hancock Street:
a. southerly side, between Washington Street and Marcy Street.
b. northerly side of Hancock Street from Marcy Street a distance of 115 feet.
55. Hanover Street:
a. (Hanover Street Extension): northerly side from Pearl St. to Brewster St.
b. (Hanover Street Extension): southerly side from Brewster Street easterly
40’
c. southerly side from Market Street to a point 285 feet east of Fleet Street
56. Harding Road: westerly side, beginning at a point 250' from the southerly curb
line at the intersection of Harding Road and Elwyn Road continuing in a
southerly direction to a point 200' from the point of beginning.
57. High Street:
a. westerly side from Market Square to Ladd Street.
b. west side from Vaughn Mall Entrance to Deer Street.
58. Highland Street: westerly side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Middle
Street and running southerly for a distance of 90 feet.
59. Hill Street: Both sides, entire length between Bridge Street and Autumn Street.
60. Howard Street: both sides from Washington Street to Manning Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 7
61. Hunking Street: both sides from Marcy Street to Mechanic Street.
62. Islington Street:
a. southerly side from Middle Street 305 feet westerly.
b. southerly side from Cass Street to the Route 1 By-Pass Overpass
c. northerly side from the corner of Congress Street/Maplewood
Avenue/Middle Street running westerly to the easterly corner of Tanner
Street.
d. southerly side starting at the junction of Congress and Islington Streets;
thence running westerly for a distance of 1,640 feet, more or less, to the
corner of Cabot Street.
e. northerly side from Dover Street to Bartlett Street and from Bartlett Street
westerly 500 feet, excepting 55 feet measured easterly from the northeast
corner of the intersection of Elm Court and Islington Street.
f. southerly side from Essex Avenue to a point 180 feet westerly.
g. northerly side – easterly from a point 145’ from Salem Street to a point
73’ westerly of Cabot Street
h. southerly side, beginning 220 feet east from Columbia Street, for 20 feet.
63. Jenkins Avenue: northerly and southerly sides. Westerly end between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
64. Joffrey's Terrace: both sides.
65. Junkins Avenue: both sides.
66. Johnson Court: both sides.
67. Kane Street: on the northerly side for a distance of ninety (90) feet from the
intersection of Kane Street and Alder Way.
68. Ladd Street: both sides from High Street to Market Street.
69. Langdon Street:
a. entire easterly side north of Islington Street.
b. entire westerly side, north of McDonough Street
70. Lincoln Avenue:
a. southerly side, between the intersection of Miller Avenue continuing to
Richards Avenue.
b. northerly side
1. From Richards Avenue, 25 feet westerly
2. From Miller Avenue, 135 feet easterly
3. Between Miller Avenue and Broad Street
71. Livermore Street: the easterly side from Pleasant Street to the dead end.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 7
72. Longmeadow Road: both sides, from Route 1 to the beginning of the Speakeasy's
cud-de-sac.
73. Manning Place: both sides from Marcy Street to Pleasant Street.
74. Manning Street: both sides from Marcy Street to Pleasant Street.
75. Maplewood Avenue:
a. south side from the corner of Dennett Street to a point 81 feet east of the
corner of Dearborn Street.
b. westerly side, 457 feet, beginning at 230 Maplewood Avenue and
extending to 154 Maplewood Avenue.
c. easterly side of Maplewood Avenue from Raynes Avenue to
287 Maplewood Avenue.
d. westerly side, 40 feet in both a northerly and a southerly direction from
the intersection at Dearborn Street.
e. from the US Route 1 Bypass northbound off ramp to Prospect Street.
76. Marcy Street:
a. easterly side from the intersection of State Street to Pleasant Street.
b. westerly side from a point 100 feet south of Court Street to Pleasant
Street.
c. easterly side of Marcy Street from New Castle Avenue to Holmes Court.
77. Market Street:
a. westerly side from the southerly boundary line of the premises of the
Moffatt-Ladd House to Deer Street.
b. easterly side between Ceres Street and a point located 18 feet north of
Ceres Street.
c. between November 1 through March 30 westerly side between Russell
Street and Deer Street except as allowed by Section 7.601 and 7.602.
d. westerly side in front of the former Standard Plumbing building at the
corner of Market Street and Hanover Street.
78. McDonough Street: both sides, from the easterly curb line of Dover Street to a
point 90 feet east of Dover Street
79. Mechanic Street:
a. southerly side, from Marcy Street to the Peirce Island Bridge
b. northerly side of Marcy Street to the Peirce Island bridge between the
hours of 11 P.M. to 6 A.M.
c. westerly side, from Peirce Island Road to Gates Street
d. easterly side, beginning at the extension of the northerly curbline of Gates
Street and running a distance of 27 feet in a northerly direction.
e. westerly side, between Gardner Street and Hunking Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 32 Chapter 7
80. Meeting House Hill Road: southerly side of the Children's Museum, both sides.
81. Melcher Street:
a. easterly side from Pleasant Street to South Mill Pond.
b. northerly side from Pleasant Street to South Mill Pond.
82. Middle Road:
a. northerly side from the intersection of Middle Street to the intersection of
Kensington Road.
b. northerly side from Sylvester Street to Sweet Avenue
83. Middle Street:
a. westerly side from State Street to Austin Street.
b. easterly side from Haymarket Square to Richards Avenue.
c. both sides from Islington Street to State Street.
d. easterly side in front of the building located at 517 Middle Street.
e. westerly side, beginning at the southerly curb line of Union Street and
running 73 feet southerly.
f. westerly side, beginning at the northerly curb line of Union Street and
running northerly to a point 85 feet north of the northerly curb line of
Union Street.
g. easterly side, beginning at the southerly curb line of Union Street and
running 88 feet southerly.
h. easterly side, beginning at the northerly curb line of Union Street and
running northerly to a point 40 feet north of the northerly curb line of
Union Street
84. Miller Avenue:
a. westerly side, starting at the junction of Middle Street and Miller Avenue;
thence running in a southerly direction for a distance of 780 feet, more or
less, at the corner of Rockland Street.
b. both sides one hundred fifty feet (150’) northerly from the intersection at
South Street.
85. Mirona Road: both sides from Lafayette Road westerly a distance of 525 feet.
86. Morning Street:
a. northerly side, from Bartlett Street, 108 feet southwesterly.
b. southerly side, from Bartlett Street to the ell of Morning Street.
87. Mount Vernon Street: westerly side.
88. New Castle Avenue: north side from New Castle town line to Marcy Street.
89. Northwest Street: both sides, from Maplewood Avenue to the beginning of
Jackson Hill Extension.
90. Parker Street: both sides from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 33 Chapter 7
91. Parrott Avenue:
a. between Junkins Avenue and Edward Street, both sides.
b. on the northerly side from 300’ easterly of Richards Avenue to a point
355’ easterly of Richards Avenue
c. on the southerly side from 310’ easterly of Richards Avenue to a point
355’ easterly of Richards Avenue
92. Partridge Street: both sides, entire length of street.
93. Pearl Street: westerly side of Pearl Street after 8:00 a.m. and before 5:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday.
94. Penhallow Street:
Portsmouth Police Station: Portsmouth Police Station Yard (28 Penhallow Street)
except that employees of the Portsmouth Police Department and the Portsmouth
District Court at such times as they are actually engaged in official business with
the Portsmouth Police Department and Portsmouth District Court.
a. easterly side from State Street to Daniel Street.
b. westerly side from southerly entrance of Police grounds, north to exit of
the N.H. National Bank; and from the intersection of Daniel Street to a
point 160 feet north of said intersection.
95. Pickering Street: both sides from Marcy to Mechanic Street.
96. Peirce Island Road:
a. northerly side, from a point 270 feet east of the intersection of Marcy
Street and Mechanic Street easterly for a distance of 900 feet; and
southerly side from a point 364 feet east of the intersection of Marcy
Street and Mechanic Street easterly for a distance of 806 feet.
b. both sides of the street from most easterly access to the City pool to the
access/egress of the sewer treatment plant.
97. Pleasant Street:
a. easterly side from Court Street to State Street.
b. easterly side from Livermore Street to Marcy Street, except for two spaces
located southerly of a point fifteen feet south of the fire hydrant in front of
337 Pleasant Street
c. westerly side from Court Street to 438 Pleasant Street.
98. Porter Street:
a. northerly side from Middle Street to Fleet Street and Church Street to
Pleasant Street.
b. southerly side from Middle Street to Pleasant Street.
99. Pray Street: both sides from the intersection of Marcy Street for a distance of
306.4 feet.
100. Preble Way:
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 34 Chapter 7
a. south side from Ranger Way to Kearsarge Way
b. north side 20 feet ease of Ranger Way to Kearsarge Way
c. north side, from easternmost point, westerly for a distance of 65 feet.
101. Profile Avenue: both sides.
102. Prospect Street: northwesterly side.
103. Raitts Court: both sides.
104. Raleigh Way:
a. southerly side from Kearsarge Way to a point 65’ westerly of Kearsarge Way
b. northerly side from Saratoga Way to a point 55’ westerly of Saratoga Way
105. Ranger Way: both sides, from Preble Way, 70 feet on the easterly side and 50
feet on the westerly side.
106. Raynes Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point 192 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Maplewood Avenue and running easterly to the end of Raynes
Avenue.
107. Richards Avenue:
a. westerly side from Middle Street to South Street.
b. easterly side from Parrott Avenue to Middle Street.
108. Richmond Street: both sides from Pleasant Street to Washington Street.
109. Rogers Street: both sides.
110. Rock Street: northeasterly side from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
111. Rockhill Avenue: both sides.
112. Rockingham Street: westerly side from Islington Street to McDonough Street.
113. Salem Street: westerly side from McDonough Street to Islington Street.
114. Salter Street: both sides.
115. School Street:
a. northerly side from Vaughan Street to High Street.
b. southerly side starting at the corner of Vaughan and School Streets; thence
running northeasterly for a distance of 179 feet, more or less.
116. Scott Avenue
117. Sheafe Street:
a. southerly side, from Penhallow Street to Chapel Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 35 Chapter 7
b. northerly side, from Penhallow Street a distance of 40 feet in an easterly
direction.
118. Sherburne Road: northerly side from Greenland Road to the I-95 Bridge, a
distance of approximately 375 feet, effective from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
119. Sheridan Avenue: easterly side
120. South Street:
a. both sides from Marcy Street to Blossom Street.
b. southerly side, forty feet (40’) on either side of the intersection at Summit
Avenue
121. South School Street: southerly side.
122. Spinney Road: both sides, entire length
123. State Street:
a. northerly side, from the point of intersection of the easterly street line of
Middle Street and the northerly curb line of State Street 85 feet easterly.
b. southerly side from Middle Street 90 feet easterly.
c. northerly side from Fleet Street to Pleasant Street.
d. southerly side, beginning at the intersection of Pleasant Street, westerly to
the intersection of Church Street.
e. northerly side, from 507 State Street, westerly 67 feet.
f. both sides, from the Piscataqua River edge, southwesterly for 76 feet, to
the end of State Street and the beginning of the extension of State Street.
g. South side, between Fleet Street and Court Place, when reserved for use
by licensed vendor.
124. Sudbury Street: northerly side from Brewster Street to Rock Street.
125. Summer Street:
a. southwesterly side from the corner of Austin Street to a point 20 feet back
from curb on both sides of the street.
b. at Telephone Pole J10, 2 spaces wide on Summer Street across from
Immaculate Conception Church.
126. Summit Avenue: easterly side.
127. Tanner Street: both sides, from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
128. Tanner Court: northerly side
129. Thaxter Road, both northerly and southerly sides, beginning at the easterly
curbline of Islington Street and running easterly for a distance of 60 feet.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 36 Chapter 7
130. Union Street: westerly side, from State Street to a point 45 feet north of State
Street
131. Vaughan Street:
a. northerly side of Vaughan Street, beginning 303 feet west of the easterly
curbline of Green Street, running 20 feet in a westerly direction.
b. southerly side of Vaughan Street, beginning 345 feet west of the extension
of the easterly curbline of Green Street, running westerly to the end of
Vaughn Street.
c. northerly side of Vaughan Street, beginning 150 east of the easterly
curbline of Maplewood Avenue, running 44 feet in an easterly direction
along the curve of Vaughan Street.
132. Walker Street: both sides.
133. Washington Street:
a. westerly side, from State Street to a point 340 feet south of the intersection
of Court Street.
b. easterly side, from Court to Hancock Street.
c. both sides from Hancock Street to Howard Street
134. Weald Road: west side from Gosling Road to corner of Winsor Road.
135. Wedgewood Road: east side from Windsor Road to Gosling Road.
136. Wentworth Street:
a. easterly side, entire length.
b. westerly side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Pleasant Street and
running southerly for a distance of 215 feet.
137. Whidden Street: southerly side from Pleasant Street to South Mill Pond.
138. Winsor Road: east side from Gosling Road to Weald Road
139. Woodbury Avenue: both sides, from Thornton Street to the access road to the
New Franklin School.
B. No Parking - School Zones
Parking shall be prohibited within the following areas:
1. Parrott Avenue: north side from Rogers Street to a point 585 feet west of Rogers
Street, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in
session.
C. Parking of Trucks having more than two axles or gross vehicle weight in excess of
10,000 pounds on public streets in residential zones.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 37 Chapter 7
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the traffic ordinance, no truck having more than
two axles or gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be parked on a public
street adjacent to land zoned Single Residence I, Single Residence II, General Residence,
Garden Apartment or Apartment, as determined by the Zoning Ordinance; provided, this
prohibition on parking shall not apply to such vehicles as are used in conjunction with
valid non-conforming business uses in said residential districts, pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance, so long as each vehicle is parked adjacent to the business premises where it is
used. For streets which constitute the boundary between one of said residential zoning
districts and a non-residential zoning district, this prohibition on parking shall apply only
to the side of the street which abuts the residentially zoned land.
D. Public Parks and Playgrounds
It shall be unlawful for any individual to park any vehicle, or to allow any vehicle
registered to him or under his control, to be parked in any public park, public playground,
or on any other premises owned by the City of Portsmouth other than in parking spaces
so designated by the City.
Section 7.331: STREETS, INTERSECTIONS, CORNERS, JUNCTIONS
Parking shall be restricted within all streets, highways, or right of way intersection areas for a
distance of no less than twenty feet. Said restriction shall apply to both sides of all traveled ways
and may be extended by the Police Department and/or the Department of Public Works as may
be deemed necessary by those Departments for the safety and welfare of the public.
Section 7.332: NO PARKING (SUNDAYS EXCLUDED)
Parking shall be prohibited at all times, except on Sunday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on the following described streets and locations:
A. Chapel Street:
l. easterly side from Bow Street to a point l62 feet from the northerly sideline of
Daniel Street.
2. westerly side from Bow Street to a point 192 feet from the northerly sideline of
Daniel Street.
B. Church Street: both sides from Congress Street to State Street.
Section 7.333: NO PARKING (7:00 A.M. TO 6:00 P.M.)
Parking shall be prohibited at all times between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the
following described streets and locations:
A. South Street: northerly side from the intersection of Miller Avenue and Middle Road.
B. State Street: northerly side from the intersection of Summer and State Streets easterly for
a distance of 258 feet.
Section 7.334: LIMITED STOPPING
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 38 Chapter 7
A vehicle may stand or stop during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in those
locations in which parking is otherwise prohibited or restricted, solely for the purpose of loading
or unloading, provided it does not obstruct any street or sidewalk.
Section 7.335: USE OF PARKING LOT
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stand or park or to leave unattended
any vehicle in a municipally owned parking lot for a period of time greater than 72 hours
in any one week.
B. The Chief of Police may, for good and sufficient reason, issue a written permit to any
driver allowing him to exceed the limitations imposed by the subsection A. The permit
shall state the time for which the permit is issued and the location to which the permit
applies.
C. The City Manager shall be permitted to block off any portion or portions of
any municipality owned parking lot at any time, so as to prohibit the use of such
portion or portions of such parking lots in order that repairs might be made to and/or
in order that snow or ice might be removed from such lot.
D. Reserved for future use.
E. The Chief of Police or the Department of Public Works shall be authorized to remove,
cause to be removed, or to be towed to a garage any vehicle found in violation of the
above named chapter, said towing and removing to be at the owner's expense.
Section 7.336: ONE-WAY STREETS
A. Vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated directions on the following streets:
l. Bow Street: westerly from Daniel Street to Chapel Street.
2. Brewster Street: northerly from Islington Street to McDonough Street.
3. Chapel Street: southerly from Bow Street to State Street.
4. Chestnut Street: southerly from Congress Street to Porter Street.
5. Concord Street: in an easterly direction from Crescent Way to Preble Street
6. Congress Street: westerly from Market Square to Islington Street.
7. Coolidge Drive: along the westerly branch of Coolidge Drive, southerly from
Wilson Road to the main line of Coolidge Drive.
8. Cornwall Street: northbound to intersection of McDonough Street.
9. Church Street: southerly from Congress Street to Court Street.
10. Daniel Street: westerly from Bow Street to Market Square.
11. Gates Street: easterly from Hancock Street to Mechanic Street.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 39 Chapter 7
12. Hanover Street: easterly from Pearl Street to Bridge Street.
13. Hanover Street Extension: westerly from Rock Street to Brewster Street.
14. High Street: northerly from Market Square to Ladd Street.
15. High Street: northerly from Hanover Street to Deer Street.
16. Ladd Street: easterly from High Street to Market Street.
17. Langdon Street: southerly from McDonough Street to Islington Street.
18. Market Street: southerly from Bow Street to Market Square.
19. Parker Street: northerly from Tanner Court to Hanover Street.
20. Penhallow Street: northerly from State Street to Bow Street.
21. Pleasant Street: northerly from State Street to Market Square.
22. Porpoise Way: in a westerly direction from Saratoga Way to Crescent Way
23. Porter Street: easterly from Middle Street to Pleasant Street.
24. Raleigh Way: in a westerly direction from Ranger Way to Crescent Way
25. Rock Street: northerly from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
26. Rock Street: southerly from Sudbury Street to Hanover Street.
27. Rockingham Street: northerly from Islington Street to McDonough Street.
28. Salem Street: northerly from Islington Street to McDonough Street.
29. Stark Street: southerly from the New Franklin School driveway to a point 120
feet north of the northerly curb line of Dennett Street.
30. State Street: easterly from Middle Street to Wright Avenue.
31. Sudbury Street: easterly from Brewster Street to Rock Street.
32. Tanner Street: northerly from Islington Street to Hanover Street.
33. Thornton Street: easterly from Woodbury Avenue to Bartlett Street.
34. Union Street: southerly between State and Islington Streets.
35. Woodbury Avenue: easterly from Cottage Street to Bartlett Street.
36. Wright Avenue: southerly from Daniel to State Street.
Section 7.337: LEFT HAND TURNS
All motor vehicles are prohibited from making left hand turns for the following movements:
A. No left turn from Bridge Street onto Islington Street.
B. Jewell Court onto Islington Street.
Section 7.338: RIGHT HAND TURNS (Deleted in its entirety 7/30/84)
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 40 Chapter 7
Section 7.339: PROCESSIONS
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion, provided that said vehicles are
conspicuously so designated.
Section 7.340: U-TURNS
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle upon any street to proceed
in the opposite direction upon said street or at any intersection within the City of Portsmouth.
Section 7.341: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway.
Section 7.342: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any type vehicle to cling or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle
upon any roadway.
Section 7.343: RIDING HANDLEBARS, FRAME OR TANK OF BICYCLE OR
MOTORCYCLE
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle or motorcycle, when upon any public street or
highway, to carry any other person upon the handle bar, frame or tank of any such vehicle, or for
any such person to ride on such vehicle.
Section 7.344: USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, AND SKATE BOARDS
The use of roller skates, coasters and skateboards is prohibited on all sidewalks and streets in any
area designated as Central Business District in the Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance, as those
districts may be amended from time to time. The use of such devices is permitted on all other
streets and sidewalks in the City, subject to the following requirements:
1. All persons under the age of 16 utilizing such devices on City streets or sidewalks must at
all times be wearing a helmet.
2. The utilization of such devices for jumping, acrobatic tricks, traversing benches, railings
or the like on City streets or sidewalks is expressly prohibited.
3. It shall be unlawful to utilize such devices on any street, alley or highway of the City of
Portsmouth after sunset unless the user is wearing reflective clothing.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 41 Chapter 7
4. It shall be unlawful to utilize such devices in any manner which causes damage or
destruction to the property of any person or of the City.
5. Where marked bicycle lanes exists the use of such devices shall be limited to within
those lanes.
Section 7.345: ROLLERBLADING REGULATIONS
All use of in-line skates or rollerblades shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance on all public streets, alleys, and highways within the City of Portsmouth. For
purposes of this ordinance, the term “rollerblade” shall include in-line skates, rollerskates, and
any wheeled device worn on feet which is used for recreation or transportation. The term
“rollerblade” shall not include skateboards.
A. Riding on Sidewalks
No person shall use rollerblades upon sidewalk in the City of Portsmouth
B. Manner and Speed of Operation
No person shall use rollerblades upon a public street, alley, or highway except in a prudent and
careful manner and at a reasonable rate of speed.
C. Equipment Required
No person shall use rollerblades upon any public street, alley or highway in the City of
Portsmouth unless the users is equipped with a helmet and wrist guards.
D. Nighttime Use
It shall be unlawful to use rollerblades on any street, alley or highway of the City of Portsmouth
after dark unless the user is wearing reflective clothing.
E. Observance of Traffic Regulations
Persons using rollerblades shall observe all traffic signs and signals; shall stop at all stop signs
and shall further observe all traffic rules and regulations.
F. Riding Abreast on Roadway
No person shall use rollerblades upon a public street, alley or highway in the City of Portsmouth
abreast of any other person using rollerblades.
G. Rollerblading Prohibited in Downtown
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 42 Chapter 7
The use of rollerblades is prohibited at all times on any alley, street or highway in the downtown
business district. This district includes any area designated as Central Business District in the
Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance, as those districts may be amended from time to time.
H. Penalties
Any person or persons violating any act or provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not more
than $100 for each offense and may have his rollerblades impounded by the Chief of Police for a
period not to exceed 30 days.
Section 7.346: NO THROUGH TRAFFIC
No person shall operate any vehicle on the following streets or ways unless that vehicle has a
point of origin or a point of destination on that street or way, except that emergency vehicles
may operate in emergency situations during the necessary performance of public duties:
1. South School Street.
2. Suzanne Drive, between Ocean Road and Route 1;
Section 7.347: HEAD-IN LIMITED PARKING (ONE HOUR)
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause the same to be
stopped or parked for longer than one hour at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday and Saturdays and between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Fridays (Sundays and holidays, not included) on the following
streets and locations:
l. Pleasant Street: along easterly side of North Church.
Section 7.348: PENALTIES
Any person who violates the provisions of Section 7.343 of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
violation, to be fined as follows: First Offense - $25.00; Second Offense - $50.00; Subsequent
Offenses - $100.00.
Section 7.349: OFF HIGHWAY RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
As defined in N.H. RSA Chapter 215-A:1 VI inclusive as amended, no off highway recreational
vehicle may be operated on any City property excluding all streets which are regulated by state
statutes.
Section 7.350: PENALTIES
Any person who violates the provisions of Section 7.347 of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
violation, to be fined as follows:
First Offense $100.00
Second Offense $200.00
Subsequent Offenses $500.00
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 43 Chapter 7
ARTICLE IV: OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS
Section 7.401: DEFINITIONS AND AUTHORITY
A. The words "Off-Street Parking Area" used herein shall mean any area acquired by the
City of Portsmouth by vote of the City Council, and designated for the parking of
vehicles.
B. The word "vehicle" shall be as defined in Section 7.301 of this Code of Ordinances.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name
to be parked in violation of this Section and said violation shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to Section 7.901, paragraph H, and removal by towing.
Section 7.402: AREAS ESTABLISHED, DESIGNATED, AND DESCRIBED
A. Bridge Street Off-Street Parking Area
The following area, to be known as the Bridge Street Off-Street Parking Area, is hereby
established for the off-street parking of motor vehicles. Said area is more particularly
bounded and described as follows:
Beginning at a point at the intersection of Maplewood Avenue, and Islington Street,
thence running in a generally northerly direction along said Maplewood Avenue to the
intersection of Hanover Street; thence turning at a right angle and running in a westerly
direction along said Hanover Street to Bridge Street; thence turning at a right angle and
running in a generally southerly direction along said Bridge Street to the intersection of
Islington Street; thence turning at a right angle and running in a generally easterly
direction along said Islington Street to point of beginning.
All of said area in the Bridge Street Off-Street Parking Lot is designated as a parking
meter zone. All off-street area within the Bridge Street Off-Street Parking Lot is hereby
designated as a four-hour parking zone.
B. Dennett and Kane Streets Off-Street Parking Area:
The following area, to be know as the Dennett/Kane Off-Street Parking Area, is hereby
established for the off-street parking of motor vehicles. Said area is more particularly
bounded and described as follows:
The triangular area 100 feet westerly from the intersection of Dennett and Kane Streets
abutting the easterly side of the property at 197 Dennett Street. The space provides
parking for five (5) vehicles.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 44 Chapter 7
C. Hanover-Fleet Street Off-Street Parking Area
The Municipal Parking Garage located on Hanover Street shall be known as the High
Hanover Parking Garage. The area within the garage shall be designated for off-street
parking and shall be striped for that purpose to include spaces for handicapped access and
compact cars. Fees for parking in the garage to be determined in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article XVI, or as may be adopted by vote of the City Council.
Any vehicle remaining in the garage after seven (7) days will be subject to towing or
immobilization at the owner’s expense. Fees to be determined in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article XVI.
Contracted Group Rates:
The City Council may authorize a separate rate as it determines for group licenses. A
group shall be considered twenty-five (25) spaces per month or more.
License cards shall be used to admit and exit a single vehicle of the cardholder on any
particular admittance to the garage. Use of the card to procure the exit of a vehicle other
than the same vehicle, which was admitted, is expressly prohibited. Such use shall be
deemed a violation of the license terms and a violation of this ordinance. Any license
cardholder found to be in violation shall be fined no more than $500.00 and the license
shall be canceled.
D. Worth Lot
The following area to be known as the Worth Lot is hereby established for off-street
parking of motor vehicles said area being more particularly bounded and described as
follows:
Beginning on the westerly sideline of Vaughan Street where said westerly sideline of said
Vaughan Street intersects the northerly sideline of a certain right of way which extends
from said Vaughan Street in a westerly direction to land now or former of the YMCA;
thence running westerly by said right of way and the land of said YMCA a distance of
394.3 feet to a point; thence turning and running in a southerly direction 15 feet, more or
less, to a point; thence turning and running by land now or formerly of Whitaker a
distance of 75 feet, more or less, to the easterly sideline of Bridge Street; thence turning
and running along said easterly sideline of said Bridge Street, a distance of 94.9 feet to
the land now or formerly of Norman Munday; thence turning and running in an easterly
direction along land of Munday, Knott, Roylos and Savramis a distance of 256 feet;
thence turning and running in a northerly direction along land of Savramis a distance of
105.4 feet to the southerly sideline of Hanover Street; thence turning and running along
said southerly sideline of said Hanover Street in an easterly direction a distance of 69.9
feet to land now or formerly of Rirado Realties, Inc.; thence turning and running in a
southerly direction along land of said Rirado Realties, Inc. a distance of 118 feet to a
point; thence turning and running in an easterly direction a distance of 141 feet to the
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 45 Chapter 7
westerly sideline of Vaughan Street; thence turning and running along said westerly
sideline of said Vaughan Street in a southerly direction, a distance of 104.9 feet to the
point of beginning. All of said area within the Worth Lot is hereby designated as parking
meter zones.
All of said area in the Worth Lot is designated as a parking meter zone. All off-street
area within the Worth Lot is hereby designated as a three hour parking zone except as
follows:
1. To the extent that contractual obligations of the City of Portsmouth
require otherwise.
2. Two spaces in the northeastern corner of the lot shall be designated and
marked “Fifteen Minute Parking Only”.
E. Court Street Off-Street Parking Area
The following area to be known as Court Street Off-Street Parking Area is hereby
established for off-street parking of motor vehicles said area being more particularly
bounded and described as follows:
Beginning on the southerly sideline of Court Street a land of the City of Portsmouth;
thence running in a westerly direction a distance of 83.53 feet to land nor or formerly of
Ruth E. Chase; thence turning and running in a southerly direction along said land of said
Chase and land of Paul V. Brown a distance of 246.2 feet to land of the Home for Aged
Women and land of the City of Portsmouth a distance of 83 feet; thence turning and
running in a northerly direction along other land of the City of Portsmouth a distance of
242 feet to the point of beginning.
All said land within the Court Street Off-Street Parking Lot is hereby designated as
parking meter zones.
F. Rockingham Street Off-Street Parking Area
The following area to be known as the Rockingham Street Off-Street Parking Area is
hereby established for off-street parking of motor vehicles:
Assessor's Plan 19, Lot Number 23.
All of said area shall be used for off-street parking not to exceed 72 hours at any one
time.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name
to be parked in violation of this Section and said violation shall be subject to removal by
towing.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 46 Chapter 7
G. Wright Avenue Off-Street Parking Area
The following area to be known as the Wright Avenue Off-Street Parking Area is hereby
established for off-street parking of motor vehicles:
That piece of land bounded by State Street on the South, the Memorial Bridge Traffic
Island on the East, Daniel Street on the North and the Community Center on the West.
All of said area not otherwise designated by the placement of parking meters shall be
limited to parking not to exceed 4 (four) hours at any one time.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name
to be parked in violation of this Section and said violation may be subject to be removed
by towing.
H. Prescott Park Off-street Parking Areas
The following areas to be known as the Prescott Park Off-street Parking Areas are hereby
established for off-street parking of motor vehicles:
1. Water Street
2. The Lot at the northerly end of the Park.
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause same
to stop for longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on any day of the week.
3. The lot on the westerly side of Prescott Park at the corner of Marcy and Dutton
Streets and the paved area adjacent to the Sheafe Warehouse between the
Piscataqua River and Marcy Street.
A. No person having control or custody of any vehicle shall stop or cause same
to stop for longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on any day of the week.
I. Meeting House Hill Off-Street Parking Area
The following area to be known as the Meeting House Hill Off-Street Parking Area is
hereby established for off-street parking of motor vehicles:
The property located at 280 Marcy Street, formerly known as the Children’s Museum.
All of said area shall be used for off-street parking not to exceed 72 hours at any one
time.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 47 Chapter 7
J. Business Validation Program
The City Manager may implement a business validation program whereby stamps, tokens
or the like may be purchased by business owners within a designated geographical area at
a discount rate for use by clients or customers. Authority is hereby provided to the City
Manager to establish the terms and conditions under which the validation program will
operate. All such terms and conditions shall be submitted to the City Council for review
and approval. Amendments to such terms and conditions may be submitted from time to
time as necessary by the City Manager to the City Council, for further review and
approval. The approved terms and conditions for the Business Validation Program shall
be kept on file as a public record with the Office of the City Clerk.
K. Leary Field Parking Area – Off-Street Parking Area
The approximately 90’ x 90’ fenced paved lot that is at the address of 161 Rockland
Street (Map 0129, Lot 0045) is hereby established as the Leary Field Off-Street Parking
Area for off-street parking of motor vehicles not to exceed 72 hours at any one time.
L. Foundry Place Off-Street Parking Area
The Municipal Parking Garage located at 100 Foundry Place shall be known as the
Foundry Place Parking Garage. The area within the garage shall be designated for offstreet
parking and shall be striped for that purpose to include parking spaces for
handicapped access and electric vehicle charging stations. Fees for parking in the
Foundry Place Parking Garage to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article
XVI, or as may be adopted by vote of the City Council.
Any vehicle remaining in the garage after seven (7) days will be subject to towing or
immobilization at the owner’s expense. Fees to be determined in accordance with
Chapter 1, Article XVI.
Section 7.403: LENGTH OF VEHICLES
Vehicles parking in Off-Street Parking Areas shall not exceed 19 feet in length.
Section 7.404: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
Section 7.405: AUTHORITY GIVEN TO REGULATE AREAS
A. The City Manager, with the authority and approval of the City Council, hereby granted,
shall provide for the installation of metering devices and the painting of necessary lines
for the regulation and operation of vehicle parking in accordance with the ordinances of
the City. This authority shall be applicable to all off-street parking areas owned or
controlled by the City.
Section 7.406: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 48 Chapter 7
Section 7.407: APPLICABILITY OF SECTIONS 7.107 THROUGH 7.113
Chapter 7, Sections 7.107 to 7.113 inclusive, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth shall also apply to said off-street parking area.
Section 7.408: PEIRCE ISLAND BOAT LAUNCH OVERNIGHT PARKING
Notwithstanding any other provision of these ordinances, the Director of Public Works may
issue permits to allow persons to lawfully utilize the Peirce Island Boat Launch parking lot for
the purpose of parking a vehicle overnight. The issuance of such permits shall be in accordance
with the following terms and conditions:
A. The permittee shall be issued an overnight parking permit from the Parking Clerk’s
Office for a deposit and fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI.
B. Each permit would be valid only for the time stated upon issuance.
C. The vehicle must prominently display the overnight parking permit on the vehicle’s
dashboard.
D. The permitted vehicle shall not be designed for human occupation, such as a motor home,
recreational vehicle or trailer.
E. The vehicle and/or vessel shall remain unoccupied for the duration of the permitted time.
In the event that the permittee secures the use of the overnight parking permit through
misrepresentation, the permittee shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
F. The Department of Public Works is authorized to adapt and enforce rules and regulations
to implement this ordinance.
G. Any person using an overnight parking permit other than at the times or manner
specifically authorized by the Department of Public Works shall be subject to forfeiture
of any deposit and to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation.
H. For purposes of this provision, the term “overnight parking” shall mean the continuous
parking of a vehicle from dusk until dawn.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 49 Chapter 7
ARTICLE IVA: BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS
Section 7-A.400: STOPPING
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any bus or taxicab to stand or to park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, except while actually
engaged in taking on or leaving passengers.
Section 7-A.401: PARKING IN TAXI STANDS OR BUS STOPS
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in any
officially designated bus stop, or for any vehicle other than a taxi cab to stand or park in
any officially designated taxi stand, with the following exceptions:
1. The driver of any vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or stand for the
purpose of actually engaging in leaving or taking passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise, such period not to exceed five minutes in overall length.
2. When deemed necessary for the public safety or convenience, the Chief of Police
or his/her designee may grant an extension to the five minute period referenced in
the previous section.
3. During the hours after 10:00 PM in the evening and before 5:00 AM in the
morning, taxi cabs may utilize any designed bus stop located in Market Square in
the manner allowed by law for taxi cabs to use designed taxi stands.
Section 7-A.402: BUS STOPS DESIGNATED
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following sections of the streets in the business section of
the City are hereby designated as Bus Stops:
A. Congress Street:
l. two parallel strips 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the northerly side of
said street from the point of intersection of said street and the westerly side of
High Street and extending westerly along Congress Street a distance of 70 feet.
2. a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the northerly side of said street,
beginning at the intersection of Bridge Street and running along said sidewalk,
easterly a distance of 36 feet.
B. Deer Street: south side, from a point 15 feet easterly of a hydrant located near the
intersection of Deer Street and Maplewood Avenue to a point 95 feet easterly of said
hydrant.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 50 Chapter 7
C. Fleet Street: a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the westerly side of said
street beginning at a point of intersection of Porter Street and running northerly along
said street a distance of 30 feet.
D. Hanover Street: southerly side of Hanover Street 90 feet east of Fleet Street to a point
285 feet east of Fleet Street.
E. Market Street: easterly side from Isle of Shoals Steamship Company Entrance a distance
of 90 fee southerly.
F. Market Square: two parallel strips 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the northerly
side of said square from the point of intersection of said square and the easterly side of
High Street and extending easterly along Market Square a distance of 70 feet.
G. Middle Street:
l. a strip 10 feet side adjacent to the sidewalk on the westerly side of said street
from the point of intersection of said street and Islington Street and running
southerly along Middle Street a distance of 40 feet.
2. a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the east side of the street
extending forty feet in a southerly direction from a point 80 feet south of the
intersection of State Street to be reserved as a bus stop from 8:00 a.m. to l:00 p.m.
Sundays only.
3. a strip 10 feet adjacent to the sidewalk on the westerly side of said street from the
point of intersection of Madison Street and running northerly along Middle Street
a distance of 40 feet.
H. Pleasant Street: a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the easterly side of said
street beginning at the intersection of State Street and running southerly along Pleasant
Street a distance of 30 feet.
I. State Street:
l. a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the southerly side of said street
beginning at the southwesterly intersection of said street and Pleasant Street and
running westerly along said State Street a distance of 30 feet.
2. a strip 10 feet wide adjacent to the sidewalk on the southerly side of said street
beginning at the southwesterly intersection of said street and Fleet Street and
running westerly along said State Street a distance of 30 feet.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 51 Chapter 7
Section 7A.403: PARKING TIME LIMITS IN BUS STOPS
A. No bus shall stand or park in the following designated bus stops for longer than five
minutes:
l. Bus Stop No. Gl.
2. Bus Stop No. Al.
3. Bus Stop No. A3.
B. No bus shall stand or park in the following designated bus stops for longer than fifteen
minutes:
1. Bus Stop No. A2.
2. Bus Stop No. B1.
3. Bus Stop No. B2.
4. Bus Stop No. E.
5. Bus Stop No. F.
6. Bus Stop No. G2.
7. Bus Stop No. H1.
8. Bus Stop No. I1.
9. Bus Stop No. I2.
C. No bus shall stand or park in the following designated bus stop for longer than two hours:
l. Bus Stop No. C.
2. Bus Stop No. D.
Section 7A.404: PARKING OF BUSES
Except as provided in Section 7A.400 of this Article, it shall be unlawful to park any bus on any
street in the City of Portsmouth or on any property of the City of Portsmouth or on any parking
lot of the City of Portsmouth between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except as provided in
Section 7A.400 or 7A.402.
Sections 7A.405 and 7A.406: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
Section 7A.407: LIVERY VEHICLES
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 52 Chapter 7
The following spaces shall be reserved on a twenty-four hour a day, seven day a week basis for
limousines or livery vehicles:
A. Russell Street: westerly side, first space north of intersection with Deer Street.
Section 7A.408: TAXI STANDS DESIGNATED
The following areas are hereby designated as Taxi stands:
A. Hanover Street: southerly side, first parking space west from Fleet Street from 7:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m.
B. Market Street:
1. easterly side, second parking space from Market Square.
2. easterly side, south for a distance of 40 feet, beginning at Bow Street, from 7 p.m.
to 6 a.m., Monday through Sunday
C. Pleasant Street: easterly side, first parallel parking space north of State Street.
D. State Street: northerly side, 40 feet east from Pleasant Street for a distance of 20 feet,
from 7 p.m. to 6 a.m., Monday through Sunday
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 53 Chapter 7
ARTICLE V: BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Section 7.501: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS
No person shall ride or propel any bicycle with wheels of 16” or more in diameter upon any
sidewalk in the City of Portsmouth. This shall not prohibit operation of a bicycle on a path that
is signed and marked as a designated share-use path with a minimum width of 8’.
Section 7.502: MANNER AND SPEED OF OPERATION
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public way, except in a prudent and careful
manner and at a reasonable rate of speed and must exercise due care around pedestrians and must
yield to pedestrians.
Section 7.503: EQUIPMENT REQUIRED
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public way in the City of Portsmouth unless
the steering, brakes, tires and other required equipment are in safe condition. Helmets are
required for all persons riding on or operating a bicycle under the age of sixteen.
Section 7.504: LIGHTS, WHEN REQUIRED
Every bicycle operated upon a public way during darkness shall be equipped with a lamp
emitting a white light visible from a distance of 300 feet in front of the bicycle and with a red
reflector or red light on the rear, which shall be visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear.
Every bicycle operated upon a public way during darkness shall have reflectors on both pedals or
wear reflector leg bands on operator’s lower extremity or other reflectors on legs or shoes visible
from 200 feet. Any person operating a bicycle during the period from one half hour before
sunrise and one half hour after sunset must wear at least one item of reflective outerwear apparel
such as a reflective vest, jacket, helmet or helmet strip.
Section 7.505: OBSERVANCE OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Every person riding a bicycle shall have all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under the rules of the road except as follows:
A. A person propelling a bicycle may pass a slower-moving vehicle in the same lane
provided such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
B. A person propelling a bicycle may pass a stationary or stopped motor vehicle on
the right.
C. A person propelling a bicycle upon a way at a speed less than the normal speed of
traffic moving in the same direction at that time and place shall remain on the
right portion of the way as far as practicable except when it is unsafe or
impractical to do so or where signage or pavement markings are provided which
indicate that it is acceptable for bicycles to use the full lane.
Section 7.506: HANDS ON HANDLEBARS
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 54 Chapter 7
No person shall operate or propel any bicycle without having at least one of his/her hands upon
the handlebars thereof.
Section 7.507: RIDING ON HANDLEBARS
No person operating or propelling a bicycle having only one saddle shall carry any other person
on said bicycle.
Section 7.508: CLINGING TO VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for any person while riding or propelling a bicycle to hold onto a moving
bus, truck or any other vehicle.
Section 7.509: RIDING ABREAST ON ROADWAYS
Persons riding bicycles 2 or more abreast on a public way shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway shall ride within a single lane.
Section 7.510: UNATTENDED BICYCLES
No person shall park a bicycle in a manner that:
A. Impedes the flow of motor vehicle traffic on roadways or the normal and
reasonable movements of pedestrian traffic, including but not limited to
crosswalks, sidewalks, and building entrances.
B. Prevents or impedes the operation of or access to a parking meter, parking pay
station, traffic control device.
C. Hinders or restricts access to handrails or ramps.
D. Hinders, obstructs or impedes the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
E. Bicycles shall not be parked on public roadways except in an area signed and
otherwise designated for bicycle parking.
F. Bicycles shall not be secured to or parked against a tree.
G. At no time shall bicycles be secured or parked against a fire hydrant or
monuments.
H. At no time shall bicycles be left unattended on private property without the
consent of the owner or legal tenant.
I. Bicycles may park on a public way or on public property for a maximum
consecutive time period of 72 hours except in an area signed and otherwise
designated for long-term parking.
Section 7.511: PENALTIES
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 55 Chapter 7
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil infraction of $35.
Made payable to the Parking Clerk of the City of Portsmouth or the operator may be deprived of
his/her bicycle until the provisions and requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
Section 7.512: APPLICABILITY
The foregoing Ordinances and rules and regulations herein contained shall apply to bicycles with
wheels of 16 inches or more in diameter only.
ARTICLE VA: DISTRICT COURT PARKING
Section 7A.501: DISTRICT COURT HOUSE PARKING
Spaces in the District Court House Parking Lot shall be designated as reserved between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday as follows:
A. Two spaces for the Judges;
B. Two spaces for the Police;
C. Five spaces for other building employees.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 56 Chapter 7
ARTICLE VI: LOADING ZONES
Section 7.601: LIMITED HOURS LOADING ZONES
The following locations are established as “Limited Hours Loading Zones” during “Loading
Zone Hours” which are defined as Mondays through Saturdays between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. or as otherwise described below. During Loading Zone Hours only licensed
commercial vehicles, vehicles marked for commercial purposes and unmarked noncommercial
vehicles with Loading Zone Permits may utilize Limited Hours Loading Zones for up to 30
consecutive minutes if actively engaged in loading or unloading product, merchandise or
equipment. At all other times these Loading Zones shall be open parking for all vehicles.
1. Bow Street: northerly side beginning 40 feet west from Chapel Street and continuing
west for a distance of 70 feet. In addition to Monday through Saturday, this location
shall also be a loading zone from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
2. Brewster Street: easterly side, beginning 40 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Islington Street and running 40 feet in the northerly direction, between the hours of 7 AM
and 3 PM, Monday through Friday.
3. Bridge Street: westerly side, beginning 50 feet north from the intersection of Bridge
Street and Islington Street for a distance of 40 feet.
4. Congress Street:
a. northerly side, beginning 9 feet west from the intersection of Fleet Street and
Congress Street running for a distance of 136 feet.
b. southerly side, beginning 130 feet east from the intersection of Fleet Street and
Congress Street running for a distance of 49 feet.
5. Daniel Street: southerly side, beginning 37 feet west from Penhallow Street for a
distance of 65 feet
6. Deer Street: southerly side, west from Market Street a distance of 60 feet.
7. Hanover Street:
a. northerly side, beginning at a distance of 106 feet from the western most point of the
southwesterly curbline of Market Street for a distance of 45 feet.
b. southerly side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Fleet Street and running westerly for
90 feet, from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
c. all parking spaces on the northerly side between Portwalk Place and Maplewood
Avenue from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
8. High Street: easterly side, in a southerly direction from Ladd Street a distance of 50 feet.
9. Market Street:
a. easterly side, south for a distance of 50 feet, beginning at Commercial Alley
b. easterly side, south for a distance of 40 feet, beginning at Bow Street from 6:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. In addition, from 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, this
area shall be designated as a taxi stand per Section 7A.408.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 57 Chapter 7
c. westerly side between Russell Street and Deer Street, from November 1st through
March 30th, 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday-Friday, 2:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Saturday.
10. Pearl Street: easterly side from a point thirty feet (30’) north of Islington Street to a point
seventy feet (70’) north of Islington Street.
11. Penhallow Street: westerly side, beginning at Commercial Alley and running northerly
for a distance of 45 feet. In addition to Monday through Saturday, this location shall also
be a loading zone from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
12. State Street:
a. northerly side, beginning 40 feet east from Pleasant Street for a distance of 40
feet. In addition, from 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, this area shall be
designated as a taxi stand per Section 7A.408.
b. southerly side, beginning 20 feet west from Atkinson Street for a distance of 57
feet.
Section 7.602: 24-HOUR LOADING ZONES
The following locations are established as “24-Hour Loading Zones” at all times, 24 hours a
day, seven days a week. Only licensed commercial vehicles, vehicles marked for commercial
purposes and unmarked non-commercial vehicles with Loading Zone Permits may utilize the 24-
Hour Loading Zones for 30 consecutive minutes if actively engaged in loading or unloading
product, merchandise or equipment. No other vehicles may utilize the 24-Hour Loading Zones.
1. Ceres Street
a. westerly side, beginning 27 feet from Bow Street for a distance of 25 feet.
b. easterly side, beginning 95 feet from Bow Street for a distance of 40 feet.
2. Chestnut Street: westerly side, south from Congress Street for a distance of 100
feet
3. Daniel Street: northerly side, beginning 123 feet east from Bow Street for a
distance of 35 feet.
4. Haven Court: both sides, entire length
5. Maplewood Avenue: easterly side, beginning 35 feet north from the intersection
of Congress Street and Maplewood Avenue running for a distance of 70 feet.
6. Pleasant Street: westerly side, beginning 21 feet south from the intersection of
Pleasant Street and State Street running southerly for a distance of 30 feet.
7. Porter Street
a. northerly side, beginning 15 feet west from Fleet Street for a distance of 40
feet.
b. southerly side, beginning 145 feet east from Middle Street for a distance of 45
feet
Section 7.603: LOADING AND UNLOADING OF LIVE PARKED VEHICLES
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 58 Chapter 7
1. Middle Street: easterly side, beginning188 feet southwesterly from intersection
with Miller Avenue, for a distance of 20 feet (in front of 375 Middle Street).
Section 7.604: LOADING ZONE PERMITS
The Director of Public Works may issue a Loading Zone Permit to allow unmarked noncommercial
vehicles to utilize Limited Hours Loading Zones and 24-Hour Loading Zones for 30
consecutive minutes if actively engaged in loading or unloading of product, merchandise or
equipment. The issuance and use of such permits shall be in accordance with Article VI and the
following terms and conditions:
a. The permittee shall be issued a Loading Zone Permit from the Parking Clerk’s
Office for a fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI.
b. Each Loading Zone Permit would be valid for one calendar year, January 1st
through December 31st.
c. Each Loading Zone Permit is non-transferable and is valid for only one vehicle
per application.
d. The vehicle must prominently display the Loading Zone Permit on the vehicle’s
dashboard.
e. In the event that the permittee secures the use of the Loading Zone Permit through
misrepresentation, the permittee shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
f. Any person using a Loading Zone Permit other than at the times or manner
specifically authorized by the Department of Public Works shall be subject to a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per use, per permit, of such unauthorized
use.
Section 7.605: EMERGENCY REPAIR TRUCKS EXEMPT (PENALTY)
This Ordinance shall not apply to trucks being used upon said streets for emergency purposes or
while engaged on highway maintenance or repairs.
Anyone who violates or causes to be violated any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not
exceeding $100 for each offense.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 59 Chapter 7
ARTICLE VII: TRUCK AND BUS TRAVEL
Section 7.701: PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no tractor – trailer truck may travel on the
following streets at any time for any reason.
1. Maplewood Avenue from Central Avenue to Woodbury Avenue
2. Woodbury Avenue from Dennett Street to Bartlett Street.
Section 7.702: TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any truck with a box, body or platform of over 12 feet in length to use the
following streets subject to the exceptions of Section 7.704 of this Article.
1. Adams Avenue
2. Banfield Road
3. Broad Street (between South Street and Jones Avenue).
4. Burkitt Street (between Dennett Street and the Maine/New Hampshire Interstate
so-called).
5. Cate Street
6. Chestnut Street (from Congress Street to Porter Street)
7. Circuit Road
8. Cleveland Drive
9. Coolidge Drive
10. Dennett Street (Between Bartlett Avenue to Maplewood Avenue)
11. Dwight Avenue
12. Echo Avenue
13. Edgewood Road
14. Farm Lane
15. Fillmore Road
16. F.W. Hartford Drive
17. Garfield Road
18. Granite Street
19. Grant Avenue
20. Greenleaf Avenue
21. Harding Road
22. Hayes Place
23. Hoover Drive
24. Mangrove Street
25. Maplewood Avenue (from Central Avenue to Woodbury Avenue)
26. McKinley Road
27. Myrtle Avenue (between Dennett St. and the Maine/New Hampshire Interstate
so-called)
28. Nixon Park
29. Pickering Street
30. Polk Avenue
31. Profile Avenue
32. Ranger Way
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 60 Chapter 7
33. Rockhill Avenue
34. Sherburne Road
35. Taft Road
36. Taylor Lane
37. Thornton Street (between Woodbury Avenue and Bartlett Street)
38. T.J. Gamester Avenue
39. Truman Place
40. Van Buren Avenue
41. Wilson Road
42. Woodbury Avenue, between Market Street and Bartlett Street
Section 7.703: BUS TRAFFIC PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no bus may travel on the following
streets at any time for any reason.
1. Ceres Street (all public sections).
Section 7.704: EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION OF TRUCK TRAFFIC
The following streets are exceptions to the prohibition against truck traffic on the streets set forth
in Section 7.702:
A. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at the
destination point accessible only through use of streets where truck traffic is prohibited as
set forth in Section 7.702.
B. Emergency vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City.
C. Public Utilities, Etc.: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, Public
Utilities, any contractors, subcontractors or materialman, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the
City.
D. Residential Home Delivery Vehicles: The operation of delivery trucks actually engaged
in making residential deliveries.
Section 7.705: ENFORCEMENT
The Public Works Department shall cause those streets which are through truck routes and local
delivery routes to be posted to give notice that this Ordinance is in effect. Where applicable, the
Public Works Department shall coordinate sign posting with the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation.
The Chief of Police shall cause enforcement of this Ordinance to occur through local, county and
state law enforcement sources.
Section 7.706: VACANT
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 61 Chapter 7
Section 7.707: TRUCK OR BUS PARKING
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck or bus any size on the following streets:
A. Hancock Street: either side
B. Woodbury Avenue: westerly side from Route #1 Bypass bridge to Boyd Road.
Section 7.708: DEFINITION
Construction sites shall mean and include any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures is taking
place. It shall also include areas upon which repairs, reconstruction, or additions are being made
to existing streets and public ways within the City of Portsmouth and shall include the
construction of new streets, roadways, the repair, reconstruction, or addition of new bridge or
overpass surfaces and shall also include those areas where backfilling is being performed and
will include travel to and from areas where fill material is being obtained or disposed of.
Section 7.709: CONDITION OF CONSTRUCTION SITES
The property owners, whether they be public or private, and the prime contractors in charge of
any construction site as defined in this ordinance shall maintain the construction site in such a
manner that litter, cement, plastic, building materials, or any other construction materials will be
prevented from being carried by the elements to adjoining premises or to roadways within the
construction site or to roadways on which construction vehicles travel for the purpose of
obtaining or dumping any type of construction material. All litter or any other type of
construction material as defined above shall be picked up at the end of each work day and placed
in such containers as will prevent the material from being carried by the elements to adjoining
premises or roadways.
Section 7.710: VEHICLES DROPPING CONTENTS ON STREETS
It shall be unlawful for any person, company, or business to transport in any vehicle or by any
other means or manner, any loose material or articles likely to sift, fall, spill, or be blown about
on any public street, alley, or other public way within the City of Portsmouth. In the event of
any of the contents of such vehicles being blown, scattered, or dispersed in any way upon any
public street, alley, or other public way or place within the City, the person in charge of said
vehicle shall immediately gather up or cause to be gathered up any such blown or scattered
material. In the event that such material cannot be gathered up in a reasonable manner, then
such person in charge of said vehicle shall cause the area to be cleaned by the use of such other
means as may be required to clean the area.
Section 7.711: COVERING OF VEHICLE LOADS REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or company transporting any materials mentioned
in the above sections to transport any vehicle load without a cover to prevent the contents of said
load to sift, fall, spill, or be blown about on any public street, alley, or other public way within
the City of Portsmouth.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 62 Chapter 7
Section 7.712: PENALTY
Any person, business or company violating any provision of this Article VII shall be fined up to
$100 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day in
which a violation occurs or continues to occur except as follows:
A. The penalty for parking on a sidewalk in the Central Business District pursuant to Section
7.315 shall be $25.00 per violation.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 63 Chapter 7
ARTICLE VIII: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section 7.801: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM, LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS, METHYL
METHACRYLATE, OR ANY FLAMMABLE LIQUID (AS DEFINED BY
THE NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION)
ROUTES TO BE TAKEN: Unless there is some type of emergency existing and there is no
practical alternative, a motor vehicle which
A. is designed to transport 4,000 or more gallons of liquified petroleum, liquified natural
gas, methyl methacrylate, or any flammable liquid as defined by the National Fire
Protection Association; and
B. contains liquified petroleum, liquified natural gas, methyl methacrylate, or any
flammable liquid as defined by the National Fire Protection Association, or the vapor
fumes of any;
must be operated over only the following routes and in accordance with all State and Federal
regulations on the transportation of hazardous materials:
1. Interstate 95;
2. Spaulding Turnpike (Route #16);
3. Route #1 Bypass between Portsmouth Traffic Circle and Interstate Bridge;
4. Route #101 (west of Interstate 95)
5. Barberry Lane and that portion of Islington Street and Greenland Road necessary
to connect Barberry Lane to Interstate 95 by the most direct route.
Operating convenience is not a basis for determining whether it is practical to operate a motor
vehicle in accordance with this Section.
Section 7.802: LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM, LIQUIFIED NATURAL GAS, METHYL
METHACRYLATE, OR ANY FLAMMABLE LIQUID (AS DEFINED BY
THE NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION )
PARKING AND STANDING: No motor vehicle described in Section 7.801 shall be parked or
left standing within the limits of the City of Portsmouth, except for valid public safety reasons
requiring such motor vehicle to be parked or left standing or for refueling of such motor vehicle.
Immediately upon completion of refueling or elimination of the public safety reason requiring a
stop, such vehicles shall continue on their way.
Section 7.803: INTERPRETATION AND SPECIFIC PERMITS
Section 7.801 and 7.802 shall be interpreted so as to provide the maximum safety to the general
public and the burden shall be upon the owner or driver of motor vehicles described in said
Sections to justify a deviation from the specific routs or the need for such exceptions to the
provisions of Sections 7.801 and 7.802 may be granted by the Portsmouth City Council after
hearing with good cause shown.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 64 Chapter 7
Section 7.804: RAILROAD TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Unless a special permit is obtained beforehand from the Portsmouth City Council, railroad tank
cars which
A. are designed to transport liquified petroleum, liquified natural gas, methacrylate, or any
flammable liquid as defined by the National Fire Protection Association and;
B. contain liquified petroleum, liquified natural gas, methacrylate, or any flammable liquid
as defined by the National Fire Protection Association or vapor fumes of any ?? shall not
be parked or stored on tracks within the City of Portsmouth.
Section 7.805: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS CROSSING HIGHWAYS
All trains containing tank cars described in Section 7.804 shall not cross any Class I, IV, and V
highway within the City limits of Portsmouth without the presence of electronic signal devices or
a flagman in the road to stop traffic.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 65 Chapter 7
ARTICLE IX: PENALTIES, FORFEITURES AND SEPARABILITY
Section 7.901: PENALTIES
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule or regulation made
by the Chief of Police pursuant thereto, except the rules and regulations found in
Section 7.l05 and except those rules referenced in paragraph B, C, D, E, F and H of this
provision, shall be subject to a fine or not more than $300 upon conviction therefore in
the Portsmouth District Court.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 7.105 A or C (Two Hour Metered
Parking Restrictions) or any rule or regulation made by the Chief of Police pursuant
thereto shall forfeit to the City the sum of $5.00 for each violation. In the event that
payment of the forfeiture sum of $5.00 is not made within thirty (30) calendar days of the
violation, then the forfeiture shall be in the sum of $25.00 for each violation.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, any person violating an
emergency order issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 7.303 or Section 321
shall forfeit to the City of Portsmouth within forty-eight (48) hours of such violation the
sum of $50. In the event that such forfeiture is not made within thirty (30) days of the
violation date, then the forfeiture shall be paid to the City of Portsmouth in the amount of
$75. In the event of failure to make such forfeiture, said person shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $100 upon conviction therefore in the Portsmouth District Court.
D. Any person receiving more than ten (10) parking violations in one (1) year, July 1 to June
30 inclusive, shall forfeit an additional charge for each subsequent violation in the
amount of $25. In the event that this additional forfeiture of $25 is not made within thirty
(30) days of the date of the violation triggering the $25 forfeiture, then the forfeiture
amount shall become $50.
E. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, any person violating the
following sections of this Chapter or any rule made by the Chief of Police pursuant
thereto, shall forfeit to the City of Portsmouth within forty-eight (48) hours of such
violation the amount designated below. In the event that the forfeiture amounts not made
within thirty (30) calendar days of the violation, then the forfeiture shall be twice the sum
listed below. In the event of failure to make such forfeiture, said person shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $100.00 upon conviction.
Section Parking Violation Fine Amount
7.105 (A) Expired Meter $15.00
7.328.1 Utilization of Multiple Spaces $25.00
7.315 (A) Parking Within an Intersection $25.00
7.315 (B) Parked in Crosswalk 25.00
7.315 (C) Blocking Fire Hydrant 25.00
7.315 (D) Parked Within 15 Feet of Fire Station Driveway 15.00
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 66 Chapter 7
Section Parking Violation Fine Amount
7.315 (E) Parked Blocking Driveway 25.00
7.315 (F) Parked on Sidewalk 25.00
7.315 (G) Obstructing Traffic During Construction Activity 15.00
7.315 (H) Double Parking 15.00
7.315 (I) Violating Traffic Signs Prohibiting Parking 25.00
7.315 (J) Parked, Wrong Direction 15.00
7.316 Back to Curb 15.00
7.319 Distance from Curb 15.00
7.320 Obstructing Street 25.00
7.324 One Hour Parking 15.00
7.325 30 Minute Parking 15.00
7.326 15 Minute Parking 15.00
7.327 Limited Parking - Two Hours 15.00
7.330 Parked in No Parking Area 20.00
7.331 Parking Too Close to Intersection 20.00
7.601 Trucks, Vans & Other Commercial Delivery
Vehicles on Certain Streets During Certain Hours
25.00
7.602 Truck Loading/Unloading Zones Established 25.00
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the owner or operator of a vehicle
unlawfully parked in areas designated as reserved for parking for the walking disabled
pursuant to Section 7.1200 shall forfeit to the City of Portsmouth within forty-eight (48)
hours of such violation $250. In the event that the payment of the forfeiture is not made
within thirty (30) days of the violation, then the forfeiture shall be in the amount of $300.
In the event of failure to make such forfeiture, said person shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $300 upon conviction therefore in the Portsmouth District Court.
G. Overnight Parking - Winter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance,
any person violating the provisions of Section 7.321(A) or an emergency snow ban as
directed by the Director of Public Works under Section 7.321(B) shall forfeit to the City
of Portsmouth within forty-eight (48) hours of such violation the sum of $25. In the
event that payment of such forfeiture amount is not made within thirty (30) days of the
violation, then the forfeiture amount shall be $35. In the event of failure to make such
forfeiture, said person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50 upon conviction
therefore in the Portsmouth District Court.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the owner or operator of a vehicle
violating the provisions of Section 7.335 or 7.1000 (72 hour parking restrictions) shall
forfeit to the City of Portsmouth within forty-eight (48) hours of such violation $50. In
the event that the payment of forfeiture is not made within thirty (30) days of the
violation, then the forfeiture shall be in the amount of $100. In the event of failure to
make such forfeiture, said person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $150 upon
conviction thereof in the Portsmouth District Court.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 67 Chapter 7
Section 7.902: SEPARABILITY
If any provision or part of any provision of this act or the application thereof, to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
the act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the
provisions of this act are declared to be severable.
Section 7.903 SUMMONS ADMINISTRATION FEE
In addition to any fine or penalty otherwise established by this ordinance, any person or entity
for whom the City serves a summons for any traffic or parking offense shall also be liable to the
City for a summons administration fee in an amount to be set periodically by the City Council
pursuant to its normal budget procedures.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 68 Chapter 7
ARTICLE X.: TOWING
Section 7.1000: TOW ZONES
A. Establishment: The City Council may designate as a tow zone, all or any portion of any
street, alley, public way, public park, or any municipal parking lot within the City of
Portsmouth.
B. Parking Prohibited: No vehicle shall park or stop nor shall any object be placed within a
tow zone.
C. Posting: Tow zones shall be designated as such by appropriate signs or markers.
D. Removal of Vehicles or Objects: Any vehicle or object remaining in a tow zone for more
than 15 minutes may be removed at the direction of the Chief of Police or the Department
of Public Works. Removal of any vehicle or object shall be at the expense and risk of the
owner thereof. The Chief of Police may, for good cause, permit a vehicle or object to
remain in a tow zone, if in his discretion, such vehicle or object does not impede traffic
or adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
E. Limited Parking Areas: City Streets
l. Any vehicle or object remaining in the same location in any controlled parking
area for more than 24 hours beyond that time limit established for such area may
be removed in the manner provided in Section 7.1000 D.
2. Any vehicle or object remaining in the same location in any uncontrolled parking
lot for more than 72 hours may be removed in the manner provided in
Section 7.1000 D.
3. Any vehicle or object remaining in the same location in any uncontrolled onstreet
parking space for more than 24hours in the Central Business Districts A and
B as bounded and shown on the City of Portsmouth Zoning Map, or more than 72
hours in any other location in the City, may be removed in the manner provided in
Section 7.1000 D.
4. Nothing herein shall take precedence over any Ordinance relating to the removal
of vehicles interfering with snow removal or emergency operations.
Section 7.1001: TOW ZONES
A. The following areas are designated as tow zones:
l. Andrew Jarvis Drive (southerly side)
2. Atkinson Street (both sides from State Street to Court Street)
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 69 Chapter 7
3. Borthwick Avenue (from the Route #1 Bypass 4,118 feet more or less to the
intersection of Borthwick Avenue with the northernmost driveway of Liberty
Mutual Insurance Company, southerly side)
4. Ceres Street (both sides from Bow Street to Market Street)
5. Chestnut Street (both sides from Congress Street to Porter Street)
6. Congress Street Bus Stop #A1
7. Court Street
a. (northerly side from Marcy Street to Pleasant Street with the exception of
121 feet in front of the Court Street Park)
b. (southerly side from Pleasant Street to Atkinson Street and the first
118 feet westerly from Marcy Street)
8. District Court House (nine spaces in the parking lot designated as reserved for
judges, police and other court personnel between 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday)
9. Gates Street (south side from Pleasant Street to Mechanic Street between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. June 15th to August 15th)
10. Hancock Street (southerly side, between Washington and Marcy Streets.)
11. Marcy Street
a. (west side from State Street to Pleasant Street between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and l0:00 p.m. June 15th to August 15th)
b. (east side from a point 133 feet southeasterly from the intersection with
State Street south for a distance of 40 feet)
c. (east side from the intersection of State Street to Pleasant Street between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and l0:00 p.m. Memorial Day through midnight
Labor Day)
12. Market Square Bus Stop #E1
13. Market Square Fire Lane (a strip 10 feet wide on the easterly side of
Market Square starting at a point in the street 27 feet from the easterly curb at the
point of intersection of said square and Daniel Street thence running in a
southerly direction parallel to the sidewalk on Market Square a distance of 114
feet)
14. Market Street:
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 70 Chapter 7
a. (westerly side from the southerly boundary line of the Moffatt Ladd House
running northerly to the intersection of Deer Street)
b. (easterly side from the intersection of Ceres Street running southerly along
Market Street a distance of 224 feet)
c. Easterly side of Market Street at a point across from Ladd Street; to total a
distance of 29' 5" which constitutes the existing area between No Parking
signs during the hours of 6:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday through
Saturday
15. Mechanic Street (southerly side from Marcy Street to the Pierce Island Bridge)
16. Penhallow Street (westerly side from the intersection of Custom House Alley and
Penhallow Street continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 45 feet)
17. Pierce Island Access Road (northerly side from a point 270 feet east of the
intersection of Marcy Street and Mechanic Street easterly for a distance of
900 feet and the southerly side from a point 364 feet east of the intersection of
Marcy Street and Mechanic Street easterly for a distance of 806 feet)
18. Porter Street – Both sides between Church Street and Pleasant Street.
19. Prescott Park (the paved vehicle accessway inside the Dutton Avenue entrance
extending approximately 43 feet southerly and 77 feet easterly from said entrance
to an area designated for parking)
20. Prospect Street (northwesterly side)
21. Sheafe Street (northerly side from the intersection of Sheafe and Penhallow
Streets easterly a distance of 61 feet)
22. Summit Avenue (easterly side)
23. State Street (northerly side from the intersection of Summer Street running
easterly on said State Street a distance of 263 feet)
24. Washington Street (westerly side from State Street to Court Street and the first
300 feet southerly from Court Street)
25. Whidden Street (southerly side from Pleasant Street to South Mill Pond)
26. Taxi Stands (areas designated by Ordinance as taxi stands during the hours in
which they are designated to be so used)
27. All sidewalks, intersections, crosswalks and areas within 15 feet of hydrants or
within 20 feet of crosswalks and intersections.
28. Areas designated as reserved parking for the walking disabled for any vehicle not
displaying a license plate, decal or card issued pursuant to RSA 260:18-a.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 71 Chapter 7
29. Following Public Parking Lots:
a. Bridge Street Lot (two spaces)
b. Court House Lot (one space)
c. High/Hanover Lot (two spaces)
d. Library Lot (two spaces)
e. Worth Plaza Lot (four spaces)
Section 7.1002: SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS
A. The Director of Public Works shall be empowered to prohibit parking on designated
public streets for the purpose of removing accumulated snow.
B. Prior to declaring such a parking ban, the Director of Public Works shall notify the local
media, radio, newspapers and television. The Director of Public Works shall provide as
much advance notice of the impending parking ban as is possible under the
circumstances.
C. The notification shall designate, either by street name or by district, such as "Central
Business Districts", what portions of the City will be subject to the parking ban.
D. The Director of Public Works shall cause, prior to initiating the parking ban, appropriate
signage to be posted in the downtown Central Business district indicating when the
parking ban will be in effect and where available off-street public parking exists.
Section 7.1003: EXCEPTIONS
A. Buses lawfully parked in Bus Stops #A1 and E1 as per Section 7A.401 will not be towed.
B. Taxis lawfully parked in Taxi stands during permitted hours.
C. Vehicles in the process of loading or unloading but in no event shall such vehicles be left
unattended or so parked for more than 15 minutes.
Section 7.1004: TOWING OR IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR
NON-PAYMENT OF PARKING FINES
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these Ordinances, motor vehicles may be towed
and stored, or otherwise immobilized by a mechanical device for non-payment of parking
fines, in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
1. PARKING CLERKS: The City Manager is hereby authorized to designate one or
more Parking Clerks. The Parking Clerk may be any individual employed by the
City of Portsmouth whose position of employment is conducive to the
performance of the duties contained in this section.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 72 Chapter 7
2. OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: The fact that a motor vehicle which is illegally
parked is registered in the name of a person, business, or corporation, shall be
considered prima facie proof that such person, business, or corporation was in
control of the motor vehicle at the time of such parking or that such person,
business, or corporation had authorized the use of such registered motor vehicle.
3. ILLEGALLY PARKED: The term "illegally parked" as used in this particular
section and all other sections concerning PARKING in the Ordinances of the City
of Portsmouth shall mean:
Any motor vehicle which is parked beyond the time limit for which money has
been deposited in the metered space occupied by that particular motor vehicle,
any vehicle parked beyond the time limit permitted in a restricted time free
parking area, any vehicle parked beyond the time permitted at a restricted timemetered
parking space, any vehicle parked in a designated no-parking zone, and
any vehicle although legally parked, which on that particular date and time, has
accumulated five or more unpaid parking violations or which has accumulated
unpaid parking violations in an amount in excess of one hundred twenty-five
dollars ($125.00) on any or all vehicles at any time registered to the owner of said
vehicle as shown on the records maintained by the Parking Clerk.
4. NOTICE: At any time subsequent to the accumulation of unpaid parking fines in
excess of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) on any or all vehicles at the
time registered to the owner of any vehicle on the records maintained by the
Parking Clerk, the Parking Clerk may send a Notice by certified mail to the
registered owner of said vehicle or vehicles at the address on the registration.
a. The date, time, and location of the violations leading to the issuance of the
notice;
b. A statement to the clear effect that failure to resolve the violations prior to
a certain specified date not less than five (5) days subsequent to the date of
the notice, will lead to towing or immobilization of the vehicle pending
such resolution;
c. A statement that the recipient of the notice may contact the Parking Clerk
to arrange a hearing on the subject of the violations.
5. HEARING: At the request of any recipient of a notice pursuant to this section,
the Parking Clerk shall arrange a hearing at the Clerk's office. Such hearing shall
be scheduled during normal business hours of City Hall. The Parking Clerk shall
conduct and preside over all hearings scheduled under this section. The hearings
shall be informal and the rules of evidence shall not apply. At such hearings the
owner of the motor vehicle which is the subject of the hearing may present any
defense of law or fact which is relevant to the issue of whether or not the subject
vehicle should be placed on the list of vehicles subject to towing or
immobilization. The decision of the Parking Clerk shall be final, subject only to
judicial review.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 73 Chapter 7
6. TOW OR IMMOBILIZATION LIST: The Parking Clerk shall maintain a list of
vehicles which are subject to being towed and held in storage or immobilized by a
mechanical device pending final resolution of unpaid parking violations.
Contained on this list shall be all motor vehicles for which the notice specified in
Article 4 above was provided. Motor Vehicles shall not be placed on the said list
in the event that the Parking Clerk, after hearing, orders otherwise, or in the event
that the fine is paid in full for all of the violations contained in the notice mailed.
7. TOWING/STORAGE OR IMMOBILIZATION: Upon the determination that
any vehicle which is listed on the Tow or Immobilization List pursuant to Article
6 above is parked on any public way or in any municipal parking lot, the car may
be immobilized or may be towed and stored.
8. RELEASE OF TOWED OR IMMOBILIZED VEHICLES; REMOVAL FROM
LIST: Motor Vehicles may be removed from the Tow or Immobilization List,
released from storage after towing or may have immobilization devices removed
in the following manner:
(1) By order of the Parking Clerk after hearing;
(2) By payment in full of all parking fines attributable, arising out of the
violations contained in the notice issued pursuant to Article 4 above;
(3) By posting a cash bond with the Parking Clerk in any amount sufficient to
make payment in full of all parking fines arising out of the violations
contained in the notice issued pursuant to Article 4 above to allow a
judicial determination of the violations pursuant to State law;
(4) By a judicial determination resolving the said violations in accordance
with State Law and the payment of any fine arising out of such
determination.
(5) Any person removing an immobilization device without authority shall be
guilty of a violation punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00.
B. In the event that a motor vehicle has been towed or immobilized pursuant to this section,
a further pre-condition to release of the vehicle shall be payment by the party desiring the
release of the vehicle of all fees and charges incurred by the City for the towing and
storage of the vehicle.
Section 7.1005: PREVIOUS ORDINANCES
All Ordinances previously enacted that conflict with the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed null and void.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 74 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XI: SPEED LIMITS
Section 7.1100: SPEED LIMITS
Where a lower speed is not required for compliance with RSA 262-A, the speed limit of any
motor vehicle not in excess of the limit specified in this subsection shall be prima facie lawful,
but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this subsection shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable and prudent and that it is unlawful.
A. Speed Limit: 5MPH
1. Ceres Street
B. Speed Limit: 10MPH
1. Mt. Vernon Street
C. Speed Limit: 15 MPH
1. Circuit Road
2. Cutts Avenue
3. Daniel Street
4. Market Street (between Deer and Daniel Street)
5. Profile Avenue
6. Rockhill Avenue
7. Russell Street
8. Shaw Road
9. Walker Bungalow Road
10. Weald Road
11. Wedgewood Road
12. Winsor Road
D. Speed Limit: 20 MPH
1. Adams Avenue
2. Aldrich Road
3. Anne Avenue
4. Arthur Road
5. Atkinson Street
6. Austin Street
7. Bartlett Street
8. Broad Street
9. Buckminster Way
10. Cabot Street
11. Cass Street
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 75 Chapter 7
12. Circuit Road
13. Cleveland Drive
14. Clinton Street
15. Colonial Drive
16. Concord Way
17. Coolidge Drive
18. Cottage Street
19. Crescent Way
20. Decatur Road
21. Dennett Street
22. Doris Avenue
23. Dwight Avenue
24. Echo Avenue
25. Edgewood Road
26. Edward Street
27. Elwyn Road Ext.
28. Essex Avenue
29. F.W. Hartford Drive
30. Falkland Way
31. Farm Lane
32. Fillmore Road
33. Franklin Street
34. Gardner Street
35. Garfield Road
36. Gates Street
37. Georges Terrace
38. Gosport Road
39. Grant Avenue
40. Greenleaf Avenue
41. Greenside Avenue
42. Hall Court
43. Hancock Street
44. Harding Road
45. Harrison Avenue
46. Harvard Street
47. Hillcrest Drive
48. Holly Lane
49. Holmes Court
50. Hoover Drive
51. Howard Street
52. Humphrey's Court
53. Hunking Street
54. Joan Avenue
55. Jones Avenue
56. Leavitt Avenue
57. Leslie Drive
58. Lincoln Avenue
59. Livermore Street
60. Madison Street
61. Manning Street
62. Marcy Street
63. Mason Avenue
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 76 Chapter 7
64. McClintock Street
65. McDonough Street
66. McKinley Road
67. Mechanic Street
68. Melcher Street
69. Mill Street
70. Moffatt Street
71. Newcastle Avenue
72. Newton Avenue
73. Nixon Park
74. Odiorne Point Road
75. Partridge Street
76. Peirce Island Road
77. Pickering Street
78. Pierce Place
79. Pine Street
80. Polk Avenue
81. Porpoise Way
82. Pray Street
83. Preble Way
84. Raleigh Way
85. Regina Road
86. Ricci Avenue
87. Richards Avenue
88. Richmond Street
89. Robert Avenue
90. Salter Street
91. Saratoga Way
92. Schurman Avenue
93. Sheffield Road
94. Sherburne Road
95. Simonds Road
96. South Street (from Ward's
Corner to Blue Fin Market)
97. Stark Street
98. State Street
99. Sutton Avenue
100. Suzanne Drive
101. Swett Avenue
102. T.J. Gamester Avenue
103. Taft Road
104. Taylor Court
105. Taylor Lane
106. Thaxter Road
107. Thornton Street
108. Truman Place
109. Tyler Place
110. Union Street
111. Van Buren Avenue
112. Victory Road
113. Walden Street
114. Wallis Road
115. Walton Street
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 77 Chapter 7
116. Washington Street
117. Wentworth Street
118. Whidden Street
119. Whipple Court
120. Wibird Street
121. Willard Street
122. Wilson Road
123. Witmer Avenue
124. Woodbury Avenue from
Dennett Street to Bartlett
Street
125. Woodlawn Circle
126. Woodworth Avenue
127. Worthen Road
E. Speed Limit: 25 MPH
1. Arthur Brady Drive (fka Omne Road)
2. Borthwick Avenue from Greenland Road to the northern most driveway of
Jackson Gray Medical Building.
3. Dodge Avenue
3. Elwyn Road
4. Greenland Road – between New Hampshire Route 33 and the municipal boundary
of Portsmouth and Greenland
5. Maplewood Avenue from Woodbury Avenue to Islington St
6. Market Street between the intersection at Nobles Island and Deer Street
7. Osprey Drive
8. Peverly Hill Road
9. Portsmouth Boulevard
10. Spinney Road
11. Woodbury Avenue from Market to Dennett St Intersection
F. Speed Limit: 30 MPH
1. Gosling Road
G. Speed Limit: 35 MPH
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 78 Chapter 7
1. Borthwick Avenue from northern most driveway of Jackson Gray Medical
Building to Route 1 ByPass
2. Market Street (except that portion between the Nobles Island intersection and
Deer Street which shall be 25 mph, see Section E and between Deer Street and
Daniel Street which shall be 15 mph, see Section C)
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 79 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XII: PARKING FOR THE WALKING DISABLED
Section 7.1200: PARKING FOR THE WALKING DISABLED
A. The City Council may designate portions of any street, alley, public way, public park or
municipal parking lot within the City of Portsmouth as reserved for parking vehicles
displaying special license plates, decals or cards issued to persons with walking
disabilities pursuant to state law;
B. Such reserved areas shall be marked by the international accessibility symbol;
C. No vehicle shall be parked in areas designated as reserved parking for the walking
disabled unless it displays the requisite license plate, decal or card.
D. It shall not be a defense to a complaint alleging failure to display the required license
plate, decal or card that the owner or operator neglected to display an otherwise valid
plate, decal or card.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 80 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XIII: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT - SNOWPLOWS
Section 7.1300: EMERGENCY LIGHTS ON SNOWPLOWS
A. All motor vehicles utilized for the plowing of snow on any premises not owned by the
operator of the vehicle shall be equipped with emergency lights. Such emergency lights
shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in RSA 266:74 as may be
from time to time amended and shall be kept in operation at all times during snow
removal operations.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of the terms and conditions of this
chapter shall be fined $50.00.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 81 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XIV: REGISTRATION EXEMPTION FOR PRISONERS OF WAR
Section 7.1400: AUTOMOBILE REGISTRATION
The automobile registration fee is hereby waived so as to permit the registration of one motor
vehicle owned by a person who was captured and incarcerated for thirty (30) days or more while
serving in the Armed Forces in a qualifying war or armed conflict as defined in RSA 72:28, IV,
and who was honorably discharged from the service. Any person applying for this waiver must
provide the City Clerk or her designee with satisfactory proof of the pre-conditions required by
this Ordinance. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted in RSA 261:157-a.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 82 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XV: EMERGENCY LANES
Section 7.1500: GENERAL LOCATIONS
For places of public assembly, or any non-residential structure with a gross first floor area of
over three thousand (3000) square feet, or any building containing more than seven (7) dwelling
units, the Fire Chief and Traffic and Safety Committee, upon joint determination that a
hazardous or potentially hazardous condition exists or may exist, may request the City Council
to establish by ordinance emergency lanes within thirty (30) feet of the above-described
buildings. These provisions shall apply to both new and existing buildings and may be reduced
by the Fire Chief and Traffic and Safety Committee if a lesser distance is all that is reasonably
required or feasible for the provision of access by emergency vehicles.
Section 7.1501: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES
Within established emergency lanes prohibiting parking, the Fire Chief and Traffic and Safety
Committee may require words "No Parking - Fire Lane" to be painted and maintained by the
owner on the macadam of the way or lot in standard traffic-safety size letters. In conjunction
with the painting, the Fire Chief and Traffic and Safety Committee may require the owner to
install and maintain signs reading "No Parking - Fire Lane - Tow Zone" in conspicuous places
but at a distance of no closer than every fifty (50) feet. Such markings and sign installations
shall be accomplished not later than sixty (60) days of written notification by the Fire Chief that
they are required and the specifications which are to be followed.
Section 7.1502: SPECIFIC LOCATIONS
A. Emergency lanes are hereby established at the following locations:
1. 95 Albany Street Extension, starting at the southwest corner of the structure
known as the Malt House Exchange, northerly four hundred fifty (450) feet, then
easterly one hundred sixty-four (164) feet to the southeast corner, eighteen (18)
feet in width from the curb.
2. Central Fire Station, 170 Court Street: starting at the northeast corner of the
building running one hundred (100) feet southwesterly along Court Street to the
southwest corner of the building.
3. 100 Durgin Lane, starting at the easternmost corner of the structure known as
1Costco Wholesale, northerly one hundred seventy-seven (177) feet and westerly
sixty-eight (68) feet from that same corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the
curb.
4. 800 Islington Street, starting at the northeast corner of one of the two structures
known as Plaza 800, southerly three hundred ninety-five (395) feet to the
southeasterly corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 83 Chapter 7
5. City Hall and Police Station, One Junkins Avenue, one hundred ten (110) feet in
length, eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
6. Seybolt Building, One Junkins Avenue, one hundred three (103) in length,
eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
7. -581 Lafayette Road, starting at the northwest corner of the structure known as
Canad Cinemas, around the entire perimeter of the structure back to the northwest
corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the foundation of the structure.
8. 599 Lafayette Road, starting at the northwest corner of the structure known as
Bowl A Rama, southerly two hundred forty-five (245) feet, eighteen (18) feet in
width from the curb.
9. 775 Lafayette Road, starting at the northwest corner of the structure known as
Lafayette Plaza, six hundred eighty (680) feet to the southwest corner, eighteen
(18) feet in width from the curb.
10. 2422 Lafayette Road, starting at the northeast corner of the structure known as
Southgate Plaza, three hundred sixty-two (362) feet westerly, then five hundred
(500) feet southerly to the southeast corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the
curb.
11. 2460 Lafayette Road, starting at a point fifty-five (55) feet north of the northeast
corner of the building known as Wal-Mart, southerly two hundred ninety (290)
feet, skipping over ten (10) handicapped parking spaces, starting again and
continuing southerly one hundred and ten (110) feet to the southeast corner, then
westerly sixty-one (61) feet, eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
12. 1500 Lafayette Road, starting at the northeast corner of the structure known as the
Market Basket, southerly six hundred thirty-eight (638) feet to the southeasterly
corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
13. 1465 Woodbury Avenue, starting at the southwest corner of the structure known
as Marshall’s Mall, nine hundred (900) feet northerly to the northwest corner,
eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
14. 1801 Woodbury Avenue, starting at the southwest corner of the structure known
as BJ's Wholesale Club, northerly one hundred eighty (180) feet; then easterly
seventy-three (73) feet from that same corner, eighteen (18) feet in width from the
curb. (1811 Woodbury Ave Deleted 2/22/94)
15. 1981 Woodbury Avenue, starting at the southwest corner of the structure known
as Staples Plaza, easterly one hundred forty (140) feet; then northerly two
hundred thirty-two (232) feet to the northwest corner, eighteen (18) feet in width
from the curb.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 84 Chapter 7
16. 1600 Woodbury Avenue, starting at the northeastern corner of the front face of
the structure known as Durgin Square, southerly and curving along the front face
of the structure seven hundred eight (708) feet, to the southeastern corner,
eighteen (18) feet in width from the curb.
Section 7.1503: PROHIBITIONS
No motor vehicle may be parked either attended or unattended in any established emergency
lane.
Section 7.1504: PENALTIES
A. Any vehicle left in a duly marked emergency lane may be removed at the direction of the
Chief of Police. Removal of any vehicle shall be at the expense and risk of the owner
thereof.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this Chapter, shall forfeit to the City the sum of $25. In the event that such sum is
not paid within thirty (30) days of the violation, then the person, firm or corporation shall forfeit
to the City the sum of $50. In the event of failure to make such forfeiture, said person, firm or
corporation shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 upon conviction therefore in the
Portsmouth District Court.
Not an official copy
________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 85 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XVI: RESIDENT ONLY PARKING
Section 7.1601: GENERAL STATEMENT
In addition to any other regulations or restrictions which may be placed upon the parking of
vehicles on the following streets, the parking of vehicles at these locations shall be limited on
Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
to vehicles which are registered to persons who reside or entities which are located in the City of
Portsmouth.
Section 7.1602: LOCATIONS
A. Hanover Street – both sides between Brewster Street and Bridge Street
B. Pearl Street – Easterly side of Pearl Street, from a point ninety feet (90’) north of
Islington Street to the corner of Pearl Street and Hanover Street.
Section 7.1603: PENALTY
Whoever violates, or permits or allows anyone in control of their vehicle to violate, this
ordinance shall forfeit to the City of Portsmouth the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In the
event that payment of such forfeiture amount is not made within thirty (30) days of the violation,
forfeiture shall be in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event of failure to make such
forfeiture the violator shall be subject of a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
upon conviction of the violation in the Portsmouth District Court.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 86 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XVII: MOPED REGULATIONS
Section 7.1701: DEFINITION
“Moped” shall mean a motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in one mile is 30 miles per
hour or less; if an internal combustion engine is used, the piston displacement shall not exceed
50 cubic centimeters and the power-driven system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
Section 7.1702: PARKING
Mopeds may park on public sidewalks, provided that they are not parked in a manner that:
A. Impedes the flow of motor vehicle traffic on roadways or the normal and
reasonable movements of pedestrian traffic, including but not limited to
crosswalks, sidewalks, and building entrances.
B. Prevents or impedes the operation of or access to a parking meter, parking pay
station, traffic control device.
C. Hinders or restricts access to handrails or ramps.
D. Hinders, obstructs or impedes the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
E. Mopeds shall not be secured to or parked against a tree.
F. At no time shall a moped be secured or parked against a fire hydrant or
monuments.
G. At no time shall mopeds be left unattended on private property without the
consent of the owner or legal tenant.
H. Mopeds may park on a public way or on public property for a maximum
consecutive time period of 72 hours except in an area signed and otherwise
designated for long-term parking.
Section 7.1703:
A moped parked on a sidewalk shall display a license plate identifying the vehicle as a moped, or
shall display a permit issued by the City of Portsmouth identifying the vehicle as complying with
the definition of a moped as defined in Section 7.1701.
Section 7.1704: PENALTY
Whoever violates, or permits or allows anyone in control of their moped to violate this
ordinance, shall forfeit to the City of Portsmouth the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). In the
event that payment of such forfeiture amount is not made within thirty (30) days of the violation,
forfeiture shall be in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event of failure to make such
forfeiture the violator shall be subject of a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
upon conviction of the violation in the Portsmouth District Court.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 87 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XVIII: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION AND ELECTRIC
VHICLE PARKING SPACES REGULATIONS
Section 7.1801: DEFINITION
“Electric Vehicle” shall mean a vehicle which uses one or more electric motors for propulsion.
“Electric Vehicle Charging Station” shall mean infrastructure that supplies electric energy for
recharging Electric Vehicles.
“Electric Vehicle Charging Station Parking Space” shall mean parking spaces adjacent to
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations that are signed as designated for the exclusive use of Actively
Charging Electric Vehicles.
Section 7.1802: LOCATION OF ELECTRIC CHARGING STATIONS AND
ELECTRIC CHARGING STATION PARKING SPACES
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations will be located in the High Hanover Parking Garage, the
Foundry Parking Garage and the City Hall Lower Lot. Signage for Electric Vehicle Charging
stations will be highly visible in color and use similar markings as No Parking, No Standing, and
Loading Zone Signage.
Section 7.1803: USE OF ELECTRIC CHARGING STATIONS AND ELECTRIC
CHARGING STATION PARKING SPACES
A person with an Electric Vehicle may us an Electric Vehicle Charging Station. The cost of
electricity will be a component of the parking fees charged and those components may change to
reflect priorities and programs that encourage Electric Vehicle adoption. These parking fees
associated with charging will be paid using mobile device technology. These parking fees shall
be established by the City’s Fee Committee. No Electric Vehicle that is not actively charging
will remain at an Electric Vehicle Charging Station Parking Space for more than thirty minutes.
Section 7.1804: PENALTY
Any person who violates the provisions of Article XVIII shall be guilty of a violation and subject
to a fine of $25.00. The Chief of Police or the Department of Public Works shall be authorized
to remove, cause to be removed, or to be towed to a garage, any vehicle found in violation of the
above named Article, said towing and removing to be at the owner’s expense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 88 Chapter 7
ARTICLE XIX – SHARED ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
Section 7.1901: PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to deal with the emerging concept of Shared Active
Transportation in which various types of small, wheeled vehicles such as electric scooters and
bicycles are made available specifically for shared-use by the public. In particular, this
ordinance is adopted to protect against the public safety hazards and visual distractions created
by the indiscriminate placement of vehicles utilized in Shared Active Transportation on the
streets, sidewalks and public areas of the City.
Section 7.1902: SHARED ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
For the purpose of this ordinance Shared Active Transportation shall refer to the concept by
which various types of small, wheeled vehicles are made available for shared-use by the general
public by a Shared Active Transportation Provider. The vehicles used in Shared Active
Transportation (shared vehicles) may include, but shall not be limited to bicycles, e-bicycles,
scooters and e-scooters. Excluded are vehicles subject to registration by the State of New
Hampshire Department of Motor Vehicles.
Section 7. 1903: PARKING OF UNATTENDED SHARED VEHICLES
Unattended shared vehicles may only be parked on streets, sidewalks or other City property in
the following areas:
a. Areas specifically designated and marked by the City for
the parking of shared vehicles, such as bike corrals, bike
racks, or other locations that are designated by the City for
parking of shared vehicles.
b. Areas in which a Shared Active Transportation Provider
has received a license from the City Council pursuant to the
processes for the creation of sidewalk encumbrances for the
purpose of parking shared vehicles.
c. Areas authorized by written contract with the City of
Portsmouth.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 89 Chapter 7
Section 7.1904: ENFORCEMENT
If any shared vehicle is found unattended in violation of the provisions of this ordinance by any
City official, then;
a. If the vehicle has identification indicating the owner of the vehicle and has a
telephone number or an e-mail address for that owner, then the owner shall be
contacted and given two (2) hours to properly park the vehicle.
b. If the vehicle does not contain the ownership information described above, or if
two (2) hours has passed since the owner has been notified that the vehicle is
improperly parked, then the City shall remove the shared vehicle from the street,
sidewalk or other location of improper parking and secure the vehicle in a location to
be determined by the City.
c. If a shared vehicle is left unattended in a manner which blocks pedestrian or
vehicle passage on a sidewalk or street or otherwise creates a public safety hazard it
shall be removed immediately.
d. Whenever a shared vehicle has been removed from the street, sidewalk or public
areas by the City it shall not be returned to the owner unless or until:
i. The owner has provided satisfactory proof that the person making
that request actually owns the shared vehicle; and
ii. The owner has paid a fee to the City in compensation for the
removal of the shared vehicle, as adopted by the City Council
during the annual budget process.
e. Any shared vehicle that has been removed from the street, sidewalk or other
public area in the City and not redeemed as allowed by this ordinance within thirty
(30) days shall be disposed of by the City without compensation to the owner.
Section 7.1905: APPEAL
Any determination made by any City official in connection with the enforcement of this
ordinance may be appealed to the Parking Clerk who shall have the authority to make a final
determination with respect to the issue being appealed.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 8
CHAPTER 8
INCUMBRANCES AND INJURIOUS PRACTICES IN STREETS
Article I Incumbrances 8.101 - 8.130
Article II Parks 8.201 - 8.210
Article III Portsmouth Urban Forestry Ordinance 8.301 - 8.310
Article IV Harbor Ordinance 8.401 - 8.422
Article V Conservation Ordinance 8.501 - 8.505
Article VI Construction Work Requiring Certified Flag Personnel 8.601 - 8.605
Article I: INCUMBRANCES
Section 8.101: INCUMBRANCES, GENERAL
No person shall, without necessity, or license from the City Council, place or leave or cause to
be placed or left, any team, carriage, cart, dray, automobile, truck or other like vehicle or thing in
any street, lane, alley or public place that shall in any way encumber or impede the free passage
thereon or therein.
Section 8.102: PEDDLING PILLS, ETC.
No person shall distribute any headache powders, pills or any drug or substance of a poisonous
nature, from house to house, or from store to store, or in any public street, playground or park.
Section 8.103: DEPOSITING SNOW
No person shall deposit, or cause to be deposited, any ice or snow, which has been removed from
private property, in or upon any street, sidewalk or public place in the City.
Section 8.104: HAULING PAPERS, ETC.
No person shall carry, haul or in any other way take old papers, rags, or other similar material
through any street in said City without having such materials so secured and covered as to
prevent their being scattered about or in any way deposited in any street or other public place in
the City.
Section 8.105: DIGGING UP A STREET
No person shall break or dig up the ground or stones in any street, lane or alley or any sidewalk
or common in the City, or erect any staging for building, or place or deposit any stone, bricks,
timber, or other materials thereon, or remove any building through any street or other public
place without first having obtained a written license from the City Council, and complying in all
respects with the conditions of said license.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 8
Section 8.106: LICENSE TO OBSTRUCT STREET
The City Council may grant a license in writing to any person for the purpose of building or
removing any building or for any other lawful purpose, to dig up, obstruct, or encumber so much
and such parts of any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the City, as may be
necessary for such purpose, and on such terms and conditions as they shall deem safe and proper.
A. Fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording.
(Amended 3/18/2002).
Section 8.107: RAILINGS, LIGHTS, ETC.
Whenever any street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the City shall under license
granted as provided in the preceding section, be dug up, obstructed, encumbered, or otherwise
rendered thereby unsafe or inconvenient for travelers, the person so licensed shall put, and at all
times keep up, a suitable railing or fence around the sections or parts of any street, lane, alley, or
other public place so dug up, and shall also keep two or more lighted lanterns fixed to such
fence, or in some proper manner, every night from twilight in the evening to daylight in the
morning, and within such reasonable time as the City Manager or the Superintendent of Public
Works shall direct, he shall amend and repair such street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public
place, to the acceptance of said City Manager or Superintendent.
Section 8.108: PROJECTIONS FORBIDDEN
No person shall make, erect, maintain or continue any doorstep, portico, entrance or passageway
to any cellar or basement, or any fence or other structure, in or upon any street, lane, alley or
sidewalk within the City.
Section 8.109: GRATINGS
No person shall suffer the platform, or grate of the entrance or passageway to his cellar or
basement, heretofore constructed in any street, lane, alley, or sidewalk, to rise above the even
surface of such street, lane, alley or sidewalk; and every such entrance or passageway shall at all
times be kept covered, when not in immediate use, by a suitable platform or grate; or in case it
shall be kept open, it shall be guarded and protected by a sufficient railing on both sides thereof,
at least two and a half feet high, and well lighted at night.
Section 8.110: DITCHES, ETC. MUST BE RAILED
If any person shall dig or sink, or cause to be dug or sunk, any well, cistern, cellar, drain, or other
cavity in the ground, near to or adjoining any street, lane or alley in the City, or shall suffer any
such cavity or well to remain open on his premises, he shall put up, so long as it shall be
necessary for the purpose, a railing or fence, on or near the line of such street, lane or alley or
otherwise secure said opening or cavity in such manner as sufficiently to guard and protect
travelers and passengers from falling into or being injured thereby.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 8
Section 8.111: DISTURBANCES FORBIDDEN
No person shall remain upon any sidewalk, or upon any doorstep, portico, or other projection,
from any house or other building to the annoyance or disturbance of any person, nor shall any
person, by any noise, gesture or other means, wantonly and designedly frighten any horse in any
street or public place in the City.
Section 8.112: GROUPS IN STREET FORBIDDEN
Three or more persons shall not stand or remain in a group, or near each other, on any sidewalk
or crosswalk, or in any street or public way, in such a manner as to obstruct a free passage
thereon or therein, for a longer time than five minutes after a request made by any person to
move on, and three or more persons standing or remaining in a group, or near each other, on any
sidewalk or crosswalk, or in any public street or public way, in such a manner as to obstruct a
free passage thereon or therein, shall move on immediately after requested to do so by the City
Manager, Chief of Police, or any constable or police officer.
Section 8.113: LOITERING
A. Definitions used in this Ordinance:
l. "Loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall
also include the colloquial expression "hanging around".
2. "Public Place" shall mean any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front
or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of
business, and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as parking lots or other vacant
private property not owned by or under the control of the person charged with
violating this Ordinance or in the case of a minor, not owned or under the control
of his parent or guardian.
3. "Parent or Guardian" shall mean and include any adult person having care or
custody of a minor whether by reason of blood relationship, the order or any court
or otherwise.
B. Certain types of loitering prohibited:
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
l. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of peace;
2. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and
repose of any person;
3. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 8
4. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place as
defined in Section A.2. This paragraph shall include the making of unsolicited
remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
C. Discretion of the Police Officer:
Whenever any police officer shall, in exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the
presence of any person in any public place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in
Section B., he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and
safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this Ordinance.
D. Loitering by Minors:
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly permit that
minor to loiter in violation of this Ordinance.
E. Notice of Violation:
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this
Ordinance, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the Chief of Police or
any other person designated by him to give such notice.
Section 8.114: AWNING AND SIGNS
No person shall place or establish any sign, awning or shade before his usual place of business or
dwelling house, over any part of any street or sidewalk, unless the same be safety fixed and
supported so as in no way in inconvenience pedestrians, and so that the lowest part of such sign,
awning or shade shall be at least 7 feet in height above the sidewalk.
Section 8.115: ANIMALS IN STREETS
No person shall suffer or allow any horses, mules, asses, meat cattle, sheep or swine, owned by
him or being in his care, to go at large without a keeper, in any street, highway, common or
public place, or being in charge of such keeper to pass along and travel over any sidewalk in any
compact part of the City.
Section 8.116: SALE OF ANIMALS
No person shall expose for sale or suffer to remain, any herds of horses, mules, asses, meat
cattle, swine or sheep, within the compact part of the City, in any street, highway, common or
public place, except in such places as shall be approved by the City Manager.
Section 8.117: POSTING FORBIDDEN
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 8
No person shall in any manner paint, put upon or affix, to a fence, bridge, or other structure, or
upon a rock or other natural object, or the property of another, without his consent, any device,
trademark, advertisement or notice.
Section 8.118: HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
No hawker, peddler, or itinerant merchant shall cry any goods, wares or merchandise, nor shall
any person whether employed by such hawker, peddler or itinerant merchant, or otherwise, call
attention to or advertise such merchandise by any words or sounds or by the blowing of horns or
other instruments, or by any unusual noise, in or upon any public street, lane, alley or place.
Section 8.119: HAWKERS' WAGON
No hawker or peddler shall allow any wagon or other vehicle owned by him or in his charge to
stand or remain upon the corner of any street or at or near the junction of any two streets for the
sale of goods, wares or merchandise therefrom.
Section 8.120: DISPLAYING MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALK
No person shall sell, or expose for sale or place or cause to be placed in or over a space
exceeding 24" (twenty-four inches) nearest the premises occupied by such person, on any
sidewalk of any street, lane, or public place in this City, any article of any kind.
Section 8.121: CUTTING SHADE TREES
No person or persons shall without first had and obtained from the City Council, dig up, remove,
destroy, or mutilate any shade tree situated and growing within the limits of any public street or
highway in passing through this City.
Section 8.122: FIREWORKS, ETC., RESTRICTED
No person shall exhibit any fireworks, or discharge any rockets, squibs, crackers or any
preparation of gunpowder, or discharge any cannon, or other firearms, within the compact part of
the City, on any street, highway, common or public place, unless by permission of the City
Manager, the City Council, or Police Commissioners.
Section 8.123: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage or alcoholic liquor as defined
in Chapter 175 of the N.H.R.S.A., upon any public highway, or while on any public sidewalk,
municipal parking lot or municipal park within the City of Portsmouth.
This provision shall not apply to that portion of the highway, sidewalk, municipal parking lot,
municipal park or mall that has been specifically leased to any private individual or concern for
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 8
the purpose of establishing an outdoor restaurant or cafe, providing said restaurant or cafe meets
all the requirements established by the City of Portsmouth.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, consume, or possess in an open can, bottle, or other
container, any alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 175 of the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated while upon property owned or under the control of the City of Portsmouth,
unless such property is the subject of a lease with the City of Portsmouth expressly allowing
such activities. (Adopted 8/1/94)
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, which alleges that a person has had one
or more convictions under this ordinance within five (5) years preceding the date of the
subsequent offense, the person shall be subject to the following penalties:
First Offense $ 40
Second Offense $ 60
Third Offense $ 80
fourth and each subsequent
offense
$100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of Court of
the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under this ordinance.
(Amended 12/15/97)
Section 8.124: BENCHES
A. No person shall sit or stand upon the back or stand upon the seat of any municipally
owned bench. (Adopted 10/6/86)
B. No person shall continue to sit, stand or lounge in the area immediately adjacent to any
municipally owned bench after having been requested to move on by any Police Officer,
and at no time after such a request has been made by a Police Officer shall any person to
whom such a request is made return and sit or stand or lounge in the area immediately
adjacent to any municipally owned bench. (Adopted 10/6/86)
Section 8.125: IDENTIFICATION OF CERTAIN WORKERS
Every person, whether in the employ of the City or any private corporation, whose duty it shall
be to visit private residence or building for the purposes of examining electric, gas and water
meters or pipes or for the purpose of inspecting drains or chimneys shall wear, while making
such a visit, a suitable badge or other distinctive mark, indicating his employment or authority.
(Adopted 10/6/86)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 8
Section 8.126: CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
No person shall consume or possess in an open can, bottle, or other container, any alcoholic
liquor or beverage as defined by Chapter 175 of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated,
while upon or in a motor vehicle upon any public way, as defined by Chapter 259:1 of the New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, or any public sidewalk, public park or municipal parking
lot within the City of Portsmouth. (Adopted 10/6/86)
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, which alleges that a person has had one
or more convictions under this ordinance within five (5) years preceding the date of the
subsequent offense, the person shall be subject to the following penalties:
First Offense $40
second offense $60
third offense $80
fourth and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of Court of
the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under this ordinance.
(Amended 12/15/97)
Section 8.127: PRIVATE PROPERTY RIGHTS
A. No person shall enter or remain upon the property of another if such a person knows he is
not licensed and privileged to do so. (Adopted 10/6/86)
B. No person shall purposely damage the property of another if such a person has no right to
do so. (Adopted 10/6/86)
C. No person shall willfully conceal the goods of any store while upon the premises of such
store unless such person is authorized to do so. (Adopted 10/6/86)
D. No person shall possess the property of another with intent to deprive the owner thereof,
knowing that such property is stolen. (Adopted 10/6/86)
Section 8.128: PUBLIC PEACE (Adopted 10/6/86)
A. No person shall knowingly create a condition which is physically offensive or hazardous
to that person or another in a public place by any act which serves no legitimate purpose.
B. No person shall with the primary purpose of causing a breach of peace, public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm:
1. Disrupt the orderly conduct of business in a public or governmental facility;
2. Disrupt any lawful assembly of persons unless such person has lawful authority to
do so;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 8
3. Be present in a public place where that person's presence substantially interferes
with a criminal investigation, firefighting operation as defined in RSA 154:17, or
the provision of any emergency service where such services require traffic or
pedestrian management;
4. Refuse to comply with the lawful order of a police officer to move from a public
place.
C. No person shall recklessly risk causing a breach of the peace, public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm by:
1. Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior in a public
place;
2. Directing at another person in a public place obscene or offensive words which
are likely to provoke a violent reaction on the part of an ordinary person;
3. Making loud or unreasonable noises in a public place or making loud or
unreasonable noises in a private place that can be heard in a public place or other
private places, and such noises would disturb a person of average sensitivity;
4. Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic or potentially obstructing vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on a public way or sidewalk or the entrance to any public
building.
D. No person shall urinate or defecate in public.
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, which alleges that a person has
had one or more convictions under this ordinance within five (5) years preceding the date
of the subsequent offense, the person shall be subject to the following penalties:
First offense $60
Second offense $80
Third and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of
Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under
this ordinance. (Amended 12/15/97)
E. No person shall operate any vehicle including motorcycles at any place within the City of
Portsmouth in any manner hereafter described:
1. Misuse of power exceeding tire traction limits in acceleration, sometimes known
as "laying down rubber" or "peeling rubber", or;
2. Misuse of braking power exceeding tire traction limits in deceleration where there
is no emergency, or;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 8
3. Rapid acceleration by means by quick upshifting of transmission gears with either
a clutch and manual transmission or automatic transmission, or;
4. Rapid deceleration by means of quick downshifting or transmission gears with
either a clutch or manual transmission or an automatic transmission, or;
5. Racing of engines by manipulation of the acceleration, gas pedal, carburetor, or
gear selection whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still, or;
6. The blowing of any horn except as a warning signal or the use of any other noisemaking
device whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still.
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, which alleges that a person has
had one or more convictions under this ordinance within five (5) years preceding the date
of the subsequent offense, the person shall be subject to the following penalties:
First offense $50
Second offense $75
Third and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of
Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under
this ordinance. (Amended 12/15/97)
Section 8.129: SCOPE, SIGNS INCLUDED
A. This ordinance shall apply to all signs placed in, on or over the public right-of-way
relating to temporary events, including, but not limited to:
1. Signs concerning temporary events;
2. Home for Sale signs and other “For Sale” signs relating to property offered for
sale;
3. Political advertising;
4. Signs advertising services such as painting, carpentry, plumbing and electrical;
5. Any other sign not erected pursuant to a valid City sign permit or express
authorization from the City Council;
All such signs shall be called “temporary signs” in this ordinance.
B. Temporary Signs On City Property Prohibited
1. No person shall post any temporary sign on any street, park, lot, right-of-way or
other property owned by the City with the following exceptions:
a. Signs posted by candidates for elected office;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 8
b. Real estate “for sale” signs located immediately adjacent to the premises
being offered for sale;
c. Real estate directional signs which do not identify a particular realtor, and
which do not exceed two square feet in total area which may be posted at
street corners to indicate that a property is for sale on a particular street.
(Amended 1/27/97)
C. Removal Required
Each permitted temporary sign displayed anywhere in the City in the public right-of-way shall be
removed not more than fifteen days after the event, sale or other matter to which the sign refers.
(Amended 12/17/2001)
Section 8.130: PENALTY
Unless otherwise provided in this Article, a person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter is punishable by a fine of up to $1,000. (Section 8.131 deleted in its entirety and
replaced 12/15/97)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 8
ARTICLE II: PARKS
Section 8.201: DEFINITIONS
A. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
l. "City" is the City of Portsmouth.
2. "Director" is a person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities,
and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.
3. "Park" is a park, reservation, playground, swimming pool, recreation center, or
any other area in the City and devoted to active or passive recreation.
4. "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
5. "Vehicle" is any wheeled conveyance, whether animal drawn, motor powered, or
self propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service of
the City parks.
Section 8.202: PARK PROPERTY
A. Buildings and Property
No person in a park shall:
l. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any
paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or part or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever,
either real or personal.
2. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary
condition. No person over the age of 5 years shall use the restrooms and
washrooms of the opposite sex.
3. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not or any soil, rock,
stones, trees, shrubs, plants, down-timber or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
4. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent
or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or
across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 8
B. Trees, Shrubbery, Lawns
No person in a park shall:
l. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or
pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any
rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig or in
other ways disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area.
2. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings,
fences, or gun carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily
used for such purposes.
3. Tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree or plant.
C. Wild Animals, Birds, Etc.
No person in a park shall:
l. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any
animal, reptile, bird or shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any
wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he
collect, remove, have in his possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or
offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen, alive or dead, of any of the group
of tree snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in those snakes known to be
deadly poisonous such as rattle snakes, moccasins, coral snakes, or other deadly
reptiles, may be killed on sight.
2. Give or offer or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or
other known noxious substances.
D. Dogs
No person shall allow any dog, whether on a leash or off a leash to be in any area in any
park in which the Recreation Department holds scheduled programs. Such areas shall be
posted by the City to indicate that no dogs are allowed at any time. (Amended 5/16/05)
E. Use of Piers, Floats and any other docking locations
The use of piers, floats and any other docking locations at Prescott Park from the
northerly boundary of the park to the Peirce Island Bridge shall be limited and regulated
as follows:
l. No commercial craft shall be secured at any such docking location;
2. No pleasure craft in excess of 70 feet in length shall be secured at any such
docking location without written permission from the Trustees;
3. No craft may be "rafted", (secured to another craft) which is secured at any such
docking location;
4. No craft shall remain secured at the floats in excess of seventy-two (72)
consecutive hours per docking, after which, at least twenty-four (24) hours shall
have elapsed before the craft may be permitted to re-secure except to load or
unload. A craft may be secured in 24-hour increments in excess of 72 hours when
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 8
the dockmaster has determined that there is no other demand for the space;
(Amended 9/21/98)
5. No craft may be docked or secured at any location in Prescott Park other than at
the northerly or southerly floats;
6. One float in both the northerly and southerly sections shall be designated by the
Dock Master for loading and unloading and shall be restricted to one-half hour
use at no cost;
7. Docking Fees:
a Emergency Docking: (Adopted 6/2/86)
1. When necessary, due to an emergency, any craft shall be permitted
to secure to the pier or floats, without charge, for up to four hours,
after which, docking fees will be assessed;
2. "Emergency" is a sudden unexpected happening requiring the
immediate attention of the operator or a passenger of the craft.
b. Daytime docking fees to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article XVI or similar wording. (Amended 3/18/2002).
c. Persons wishing to secure a craft for a twenty-four (24) hour period shall
pay a fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or
similar wording. (Amended 7/9/90) (Amended 3/18/2002).
8. The Dock Master may inquire of the person in charge of any craft to be secured to
the floats, the intended length of stay and may collect in advance the appropriate
fee.
9. Any person, firm, or corporation who secures a craft or allows a craft under its
ownership or control to be secured in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall
be subject to the following:
a. a fine of not more than One Hundred ($100) dollars per day;
b. prosecution under the New Hampshire Criminal Code;
c. a civil assessment payable to the City of Portsmouth in the amount of any
docking fees which are not paid.
10. The provisions of this ordinance shall be posted in plain view at the piers, floats,
and along the seawall at Prescott Park.
(8.202.E Amended 7/9/84 in its entirety; 8.202.E Amended 5/6/85 in its entirety)
F. Dock Master
Enforcement of the provisions of Section 8.202.D of these ordinances and collection of
any and all docking fees created thereunder, shall be within the authority and
responsibility of a Dock Master, who shall be appointed by and be under the direction
and control of the Trustees of Trust Funds. (Adopted 7/9/84)
G. Municipal Floats, Docks and Piers Trust
All fees collected under the provisions of Section 8.202 D shall be held in trust by the
Trustees of the Trust Fund for the purpose of repair, maintenance and safe operation of
municipal floats, docks and piers. (Subsection F adopted 8/18/97)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 8
Section 8.203: SANITATION
A. Pollution of Waters: No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or
cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into
such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in
the pollution of said waters.
B. Refuse and Trash: No person in a park shall have brought in or shall dump, deposit or
leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or
refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
Section 8.204: TRAFFIC
A. State Motor Vehicle Laws Apply: No person in a park shall fail to comply with all
applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and
operation of vehicles together with such regulations as are contained in this and other
Ordinances.
B. Enforcement of Traffic Regulations: No person in a park shall fail to obey all traffic
officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to
direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or
roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations
and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.
C. Obey Traffic Signs: No person in a park shall fail to observe carefully all traffic signs
indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property.
D. Speed of Vehicles: No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed
exceeding 15 mph except upon such roads as the Director may designate, by posted
signs, for speedier travel.
E. Operation Confined to Roads: No person in a park shall drive any vehicle on any area
except the park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion by
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Director.
F. Parking: No person in a park shall:
l. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area and such
use shall be in accordance with the posted directions there at and with the
instructions of any attendant who may be present.
2. Leave any vehicle anywhere in the park with one or more wheels chained or with
motor set in gears and doors locked, or in any manner fixed or arranged so that
such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 8
3. Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park
official.
G. Bicycles: No person in a park shall:
l. Ride a bicycle on other than a vehicular road or park path designated for that
purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over
any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian
travel.
2. Ride a bicycle other than in full compliance with the traffic regulation of the City
of Portsmouth.
3. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or pavement or set against trees, or in any
place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it or leave
bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is
space available.
H. Skateboards and In-line Skates (Roller Blades): In Prescott Park, no person shall ride a
skateboard, or wear either roller skates or in-line skates (Roller Blades). (5/2/94)
Section 8.205: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES
A. Bathing and Swimming: No person in a park shall:
l. Swim, bath or wade in any waters in any park except in such waters and at such
places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulation as are
herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any
waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing,
or congregate threat when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a
finding that such use of the water could be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
2. Frequent any water or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing,
or congregate there at except between such hours of the day as shall be designated
by the Director for such purposes for each individual area.
3. Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit as to indecently expose his
person or call forth merited criticism. No person shall appear in bathing costume
at any place in the parks except within the limits of designated bathing places or
areas, and all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly accepted standards.
4. Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in
such bathing house or structures as may be provided for that purpose.
B. Hunting and Firearms:
No person in a park shall hunt, trap or pursue wild life at any time. No person shall use,
carry or possess firearms of any descriptions or air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows,
slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wild life and dangerous to
human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any
kid of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries if
forbidden.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 8
C. Picnic Areas and Use: No person in a park shall:
l. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when
necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for comfort and
convenience to all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve
this end.
2. Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces together with tables and
benches follows generally the rule of "first come/first served".
3. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein
for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons nor shall any
person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
4. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash
in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage, and other refuse is placed in
the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the
picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
D. Games
No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes
except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or
comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and quoits is prohibited except
on fields and courts provided therefore. Roller-skating and Rollerblading shall be
confined to those areas specifically designated for such activities.
Section 8.206: BEHAVIOR
A. Intoxicating Beverages: No person in a park shall:
l. Have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages
at any time in the park.
2. Have entered or be under the influence of intoxicating liquor at any time in the
park.
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, the person shall be subject
to the following penalties: (4/1/02)
First offense $50
Second offense $75
Third offense and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the
Clerk of Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any
case charged under this ordinance. (12/15/97.)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 8
B. Fireworks and Explosives:
No person in a park shall bring, or have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn any fire-crackers, torpedoes, rockets, or other fireworks or
explosives of flammable materials, or discharge them or throw them into such area from
land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound,
mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
C. Domestic Animals: (deleted in its entirety 10/19/87)
D. Reservation of Facilities
No person in a park shall occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated
by the Director for the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under 6
years of age.
E. Dress
No person in a park shall appear at any place in other than proper clothing. With the
exception of the restricted bathing area, "proper clothing" shall be construed to prohibit
the wearing of trunks or clothing that does not cover the upper portion of the body.
F. Alms
No person in a park shall solicit alms for any purpose, whether public or private. Nonprofit
organizations may solicit contributions during those times when they have been
specifically authorized to use park property by the City Council. (Adopted 3/20/89)
G. Fires
No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No person shall drop, throw, or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
flammable material, within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto.
H. Closed Areas
No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public" nor shall any
person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
I. Games of Chance
No person in a park shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
Raffles shall not be considered a game of chance for the purpose of this section and shall
be permitted by non-profit organizations during those times when they have been
specifically authorized to use park property by the appropriate City department. (4/03/89)
J. Loitering and Boisterousness
No person in a park shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other
areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language,
or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the peace.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 8
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, the person shall be subject to the
following penalties: (Amended 4/1/2002)
First offense $50
Second offense $75
Third and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of
Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under
this ordinance. (Amended 12/15/97)
K. Exhibit Permits
No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Director upon
request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with any Ordinance or rule.
L. Interference with Permittees
No person in a park shall disturb or interfere unreasonable with any person or party
occupying any area, or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
M. No person shall enter or remain in any park when such park is posted as closed pursuant
to Section 8.208 (A).
Upon a conviction of any offense under this ordinance, which alleges that a person has
had one or more convictions under this ordinance within five (5) years preceding the date
of the subsequent offense, the person shall be subject to the following penalties:
First offense $50
Second offense $75
Third and each subsequent offense $100
Any fine to which a violator is subject under this ordinance may be paid to the Clerk of
Court of the Portsmouth District Court at any time prior to trial in any case charged under
this ordinance. (Amended 12/15/97)
Section 8.207: MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
A. Vending and Peddling
No person in a park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station
or place any stand, cart or vehicle for transportation, sale or display of any such article or
thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and
under the authority and regulation of the Director.
Exception is also made for the concession stand at Prescott Park, the operation of which
must be authorized through the City Council. (Adopted 3/20/89)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 8
B. Advertising
No person in a park shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to
any article or service for sale or hire.
C. Signs
No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected
any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
D. Location of Sidewalk Vendors, Peddlers
No vendor or peddler shall station or place one's person, stand, cart or vehicle for
transportation, sale or display of any article or thing in the following locations:
1. A point measured at 124 feet from the corner of State Street and Marcy Street
extending 60 feet in an easterly direction along the northerly sidewalk of Marcy
Street; (Adopted 6/20/88)
2. A point measured at 334 feet from the corner of State Street and Marcy Street
extending 155 feet in an easterly direction along the northerly sidewalk of Marcy
Street. (Adopted 6/20/88)
Section 8.208: PARK OPERATING POLICY
A. Hours
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to the public every
day of the year during hours designated by the City Manager and approved by the
Council. The opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein.
B. Closed Areas
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the Director at
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals
(daily or otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses as the Director shall find
reasonably necessary.
C. Lost and Found Articles
The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the Director who shall
make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The Director shall make every
reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost.
D. Permit
A permit shall be obtained from the appropriate Director before participating in the
following park activity:
1. Application:
a. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application
with the appropriate Director. The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity if any;
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired;
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 8
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
(6) Any other information, which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether, a permit should
issue hereunder.
2. Standards for Issuance
The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
a. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
b. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
c. That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence or crime or disorderly conduct;
d. That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
e. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day
and hour required in the application.
3. Appeal
Within 5 days after receipt of an application, the Director shall apprise an
applicant in writing of his reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person
shall have the right to appeal in writing within 5 days to the City Council, which
shall consider the application under the standards set forth in subsection 2. hereof
and sustain or overrule the Director's decision within 5 days after receipt of said
appeal in regular session. "Regular session" shall mean a regularly scheduled
meeting of the City Council. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
4. Effect of Permit
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable
Ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said permit.
5. Liability of Permittee
The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss,
damage, or injury sustained by an person whatever by reasons of the negligence
of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued.
6. Revocation
The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of
violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good cause shown.
E. Night Fishing on Peirce Island (Adopted 6/3/96)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee is hereby authorized to issue permits to individuals to allow such individuals to
fish from Peirce Island during any period of time when the Island has otherwise been
closed to the public pursuant to this ordinance. The permits shall be issued for a period
of time not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days at the discretion of the Chief. Such
permits shall be issued to any individual requesting the same upon a demonstration by
that individual of proper identification. The permits shall be issued free of charge. Any
permit issued pursuant to this provision must be carried on the person of the permittee at
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 8
all times while on Peirce Island pursuant to the permit and presented upon demand to any
law enforcement officer or municipal official making such demand and shall not be
transferable to any other person. The Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee may refuse
to issue a permit under this provision to any individual who has previously been
convicted of committing any offense within the physical boundaries of Peirce Island.
Section 8.209: PENALTIES
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than $20.00 and not
more than $100.00 for each offense, unless otherwise provided herein. (Amended 12/15/97)
Section 8.210: SEPARABILITY
Should any section, clause, or provision of Article II be declared by the Court to be invalid, the
same shall not effect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
part so declared.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 8
ARTICLE III: PORTSMOUTH URBAN FORESTRY ORDINANCE
(Adopted 10/21/2013 - Replaces former Article III - Street Trees)
Section 8.301: AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted with the authority of RSA 231:139 (et. seq.)
Section 8.302: DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
A. "City" is the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
B. “Tree Warden” is a member of the City Administrative Staff appointed by the
City Manager with an interest in trees and public greenery and may be the
Director of the Department of Public Works of the City or his/her designee. The
Tree Warden shall be appointed in accordance with this Ordinance and in
accordance with State Statute.
C. "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
D. "Street tree" or "Tree" is a tree in a public place on property owned by the City of
Portsmouth or in a public right of way, or easement controlled by the City, and is
defined as a woody plant with a single main stem that has the potential to grow
to at least thirteen (13) feet high and two (2) inches in diameter.
E. “Urban Forest” is defined as trees in any public park, public parking lot, or within
any public right of way within the City of Portsmouth.
F. “Public Greenery” is defined as any vegetation on public property or on public
rights-of-way in the City of Portsmouth whose existence improves the aesthetics
of the area where it is located and contributes to the fabric of the City of
Portsmouth in a positive manner.
Section 8.303: FINDINGS
The value of urban trees can hardly be overstated. In addition to conferring significant
environmental value they provide equally important psychological benefits. What was said in
the early 1800’s remains true today: “There is not a village in America, however badly planned
at first, or ill-built afterwards, that may not be redeemed, in a great measure, by the aid of shade
trees in the streets… and it is never too late or too early to project improvements of this kind.”
[Andrew Jackson Downing (1815-1852)]
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 8
Section 8.304: PURPOSE
This Ordinance establishes policies, requirements, and standards to ensure a healthy and
stable urban forest in Portsmouth. Its provisions are enacted to:
1. Establish on public lands and public rights of way, as many trees as can be
maintained in a suitable and aesthetically pleasing way.
2. Encourage the planting of trees that will represent a diversity of species and age
classes and which are not invasive.
3. Regulate and enforce the planting and maintenance of trees on City property.
4. Establish limits on the amount of disturbance of trees that may take place on public
property.
Section 8.305: POLICIES
It shall be the policy of the City to expand the urban forest through the planting of trees
alongside the streets of the City and in City parks and other public places, consistent with the
best arboricultural practices, horticultural practices, aesthetic concerns, and public safety.
Whenever feasible, trees that are removed shall be replaced as soon as possible with one
or more specimens appropriate to the site.
The City shall endeavor to meet the national standards set forth in the Tree City USA
Program so as to qualify annually as a Tree City USA Award-Winning Community.
Section 8.306: TREE WARDEN
The Tree Warden, in consultation with the Trees & Public Greenery Committee, is
charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this Ordinance and all applicable
provisions of state law. The Tree Warden may serve notice to any person in violation of this
Ordinance or, in consultation with the Trees & Public Greenery Committee, may institute legal
proceedings through the Office of the City Attorney.
Section 8.307: AUTHORITY OF THE TREE WARDEN
A. The Tree Warden shall have jurisdiction and supervision over all street trees and
any tree in any park, public right-of-way, easement, or any other public place
within City limits.
B. The Tree Warden, in consultation with the Trees & Public Greenery Committee,
shall have the authority to plant, care for, and replace trees and other plantings.
C. Order to Preserve or Remove:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 8
The Tree Warden shall have the authority, and it shall be the duty of the Tree Warden, to
order the trimming, spraying, preservation, or removal of trees upon property owned by or
controlled by the City, or in any City right of way. The Tree Warden, subject to the approval of
the Trees & Public Greenery Committee, shall take such action necessary to order the removal of
street trees and trees in public places wherever necessary to preserve public safety or to prevent
the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places. No street tree or tree in a public place
having a diameter larger than two (2) inches as measured, four (4) feet above the ground, shall
be removed without approval of the Trees & Public Greenery Committee, after a public hearing,
except where delay in the removal of the tree would pose an imminent threat to public safety or
property.
The Tree Warden shall have the authority, subject to applicable provisions of state law
and municipal ordinance, to order the trimming or removal of a tree on private property if the
Tree Warden deems such tree to be a public hazard.
The Tree Warden or designee shall provide advice to the Site Review Technical
Advisory Committee on tree removal, tree selection, and placement on projects that come before
the Planning Board.
Section 8.308: PROHIBITED ACTS
A. No person or entity (except a public utility with the express written approval of
the Tree Warden, after consultation with the Trees & Public Greenery
Committee) shall cut, prune, injure, affix wires or cables, post notices, or remove
any tree in any public right of way, public park, or other public property.
B. No person shall plant a tree or shrub on City property without first obtaining the
consent of the Tree Warden.
C. Any person planting a tree between the carriage way and the sidewalk in any
public street or highway on which his or her estate is situate shall consult with the
tree warden concerning the location, species, size of the tree, and proper planting
techniques.
Section 8.309: PERMITS REQUIRED
A. No person shall trim, cut, or alter trees in public places without first filing an
application and procuring a permit from the Tree Warden.
B. No person shall remove trees in any public right of way or public place, including
parks or parking lots, without a permit from the Tree Warden, which permit shall
not be granted until after a hearing has been held by the Trees & Public Greenery
Committee. Said hearing shall be a public hearing and shall be held within fortyfive
(45) days from the date of the application for removal.
Upon receipt of an application for removal of a tree, the Tree Warden shall cause
to be attached to any tree sought to be removed, a conspicuous tag of a kind and
color approved by the Tree Warden. Said tag shall be attached to such tree or
trees
not less than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 8
C. No person shall alter or remove any tree shown on a Site Plan approved by the
Planning Board without the approval of the Planning Board or the Planning
Director (as determined by the Planning Board), and no tree located in a public
right of way and shown on a Site Plan shall be removed without approval of the
Planning Board or the Planning Director and without approval of the Trees &
Public Greenery Committee.
D. Application Data: The application required herein shall state the number and kind
of trees to be trimmed, altered, or removed; the kind of treatment to be
administered; the kind and condition of nearest trees upon the adjoining property;
and such other information as the Tree Warden shall find reasonably necessary to
a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
E. Standards for Issuance: The Trees & Public Greenery Committee shall issue an
approval for the removal of a tree only upon the finding that the desired action or
treatment is necessary and that the proposed method and workmanship are
satisfactory. It shall be the duly of the Tree Warden to coordinate with the Public
Works Department all work to be done under a permit issued in accordance with
the terms of this Ordinance. The Tree Warden shall have the authority to affix
reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit.
F. No person shall affix any sign or signs to any public trees except as in B. above.
G. The Tree Warden shall order the issuance of permits for tree removal only after a
public hearing is held by the Trees & Public Greenery Committee and after the
Committee finds that the desired action is necessary and the proposed methods
and workmanship are satisfactory. Except for exigent circumstances, the decisions
of the Tree Warden shall be subject to prior review and approval by the Trees &
Public Greenery Committee, which will consider the following: (1) the reason for
the request; (2) the health of the tree; and (3) the importance of the tree to the
streetscape and/or neighborhood.
Section 8.310: ENFORCEMENT
A. Any person, natural or otherwise, who violates a provision of this ordinance, shall
be:
a. Subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation; and
b. Shall be liable to the City of Portsmouth for all costs of treating, restoring,
or replacing any trees or public greenery under the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance or the Tree Warden, as well as other damages allowed by law.
B. This ordinance may be enforced by means of a civil action seeking injunctive
relief.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 8
ARTICLE IV: HARBOR ORDINANCE
Section 8.401: HARBOR LIMITS
A. The City Council of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire hereby ordains that it is in
the best interest of said community that rules and regulations concerning the use of its'
harbor waters be adopted to insure the safe and orderly development of this natural
resource.
B. The Harbor Master referred to throughout the City of Portsmouth Harbor Ordinance will
be the Harbor Master as appointed by the New Hampshire Port Authority.
C. The Harbor Limits of the City of Portsmouth for the purposes of this Ordinance shall be
defined as follows:
"That portion of Portsmouth Harbor lying within Little Harbor, Sagamore Creek, the
Piscataqua River (within the boundaries of the State of New Hampshire) to the extension
of Gosling Road running southeasterly from southerly end of Shapleigh's Island."
D. The following port regulations shall apply to the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
Section 8.402: ANCHORAGES
No person shall place or allow to anchor or lie any steamer, vessel, boat or other craft in any
position in the Portsmouth Harbor as heretofore defined as is prohibited by any Ordinance, rule
or regulation.
Section 8.403: ANNOYANCE
No watercraft shall be operated in the Harbor so as to cause annoyance, disturbance or
inconvenience to the public.
Section 8.404: MOORING (PLACE AND TYPE ESTABLISHED)
The Harbor Master shall assign and indicate to the Master or Owner of boats and vessels the
location which they may occupy with or for mooring purposes, the kind of mooring to be used,
and shall change the location of said moorings from time to time when a crowded condition of
such Harbor or other conditions render such change desirable; he shall assign mooring privileges
in such orders in all cases where individuals who own the shore rights or have interest in the
same are complainants and shall locate suitable mooring privileges therefore for boats and
vessels, temporarily or permanently as the case may be, fronting their land, if so requested, but
not thereby to encroach upon a natural channel or channels established by said Harbor Master
and approved by the City Council.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 8
Section 8.405: MOORING (PENALTY FOR NEGLECTING TO REMOVE OR
REPLACE)
In case of neglect or refusal of the master or owner of any boat or vessel to remove this mooring
or to replace it by one of different character, when so directed by the Harbor Master, said Harbor
Master shall cause said mooring to be removed, or shall make such change in the character
thereof as required, and shall collect from the master or owner of such boat or vessel the sum of
$20.00 for either of such services rendered and also the necessary expenses.
Section 8.406: VESSELS OBSTRUCTING ANCHORAGE TO BE REMOVED
The Harbor Master shall, upon complaint to him by the master, owner or agent of any vessel,
cause any other vessel or vessels obstructing the free movement or safe anchorage of such vessel
to remove to a position to be designated by him and to cause, without any complaint being made
to him any vessels anchoring within the channel lines established as provided by law to remove
to such anchorage as he may designate.
Whoever neglects or refuses to obey the orders of the Harbor Master shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment of not more than 60 days,
or by a fine of not more than $20.00 or by both such fine and imprisonment. If such vessel has
no crew on board, or if the master or other person in charge neglects or refuses to move such
vessel as directed by the Harbor Master, then and in that case the Harbor Master may put a
suitable crew on board and move said vessel to a suitable berth at a wharf or anchorage at the
cost of the crew for removing such vessel the Harbor Master may collect by suit.
Section 8.407: NAVIGATION INJURED (FROM VESSEL)
If any owner, owners or master of any vessel, or any other person shall cast or throw, or cause or
suffer to be cast or thrown from their vessels, or from any other place, any stone, sand or other
ballast or any other thing into the channel of said Portsmouth Harbor, whereby the navigation of
the same may be obstructed, he or they shall forfeit and pay for each offense a sum, as set forth
in the State Litter Law currently in effect.
Section 8.408: OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS
No person shall fail to observe any lawful order of the Harbor Master with reference to the
navigation and disposal of his watercraft within the limits of the Harbor. Any person who shall
obstruct or hinder the Harbor Master in the lawful performance of his duties shall forfeit and pay
for each offense a sum not less than $10.00, nor more than $20.00, to be recovered on complaint
by the Harbor Master. The Harbor Master may arrest and deliver to the Police Department on
shore any person committing an assault upon him or another person acting under his authority.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 8
Section 8.409: RAFTS
Owner of rafts shall be subject to all of the provisions herein regarding vessels, except those
provisions, which by their very nature can have no application.
Section 8.410: WHARVES (OBSTRUCTION)
No owner or master of any steamer, vessel, boat or watercraft of any kind shall permit or suffer
his watercraft to be more than one tier deep, or in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage
of other vessels going in and coming out, at any wharf in the City, after the master or owner of
such vessel shall have been directed to remove the same by the Harbor Master.
Section 8.411: WHARVES (REMOVAL OF VESSELS)
The Harbor Master is hereby authorized, and it shall be his duty to remove or cause to be
removed any vessel or boat from any wharf in port of Portsmouth when so requested by the
owner of said wharf; and whenever he shall deem it necessary he shall remove or cause to be
removed any vessel lying in tier, and if any vessel, boat or raft shall anchor or lie contrary to any
ordinance, rule or regulation, said Harbor Master shall forthwith give notice to the owner or
master thereof, or the person having the care of same, to remove the same and if the said notice
be not complied with without delay, the Harbor Master shall make or cause said removal, at the
expense of said vessel, boat or raft.
Section 8.412: ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the Harbor Master to enforce all of the provisions of this ordinance, and of
all lawfully promulgated rules and regulations pertaining to the Harbor and waterfront of the
City of Portsmouth, and watercraft by causing the person or persons offending, to be prosecuted,
for the penalty or penalties incurred, immediately upon the violation of any of the provisions of
said ordinance, rules or regulations.
Section 8.413: PENALTY
The master, owner or owners of any vessel, boat or raft or any other person who shall violate any
of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated for the
government of the Harbor, to which a specific penalty is not annexed or otherwise provided by
law, shall for each offense forfeit and pay a sum not less than $20.00.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 8
Section 8.414: OIL POLLUTION
Except in case of emergency imperiling life or property, or unavoidable accident, collision, or
stranding, no person shall discharge, or suffer, or permit the discharge of oil by any method,
means or manner into or upon the waters of Portsmouth Harbor from vessel using oil as fuel for
the generation of propulsion power, or from any vessel carrying or having oil thereon in excess
of that necessary for its lubricating requirements and such as may be required under the laws of
the United States and rules and regulations prescribed thereunder. Any person who violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished a provided by law of
the United States, if applicable, otherwise by a fine of not to exceed $20.00 for each such
offense.
Section 8.415: ABANDONED BOATS, VESSELS, WRECKS, ETC.
A. No person shall cause to be abandoned any boat, vessel, hulk, or raft on the shores within
Portsmouth Harbor.
B. Any boat, vessel, hulk, or raft left within the confines of Portsmouth Harbor, either in or
on public property or between low mean water and mean high water or on any shore and
which has been unattended for a period of one year, shall be deemed to be abandoned.
C. The Harbor Master of the City of Portsmouth, on complaint of owner of land or dock or
upon his own complaint, shall order the last owner of record of any such abandoned boat,
vessel, hulk, or raft to remove same within a specified reasonable period of time; and
upon his failure to do same shall cause its removal or destruction at the cost of said last
owner of record.
D. Any violation of the above section shall be considered to be a misdemeanor and
punishable by a fine of not exceeding $10.00 for each offense. Each day the violation is
permitted to exist beyond the limits above described, shall be considered a separate
offense.
Section 8.416: RECKLESS OPERATION
No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel in a reckless manner so as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person.
Section 8.417: SPEED LIMITS
All types of watercraft, boats and vessels operating within any maintained channel, mooring
areas or within 100 yards of any dock, shall maintain a speed of not more than five knots per
hour.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 8
Section 8.418: BOAT LAUNCHING RAMP
No person shall place, or allow to lie, any boat, skid, or any other craft on the public boat
launching ramp for a period in excess of 30 minutes unless by special permission of the Harbor
Master. In no case, shall such permission exceed a period of 24 hours.
Section 8.419: PUBLIC GROUNDS
No person shall place, or allow to lie, any boat, skiff, trailer, or any other craft on the waterfront
public grounds for a period in excess of 24 hours unless by special permission of the Harbor
Master.
Section 8.420: LENGTH OF TIME PERMITTED TO DOCK
(Deleted 7/9/84)
Section 8.421: PENALTY
The master, owner or owners of any vessel, boat or raft, or any other person who shall violate
any of the provisions of any rule or regulation lawfully promulgated for the government of the
Harbor, to which a specific penalty is not annexed or otherwise provided by law, shall forfeit and
pay a sum not more than $100.00 per day per violation per day, to be recovered on complaint by
the Harbor Master before Portsmouth District Court. (Amended 7/9/84)
Section 8.422: SHORELINE USES
All commercial and industrial marine uses of Portsmouth's shoreline shall be in accordance with
the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 8
ARTICLE V: CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
Section 8.501: PURPOSE
Those properties listed in Section 8.503 are hereby declared to be conservation properties of the
City of Portsmouth. Other than the maintenance of Public Infrastructure described in Section
8.505, passive recreation is the only permitted use or activity on the conservation properties.
Any other use or activity on the conservation properties must be approved by prior vote of City
Council. Such approval shall be by a 2/3 majority of those present and voting on the question.
Any Council vote under this provision must be preceded by a referral of the question to the
Conservation Commission for its review and report back to the Council. The Council shall not
vote on the question until either the report has been received from the Conservation Commission
or thirty (30) days have passed from the Council vote referring the matter to the Conservation
Commission.
Section 8.502: PASSIVE RECREATION
The term “Passive Recreation” shall mean uses of land, or activities on land, which are
conducted primarily for leisure purposes and which do not cause damage to the conservation
nature of the land.
Section 8.503: CONSERVATION PROPERTIES
Map-Block-Lot Location Book/Page Date
Adopted
0123-0009-000A Maplewood Ave 3577/2037 07/16/2001
0201-0026-0000 Sagamore Ave 2299/1707 04/07/1997
0204-0007-0000 Little Harbor Rd 2395/1462 04/07/1997
0222-0073-0000 Jones Ave 2391/0386 04/07/1997
0225-0008-0000 Elwyn Rd 2289/1810 04/07/1997
0263-0003-0000 Greenland Rd 2385/0403 04/07/1997
0265-002D-0000 Banfield Rd 2413/0222 04/07/1997
0271-0001-0008 Lafayette Rd 2851/2879 04/07/1997
0274-0003-0000 Banfield Rd 2327/1314 04/07/1997
0278-0001-0000 Greenland Rd 2646/0720 04/07/1997
0278-0002-0000 Greenland Rd 2235/0417 04/07/1997
0278-0003-0000 Greenland Rd 2235/0417 04/07/1997
0280-0003-0000 Greenland Rd 2646/0720 04/07/1997
0232-0008-0001 Lois Street 6014/0575
0283-0013-0000 Ocean Rd 2249/0432 04/07/1997
0284-0003-0000 Heritage Ave 2253/1684 04/07/1997
0284-0004-0000 Suzanne Dr 1615/0129 04/07/1997
0288-0001-0000 Lang Road 3278/1316 04/20/1998
0284-0009-0000 Heritage Ave 2253/1684 04/07/1997
0287-0003-0000 off of Lang Road 2230/0277 04/07/1997
0293-0010-0000 Ocean Rd 2299/0424 04/07/1997
0293-0013-0000 Ocean Rd 2249/0432 04/07/1997
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 32 Chapter 8
Map-Block-Lot Location Book/Page Date
Adopted
0294-0009-0000 Ocean Rd 2370/1383 04/07/1997
0294-0022-0000 Ocean Rd 2249/0432 04/07/1997
0295-0001-0000 Ocean Rd 2230/0275 04/07/1997
0295-0002-0000 Ocean Rd 2156/0149 04/07/1997
0295-0003-0000 Ocean Rd 2230/0275 04/07/1997
0295-0005-0000 Ocean Rd 2230/0278 04/07/1997
0296-0001-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2747/2301 04/07/1997
0296-0004-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2230/0276 04/07/1997
0296-0006-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2230/0276 04/07/1997
0296-0011-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2484/0311 04/07/1997
0296-0012-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2484/0311 04/07/1997
0296-0013-0000 off of Lafayette Road 2484/0311 04/07/1997
0296-0008-0000 Ocean Rd 2215/1493 04/07/1997
0296-0010-0000 Ocean Rd 2249/0432 04/07/1997
0293-0016-0000 Ocean Rd 2249/0432 04/07/1997
0298-0008-0000 Lafayette Rd 2247/0237 04/07/1997
0298-0005-0001 Lafayette Rd 2549/1850 04/07/1997
Section 8.504: ENFORCEMENT
A. This ordinance may be enforced against the City of Portsmouth by means of an action
seeking injunctive relief, which may be filed in the Courts of the State of New Hampshire
by any interested party.
B. Any other person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to a penalty, upon conviction, of up to $1,000 per occurrence.
C. The enforcement provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed exclusive, but shall be
concurrent with any other remedies available at law.
Section 8.505: MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the maintenance of public roadways, sidewalks, drainage
and stormwater structures, sewer and water lines and other utilities (“Public Infrastructure”) that
cross or abut Conservation Properties. Maintenance shall include replacement if within the
existing footprint of the original structure. Any expansion or new use for Public Infrastructure
on any Conservation Property would require the approval described in Section 8.501.
ARTICLE VI: CONSTRUCTION WORK REQUIRING CERTIFIED FLAG
PERSONNEL
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 33 Chapter 8
Section 8.601: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
No entity shall perform any construction or excavation or otherwise take any action
which would hinder the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians on any street or right-of-way of
the City of Portsmouth except pursuant to a permit to be issued in advance by the Director of
Public Works or his or her designee (hereinafter “Director”). The fee for the permit shall be as
established by the City Council pursuant to its resolution process.
Section 8.602: APPLICATION CRITERIA
An application for a permit under this section shall be made upon such forms as may be
developed by the Director. Such forms shall include a brief sketch or diagram showing the area
in which the work will be performed or the obstruction located and shall include a plain
statement of what actions will be taken by the permittee to protect personal safety and property
related to the work to be performed under the permit.
All applications under this Chapter shall be filed with the Director no less than 48 hours,
weekends and holidays excluded, prior to the commencement any work or the placement of any
obstruction in the City streets or rights-of way. Except, however, the Director shall make
provision for permits to be granted in emergency situations under such terms as determined by
the Director.
Section 8.603: AUTHORITY OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
As determined by the Director, whenever necessary to protect personal safety and
property any permittee under this Chapter shall be required to retain the services of certified
flaggers as defined herein. The permittee shall also provide any other protective equipment such
as barriers, flashers or safety vehicles as may be required by the Director.
Section 8.604: CERTIFIED FLAGGER
The term “Certified Flagger” shall mean a person who meets training and/or experience
criteria to be promulgated and kept on public file by the Director. The Director shall keep a list
available for public review of companies or individuals providing certified flaggers for use by
any permit applicant. Any person or company desiring to provide certified flagging services on
projects within the City of Portsmouth may apply for such certification to the Director for
placement upon the certified flagger list.
Section 8.605: UNIFORMED POLICE OFFICERS REQUIRED
Except for work performed by or under contract with the City, the permit issued pursuant
to this ordinance shall require the use of uniformed police officers under the following
circumstances:
A. Whenever the Chief of Police and the Director of Public Works determine that
circumstances exist creating a public safety concern such that the use of
uniformed police officers should be required.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 9
CHAPTER 9
MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC WELFARE
Article I Disorderly Houses 9.101 - 9.102
Article II Reserved
Article III Regulation of Minors 9.301 - 9.302
Article IV Reserved 9.401
Article V Public Way Obstructions, Placement and Registration 9.501 - 9.511
Article VI City Plants or Property 9.601 - 9.602
Article VII Municipal Facilities for Skateboarding or Rollerblading or
Rollerskiing
9.701 – 9.704
Article VIII Boarding or Rooming Houses 9.801 – 9.805
Article I: DISORDERLY HOUSES
Section 9.101: PROHIBITED
No person shall keep or maintain or continue any disorderly house or shop or house of ill fame in
this City.
Section 9.102: PENALTY
If any person shall violate the provisions of this Ordinance, he shall be fined not less than $1.00
nor more than $100.00 for each day he shall keep, maintain, or continue any such disorderly
house, shop or house of ill fame.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 9
Article II: (Reserved for future use; Deleted in entirety 10/22/2012)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 9
ARTICLE III: REGULATION OF MINORS
Section 9.301: CURFEW
The curfew regulations as set forth in the N.H. RSA, Chapter 571, Section 8-11 inclusive are
hereby adopted by the City of Portsmouth.
Section 9.302: SUPERVISION OF BUSINESS PREMISES
No business premises shall be open to the public after the hours of 6:00 p.m. unless the
proprietor or his agent or employee is present to supervise activities on the premises.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 9
ARTICLE IV: RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
(Article entitled Removal of Dog Excrement deleted in its entirety 5/16/05)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 9
ARTICLE V: PUBLIC WAY OBSTRUCTIONS, PLACEMENT & REGISTRATION
Section 9.501: DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the
context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
A. "City": The City of Portsmouth.
B. “Newspaper or new periodical”: a daily or weekly publication containing all of the
following: current news, editorials, feature articles and advertising.
C. “Newsrack”: Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other
dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news
periodicals.
D. “Public Way Obstruction”: Any object which in any way obstructs the free passage of
pedestrians, wheelchairs or vehicles on the streets, sidewalks or roadways.
Section 9.502: CERTAIN PUBLIC WAY OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED
A. No person shall install, use, attach or maintain any public way obstruction which projects
onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street.
B. No person shall install, use attach or maintain any public way obstruction which in whole
or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk, when such installation, use or
maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is
used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use,
or when such public way obstruction unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress
into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic
signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location.
Section 9.503: LICENSING OF LOCATION – NEWSRACK LIMITED EXCEPTION
A. No person shall install or maintain any public way obstruction which in whole or in part
rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk, except newsracks, without first applying for an
being granted a license from the City Council. The license application shall include the
following:
1. The physical dimensions of the public way obstruction.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person or company responsible
for the obstruction.
3. A diagram showing the location of the obstruction and the dimensions of the
sidewalk upon which it is to be located.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 9
Newsracks shall require the submission of license application, but the license shall be granted by
the City Clerk on a ministerial basis without the requirement of City Council approval.
Newsracks must comply with the remaining provisions of this ordinance.
Section 9.504: STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE & OPERATION
Any public way obstruction which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk
or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
A. Public way obstructions must be licensed individually by location.
B. The City shall issue a proof of license in the form of a sticker or decal which must be
attached to the obstruction at all times.
C. Fees to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording.
(Amended 3/18/2002).
D. All licenses must be renewed annually prior to March 1st.
E. Unlicensed newsracks or public way obstructions will be considered abandoned and
subject to removal without notice.
F. All licenses are non-transferable.
Section 9.506: HOLD HARMLESS AND INSURANCE
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a public way obstruction on a public
sidewalk, parkway, roadway or street in the City shall file a written statement with the City Clerk
satisfactory to the City Attorney, whereby he/she, or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
City, its officers, City Council Members and employees, from any loss or liability or damage,
including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by
any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of the public way obstruction within
the City. A Certificate of Insurance in a form approved by the City Attorney indicating no less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000) in general liability insurance coverage and naming the City
as an additional insured shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk by each such person or
entity.
Section 9.507: REMOVAL OF NEWSRACK OR PUBLIC WAY OBSTRUCTION
The City Manager or his/her designee shall remove any public way obstruction placed on any
street, sidewalk, parkway or roadway in violation of this ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 9
Section 9.508: SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordnance are severable. If any provision of this ordinance or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application.
Section 9.509: INJUNCTION
Any violation of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other
relief provided by this ordinance, the City Attorney may apply to a Court of competent
jurisdiction of an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this ordinance. Such
application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction
and permanent injunction.
Section 9.510: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC WAY OBSTRUCTIONS
Any damage to public way obstructions, whether or not properly licensed, by any cause
whatsoever, including snowplowing and removal, will be at the sole expense of the owner.
Section 9.511: PENALTY
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be fined $100.00
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Adopted Ordinance by deleting in it’s entirety and replaced with new text 12/4/2000)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 9
Article VI: CITY PLANTS OR PROPERTY
Section 9.601: DAMAGE TO CITY PLANTS OR PROPERTY
No person shall wantonly or willfully destroy shrubbery, pull up, bend or mar growing trees or
otherwise injure or cause to be injured any shrubs, flowers or trees on City property maintained
by the City, or shall wantonly or willfully damage or deface any other property of the City or of
any department thereof.
Section 9.602: PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine or penalty in the
amount of $100.00.
(Article VI Adopted in its entirety 1/9/95)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 9
Article VII: MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR SKATEBOARDING OR
ROLLERBLADING OR ROLLERSKIING
Section 9.701: APPLICATION
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 507-B:11 for the purpose of
requiring the use of certain safety equipment at any facility owned or operated by the City, or any
subdivision of the City, for skateboarding or rollerblading, or rollerskiing and to secure the
protection from liability for the City afforded by that statute.
Section 9.702: MANDATE
No person shall be permitted to ride a skateboard or rollerblade or rollerski at any recreational
facility owned or operated by the City or any of its subdivisions for those purposes unless that
person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads.
Section 9.703: PENALTY
Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fifty dollar ($50.00)
fine upon conviction of that violation.
Section 9.704: POSTING
Signs shall be posted at any facility described in this ordinance to afford reasonable notice that
any person riding a skateboard or rollerblading or rollerskiing at the facility must wear a helmet,
elbow pads and knee pads and that any person failing to do so will be subject to the penalties
provided by the ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 9
Article VIII: BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSES (Adopted 09-17-2007)
Section 9.801: DEFINITION
The term Boarding House or Rooming House shall apply to any residential structure in which
more than 3 rooms are rented, leased or otherwise made available to tenants where such rooms
do not contain separate bathroom facilities.
Section 9.802: PERMIT REQUIRED
Commencing January 1, 2008 every Boarding House and Rooming House in the City shall
operate only on the issuance of a Boarding House permit issued by the City Council. Each such
permit issued by the City Council shall be for a one year period commencing from the date of
issuance and must be renewed annually by the owner of the property on which the Boarding
House is located by application to the City Council. The Boarding House permit shall not be
transferable.
Section 9.803: TERMS AND CONDITIONS
The terms and conditions under which the holder of any such Boarding House permit shall
operate are as follows:
A. The permit holder must maintain compliance with all City and State laws
regarding such facilities including but not limited to the zoning ordinance, fire
code and health regulations of the City.
B. There must be posted at all times at the front entrance of the facility a sign
indicating 24 hour, seven days a week, valid and effective contact information for
the management of the facility.
C. The permit holder must maintain the facility in such a manner so as not to cause
unreasonable interference with the use and occupancy of other properties in the
vicinity of the facility.
D. The permit shall not allow any more rooms to be rented, leased or made available,
or persons to occupy the Rooming or Boarding House than are authorized by the
Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance.
Section 9.804: PERMIT RENEWAL
Prior to renewing the Boarding House permit for any facility, the City may conduct such
investigations as it deems appropriate to determine compliance with this ordinance. Failure of
the owner of the facility to comply with the provision of this ordinance shall be cause for nonrenewal
of the permit.
Section 9.805: ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this ordinance may be enforced by the municipal administration utilizing any
or all of the following:
A. Suspension, revocation or termination of the Boarding House or Rooming House
permit.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 9
B. By filing an appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking
specific performance by the permittee or property owner of the terms of this
ordinance.
C. By the filing of a complaint in the Portsmouth District Court against the permittee
seeking such penalties as may be allowed under state law in the case of conviction
of a violation level offense.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 9
CITY OF PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted by Portsmouth City Council: December 21, 2009
Effective Date: January 1, 2010
As Amended Through: December 16, 2019

As Amended Through December 16, 2019 i
CHAPTER 10
ZONING ORDINANCE
Table of Articles
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 1-1
ARTICLE 2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 2-1
ARTICLE 3 NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES 3-1
ARTICLE 4 ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS 4-1
ARTICLE 5 DIMENSIONAL AND INTENSITY STANDARDS 5-1
ARTICLE 5A CHARACTER-BASED ZONING 5A-1
ARTICLE 5B GATEWAY NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE DISTRICTS 5B-1
ARTICLE 6 OVERLAY DISTRICTS 6-1
ARTICLE 7 FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT 7-1
ARTICLE 8 SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 8-1
ARTICLE 9 SPECIAL USES 9-1
ARTICLE 10 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS 10-1
ARTICLE 11 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 11-1
ARTICLE 12 SIGNS 12-1
ARTICLE 13 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 13-1
ARTICLE 14 IMPACT FEES 14-1
ARTICLE 15 DEFINITIONS 15-1

As Amended Through December 16, 2019 iii
CHAPTER 10
ZONING ORDINANCE
Table of Articles and Sections
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 1.1
SECTION 10.110 TITLE ..................................................................................................................... 1.1
SECTION 10.120 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................... 1.1
SECTION 10.130 APPLICABILITY ........................................................................................................ 1.2
SECTION 10.140 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS ............................................................... 1.2
SECTION 10.150 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS .................................................................................. 1.2
SECTION 10.160 SEPARABILITY ........................................................................................................ 1.2
ARTICLE 2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 2.1
SECTION 10.210 GENERAL ............................................................................................................... 2.1
SECTION 10.220 BUILDING PERMIT ................................................................................................... 2.1
SECTION 10.230 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ............................................................................ 2.2
SECTION 10.240 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS .................................................................................... 2.6
SECTION 10.250 PENALTY ................................................................................................................ 2.10
ARTICLE 3 NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES 3.1
SECTION 10.310 NONCONFORMING LOTS .......................................................................................... 3.1
SECTION 10.320 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES...................................................... 3.1
SECTION 10.330 NONCONFORMING USES ......................................................................................... 3.2
ARTICLE 4 ZONING DISTRICTS AND USE REGULATIONS 4.1
SECTION 10.410 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF DISTRICTS ......................................................... 4.1
SECTION 10.420 DISTRICT LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES .................................................................... 4.3
SECTION 10.430 USE REGULATIONS ................................................................................................. 4.4
SECTION 10.440 TABLE OF USES – RESIDENTIAL, MIXED RESIDENTIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS .............................................................................................................. 4.7
SECTION 10.450 TABLE OF USES – PEASE/AIRPORT DISTRICTS ......................................................... 4.27
SECTION 10.460 TABLE OF USES – MUNICIPAL AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS .................................. 4.34
SECTION 10.470 USES PERMITTED IN THE TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR DISTRICT ............................. 4.34
ARTICLE 5 DIMENSIONAL AND INTENSITY STANDARDS 5.1
SECTION 10.510 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................... 5.1
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 iv
SECTION 10.520 RESIDENTIAL AND MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.................................................... 5.6
SECTION 10.530 BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ..................................................................... 5.8
SECTION 10.540 AIRPORT DISTRICTS................................................................................................ 5.9
SECTION 10.550 CONSERVATION DISTRICTS ..................................................................................... 5.10
SECTION 10.560 MUNICIPAL DISTRICT .............................................................................................. 5.10
SECTION 10.570 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES .................................................... 5.11
SECTION 10.580 SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN USES ..................................... 5.11
SECTION 10.590 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN NONRESIDENTIAL USES AND RESIDENTIAL AND
MIXED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ............................................................................... 5.12
ARTICLE 5A CHARACTER-BASED ZONING 5A.1
SECTION 10.5A10 GENERAL ............................................................................................................... 5A.1
SECTION 10.5A20 REGULATING PLAN ................................................................................................. 5A.3
SECTION 10.5A30 CHARACTER DISTRICT USE STANDARDS .................................................................. 5A.4
SECTION 10.5A40 CHARACTER DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS .................................................. 5A.4
SECTION 10.5A50 CIVIC DISTRICTS ................................................................................................... 5A.42
SECTION 10.5A60 DEFINITIONS ......................................................................................................... 5A.43
ARTICLE 5B GATEWAY NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE DISTRICTS 5B.1
SECTION 10.5B10 GENERAL ............................................................................................................... 5B.1
SECTION 10.5B20 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL BUILDINGS AND DEVELOPMENT................................ 5B.2
SECTION 10.5B30 BUILDING TYPES AND STANDARDS........................................................................... 5B.6
SECTION 10.5B40 DEVELOPMENT SITE STANDARDS .......................................................................... 5B.13
SECTION 10.5B50 PRE-EXISTING BUILDINGS AND LOTS ..................................................................... 5B.19
SECTION 10.5B60 BUILDING FAÇADE TYPES ...................................................................................... 5B.22
SECTION 10.5B70 DENSITY THRESHOLDS AND BONUSES ................................................................... 5B.23
SECTION 10.5B80 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS ...................................... 5B.26
SECTION 10.5B90 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND CIRCULATION ............................................................... 5B.27
SECTION 10.5B100 COMMUNITY SPACE ............................................................................................. 5B.28
ARTICLE 6 OVERLAY DISTRICTS 6.1
SECTION 10.610 OVERLAY DISTRICTS GENERALLY ............................................................................ 6.1
SECTION 10.620 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT ........................................................................................... 6.2
SECTION 10.630 HISTORIC DISTRICT................................................................................................. 6.12
SECTION 10.640 DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT ............................................................................. 6.24
SECTION 10.650 OSPREY LANDING OVERLAY DISTRICT ..................................................................... 6.24
SECTION 10.660 AIRPORT APPROACH OVERLAY DISTRICT ................................................................. 6.25
SECTION 10.670 HIGHWAY NOISE OVERLAY DISTRICT ....................................................................... 6.28
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 v
ARTICLE 7 FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT 7.1
SECTION 10.710 GENERAL ............................................................................................................... 7.1
SECTION 10.720 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS .............................................................................. 7.2
ARTICLE 8 SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 8.1
SECTION 10.810 RESIDENTIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENCE OR CARE USES .................................. 8.1
SECTION 10.820 EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, CHARITABLE, CULTURAL, PUBLIC AND RECREATIONAL
USES ..................................................................................................................... 8.10
SECTION 10.830 BUSINESS USES ..................................................................................................... 8.11
SECTION 10.840 MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTOR VEHICLE USES ........................................................ 8.13
SECTION 10.850 INDUSTRIAL USES ................................................................................................... 8.14
SECTION 10.860 HOURS OF OPERATION ........................................................................................... 8.16
ARTICLE 9 SPECIAL USES 9.1
SECTION 10.910 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS .............................................................................. 9.1
SECTION 10.920 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES .......................................................... 9.6
SECTION 10.930 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES .......................................................................... 9.13
ARTICLE 10 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS 10.1
SECTION 10.1010 WETLANDS PROTECTION ...................................................................................... 10.1
SECTION 10.1020 EARTH PRODUCTS REMOVAL AND PLACEMENT ...................................................... 10.13
ARTICLE 11 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 11.1
SECTION 10.1110 OFF-STREET PARKING .......................................................................................... 11.1
SECTION 10.1120 OFF-STREET LOADING .......................................................................................... 11.16
SECTION 10.1130 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING ............................................................................. 11.17
SECTION 10.1140 OUTDOOR LIGHTING ............................................................................................. 11.18
ARTICLE 12 SIGNS 12.1
SECTION 10.1210 PURPOSE AND INTENT .......................................................................................... 12.1
SECTION 10.1220 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS ............................................................................... 12.1
SECTION 10.1230 SIGN DISTRICTS ................................................................................................... 12.6
SECTION 10.1240 PERMITTED SIGN TYPES ....................................................................................... 12.8
SECTION 10.1250 SIGN DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS............................................................................ 12.8
SECTION 10.1260 SIGN ILLUMINATION ............................................................................................... 12.13
SECTION 10.1270 ADDITIONAL SIGN REGULATIONS ........................................................................... 12.14
SECTION 10.1280 NONCONFORMING SIGNS ...................................................................................... 12.15
SECTION 10.1290 SIGN DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................ 12.16
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 vi
ARTICLE 13 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 13.1
SECTION 10.1310 APPLICABILITY ...................................................................................................... 13.1
SECTION 10.1320 DRAINAGE ............................................................................................................ 13.1
SECTION 10.1330 NOISE AND VIBRATION .......................................................................................... 13.1
ARTICLE 14 IMPACT FEES 14.1
SECTION 10.1410 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................. 14.1
SECTION 10.1420 GENERAL ............................................................................................................. 14.1
SECTION 10.1430 AMOUNT OF IMPACT FEE ....................................................................................... 14.1
SECTION 10.1440 ACCOUNTING........................................................................................................ 14.1
SECTION 10.1450 ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT ................................................................................. 14.1
SECTION 10.1460 REFUND ............................................................................................................... 14.2
SECTION 10.1470 APPEALS .............................................................................................................. 14.2
SECTION 10.1480 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS ............................................................... 14.2
ARTICLE 15 DEFINITIONS 15.1
SECTION 10.1510 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION .................................................................................... 15.1
SECTION 10.1520 TERMS WITH SPECIALIZED APPLICATIONS.............................................................. 15.1
SECTION 10.1530 TERMS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY....................................................................... 15.4
Article 1 Purpose and Applicability
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 1-1
Article 1 Purpose and Applicability
Section 10.110 Title
Section 10.120 Purpose
Section 10.130 Applicability
Section 10.140 Relationship to Other Requirements
Section 10.150 Changes and Amendments
Section 10.160 Separability
Section 10.110 Title
Chapter 10 of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth shall be known as the Zoning
Ordinance.
Section 10.120 Purpose
10.121 General Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and the general welfare of
Portsmouth and its region in accordance with the City of Portsmouth Master Plan. The
Ordinance is intended to implement the goals and objectives of the Master Plan by
regulating:
1. The use of land, buildings and structures for business, industrial, residential and
other purposes;
2. The intensity of land use, including lot sizes, building coverage, building height
and bulk, yards and open space;
3. The design of facilities for vehicular access, circulation, parking and loading;
4. The impacts on properties of outdoor lighting, noise, vibration, stormwater runoff
and flooding;
5. The preservation and enhancement of the visual environment;
6. The preservation of historic districts, and buildings and structures of historic or
architectural interest; and
7. The protection of natural resources, including groundwater, surface water, wetlands,
wildlife habitat, and air quality.
10.122 Sustainability Objectives
This Ordinance is intended to promote sustainable and balanced development in
support of the following sustainability objectives:
1. Reduce dependence upon fossil fuels, extracted underground metals and minerals;
2. Reduce dependence on chemicals and other manufactured substances that accumulate
in nature;
3. Reduce dependence on activities that harm life-sustaining ecosystems; and
4. Meet the hierarchy of present and future human needs fairly and efficiently.
Article 1 Purpose and Applicability
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 1-2
Section 10.130 Applicability
10.131 The requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to all areas within the
boundaries of the City of Portsmouth except where specifically exempted.
10.132 No structure or building shall be erected, enlarged or moved, nor shall
any use be authorized or extended, nor shall any existing lot be changed as
to size or shape, except in accordance with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
Section 10.140 Relationship to Other Requirements
10.141 The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare. Whenever a provision of this Ordinance is
more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement upon the use
or dimensions of a lot, building or structure than is imposed or required
by another ordinance, regulation, rule or permit, the provision of this
Ordinance shall govern.
10.142 This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate, annul or interfere with any
easement, covenant, deed restriction or other private agreement. However,
whenever a provision of this Ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a
higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other private agreement, the provision of this Ordinance shall
govern.
Section 10.150 Changes and Amendments
10.151 This Ordinance may be amended in accordance with the provisions of State
law.
10.152 All petitions or requests for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be
referred to the Planning Board for its consideration and the Board shall
submit its recommendations concerning such petitions and requests to the
City Council.
10.153 In addition, the Planning Board may, upon its own initiative from time to
time, consider amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and submit
recommendations thereon to the City Council.
Section 10.160 Separability
Should any provision of this Zoning Ordinance be declared invalid by a final court
decision the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-1
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
Section 10.210 General
Section 10.220 Building Permit
Section 10.230 Zoning Board of Adjustment
Section 10.240 Conditional Use Permits
Section 10.250 Penalty
Section 10.210 General
10.211 Enforcement Officer
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Code Official.
10.212 Violations
When it is determined that a violation of this Ordinance exists in any building,
structure, property or premises, the Code Official may issue to the owner and/or
occupant an order to cease and desist such violation, or take any other action authorized
by law.
Section 10.220 Building Permit
10.221 Requirements
10.221.10 No construction, reconstruction or alteration of a building or change of
use or intensification in use of a structure or parcel of land requiring the
issuance of a building permit by the Code Official shall be commenced
without such permit.
10.221.20 No building permit may be issued for any premises unless all buildings,
structures and uses of the premises comply in all respects with (a) the
provisions of this Ordinance, (b) the terms of any special exception or
conditional use permit granted under this Ordinance, (c) the terms of any
variance granted from the provisions of this Ordinance; provided that:
10.221.21 A lawful nonconforming building, structure or use may
be continued or extended to the extent permitted under
Article 3.
10.221.22 A building permit may be issued when the effect of the
construction, reconstruction or alteration is to eliminate all
violations of this Ordinance on the premises.
10.221.30 No building permit may be issued unless all required local approvals have
been met, including, but not limited to the following: subdivision
approvals, variances, special exceptions, conditional use permits, Historic
District Commission approvals and site plan approval.
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-2
10.221.40 The Code Official shall not issue any building permit where application
for such permit is made after the first legal notice of the second reading and
public hearing by the City Council on proposed changes in the Zoning
Ordinance has been posted in accordance with the provisions of State law,
if the proposed changes in the Zoning Ordinance would, if adopted, justify
refusal of such a permit. After final action has been taken on the proposed
changes in the Zoning Ordinance, the Code Official shall issue or refuse
such a permit which has been held in abeyance pursuant to this subsection.
10.222 Applications for Building Permits
10.222.10 Applications for building permits must be made by the owner of the
premises or the owner’s authorized agent.
10.222.20 Applications for building permits shall be on forms prescribed by Code
Official.
10.222.30 An application for a building permit shall state the existing and intended
use of each building or structure, and shall be accompanied by adequate
plans, accurately drawn, showing the following minimum information:
(1) the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
(2) the exact location and size of all buildings or other structures
already on the lot;
(3) the location of new buildings or other structures to be constructed,
together with the lines within which all buildings or other
structures are to be created;
(4) such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
If determined appropriate by the Code Official, such plans shall be based
on a surveyed plot plan.
Section 10.230 Zoning Board of Adjustment ?
10.231 Powers
The Board shall have all powers granted by State law to Zoning Boards of Adjustment.
10.232 Special Exceptions
10.232.10 The Board shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions as
provided for in this Ordinance. The Board shall grant requests for special
exceptions which are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this Ordinance and meet the standards of Subsection 10.232.20.
? By Act of the Legislature, the Portsmouth Zoning Board of Adjustment consists of 7 members
and 2 alternates.
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-3
Appropriate conditions of the sort set forth in Subsection 10.232.30 may be
placed on special exception approvals when necessary to meet the
standards of Subsection 10.232.20. The Board shall deny requests for
special exceptions that do not meet the standards of this Section.
10.232.20 Special exceptions shall meet all of the following standards:
10.232.21 Standards as provided by this Ordinance for the particular
use permitted by special exception;
10.232.22 No hazard to the public or adjacent property on account of
potential fire, explosion or release of toxic materials;
10.232.23 No detriment to property values in the vicinity or change in
the essential characteristics of any area including residential
neighborhoods or business and industrial districts on account
of the location or scale of buildings and other structures,
parking areas, accessways, odor, smoke, gas, dust, or other
pollutant, noise, glare, heat, vibration, or unsightly outdoor
storage of equipment, vehicles or other materials;
10.232.24 No creation of a traffic safety hazard or a substantial increase
in the level of traffic congestion in the vicinity;
10.232.25 No excessive demand on municipal services, including, but
not limited to, water, sewer, waste disposal, police and fire
protection and schools; and
10.232.26 No significant increase of stormwater runoff onto adjacent
property or streets.
10.232.30 Special exception approvals may be subject to appropriate conditions,
including but not limited to the following:
10.232.31 Front, side and rear yards in excess of the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance;
10.232.32 Landscaping and/or screening of the premises from the
street or adjacent property in excess of the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance;
10.232.33 Modification of the exterior features, buildings or other
structures;
10.232.34 Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures
more stringent than the minimum or maximum requirements
of this Ordinance;
10.232.35 Limitations on the number of occupants and methods and
times of operation;
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-4
10.232.36 Grading of the premises for proper drainage;
10.232.37 Regulation of design of access drives, sidewalks,
crosswalks and other traffic features;
10.232.38 Off-street parking and loading spaces in excess of the
minimum requirements of this Ordinance;
10.232.39 Regulation of the number, size, lighting of signs more
stringent than the requirements of the Ordinance; and
10.232.39a Other performance standards.
10.233 Variances
10.233.10 The Board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases a variance from the
terms of this Ordinance.
10.233.20 In order to authorize a variance, the Board must find that the variance
meets all of the following criteria:
10.233.21 The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
10.233.22 The spirit of the Ordinance will be observed;
10.233.23 Substantial justice will be done;
10.233.24 The values of surrounding properties will not be diminished;
and
10.233.25 Literal enforcement of the provisions of the Ordinance
would result in an unnecessary hardship.
10.233.30 For purposes of section 10.233.25, “unnecessary hardship” means that one
of the following conditions exists:
10.233.31 Owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish
it from other properties in the area, (a) no fair and substantial
relationship exists between the general public purposes of
the Ordinance provision and the specific application of that
provision to the property; and (b) the proposed use is a
reasonable one. (Under this provision, an unnecessary
hardship shall be deemed to exist only if both elements of
the condition are based on the special conditions of the
property.)
10.233.32 Owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish
it from other properties in the area, the property cannot be
reasonably used in strict conformance with the Ordinance,
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-5
and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a reasonable
use of it. (Under this provision, an unnecessary hardship
shall not be deemed to exist if any reasonable use, including
an existing use, is permitted under the Ordinance.)
10.233.40 The definition of “unnecessary hardship” set forth in Section 10.233.30
shall apply whether the provision of the Ordinance from which a variance
is sought is a restriction on use, a dimensional or other limitation on a
permitted use, or any other requirement of the Ordinance.
10.233.50 Where this Ordinance contains a more stringent requirement or higher
standard than is reflected by existing conditions, it shall be deemed that the
intent of the Ordinance is to promote compliance with such requirement or
conformance to such standard rather than a continuation of existing
conditions. Accordingly, whether surrounding properties violate a
provision or standard for which a variance is requested shall not be a factor
in determining whether “the spirit of the Ordinance would be observed” by
the granting of a variance, as required by Section 10.233.22.
10.233.60 Because “special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other
properties in the area” must be present for a variance to be granted (Section
10.233.30), the existence in the surrounding area of conditions that are
similar to the proposed nonconformity shall not be a basis for the granting
of a variance.
10.233.70 The Board may attach to a variance any conditions that it deems necessary
to ensure that the variance satisfies the criteria set forth in Section
10.233.20.
10.234 Procedures for Variances, Special Exceptions and Appeals from
Decisions of the Code Official
10.234.10 Requests for variances and special exceptions must be made by persons
authorized by state law.
10.234.20 Appeals from decisions or orders of the Code Official may be made by
any person within 30 days after the date on which the written decision was
actually filed.
10.234.30 Requests for variances and special exceptions and appeals from decisions
of the Code Official shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board
of Adjustment. Such requests and appeals shall refer to the specific
provisions of the Ordinance involved and shall set forth the interpretation
claimed and reasons why the request of appeal should be granted.
10.234.40 Requests for variances and special exceptions shall include layout or plot
plans conforming to the Board’s rules and regulations.
10.234.50 In any case in which the Board of Adjustment is required to give notice of
a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of State law, all
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-6
persons owning property within 300 feet of the property involved in the
appeal or request shall be given notice in the manner set forth by State law,
provided that failure to give notice beyond statutory requirement shall not
give rise to any right of appeal or protest. The requirements of this
paragraph shall not apply in Character Districts 4 and 5 (CD4 and CD5)
and the Downtown Overlay District.
10.235 Certain Representations Deemed Conditions
Representations made at public hearings or materials submitted to the Board by an
applicant for a special exception or variance concerning features of proposed buildings,
structures, parking or uses which are subject to regulations pursuant to Subsection
10.232 or 10.233 shall be deemed conditions upon such special exception or variance.
10.236 Expiration of Approvals
Variances and special exceptions shall expire unless a building permit is obtained within
a period of two year from the date granted. The Board may, for good cause shown,
extend such period by as much as one years if such extension is requested and acted upon
prior to the expiration date. No other extensions may be requested.
10.237 Outstanding Violations
No variance or special exception may be granted for premises on which outstanding
violations of this Ordinance exist, unless the effect of such variance or special exception
would be to remedy all such violations.
Section 10.240 Conditional Use Permits
10.241 General
10.241.10 A conditional use is a use of land or buildings within a zoning district that
may be authorized by this Ordinance subject to additional requirements. A
conditional use permit allows the Planning Board or other such Board or
person as may have jurisdiction to consider uses which may be desirable
or appropriate in particular cases, but which are not allowed as a matter of
right within a zoning district.
10.241.20 This Ordinance authorizes the following general types of conditional use
permits:
10.241.21 Conditional use approval is required for any use designated
“CU” in Section 10.440 – Table of Uses.
10.241.22 Conditional use approval is required for most uses,
activities and alterations in a wetland or wetland buffer
(Article 10, Section 10.1010 – Wetlands Protection).
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-7
10.241.23 Conditional use approval may be granted to allow flexibility
of site or building design where specifically authorized by
the Ordinance but not listed in Section 10.440. These include
the following provisions:
(a) Character Districts (Article 5A)
? Increase in allowed building footprint subject to
specified development standards;
? Provision of required community space on a
different lot than the development;
? Crediting or assignment of excess community
space in an Incentive Overlay District.
(b) Gateway Districts (Article 5B)
? More than 24 dwelling units in a building;
? More than one principal building or building type
on a development site;
? Increased housing density, building height, or
footprint.
(c) Off-Street Parking (Article 11)
? Less than the minimum number of required spaces
or more than the maximum number of allowed
spaces;
? Shared parking.
(d) Highway Noise Overlay District (Article 6)
? Noise sensitive land uses
10.241.30 No structure, building or use requiring a conditional use permit under
this Ordinance shall be used, constructed, altered or expanded unless the
required conditional use permit has been granted by the Planning Board or
other such Board or person as may have jurisdiction.
10.241.40 A structure, building or use authorized by a conditional use permit may
not be added to, enlarged, expanded or moved to another part of the lot
without securing a new conditional use permit.
10.242 Basis for Approval
10.242.10 The Planning Board or other such Board or person as may have jurisdiction
may grant a conditional use permit if the application is found to be in
compliance with the general approval criteria in Section 10.243 or, if
applicable, the specific standards or criteria as set forth in this Ordinance
for the particular use or activity. The Planning Board or other such Board
or person as may have jurisdiction shall make findings of fact, based on the
evidence presented by the applicant, City staff, and the public, respecting
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-8
whether the conditional use is or is not in compliance with the approval
criteria of Section 10.243.
10.242.20 The applicant shall provide, through the introduction of sufficient
evidence, through testimony, or otherwise, that the proposed use,
development, or activity, if completed as proposed, will satisfy the
general and specific requirements as contained in the Ordinance.
10.243 Approval Criteria
10.243.10 A conditional use permit shall be granted only if the Planning Board or
other such Board or person as may have jurisdiction determines that the
proposal conforms to all applicable conditional use permit criteria, as set
forth below or in other sections of this Ordinance.
10.243.20 Conditional uses designated in Section 10.440 – Table of Uses, as well as
other conditional uses for which no specific criteria are set forth in the
Ordinance, shall comply with all of the following criteria:
10.243.21 The design of proposed structures, their height and scale in
relation to the site’s surroundings, the nature and intensity of
the proposed use or activity, and the layout and design of
the site will be compatible with adjacent and nearby
properties, buildings and uses, will complement or enhance
the character of surrounding development, and will
encourage the appropriate and orderly development and
use of land and buildings in the surrounding area.
10.243.22 All necessary public and private utility infrastructure and
services will be available and adequate to serve the proposed
use.
10.243.23 The site and surrounding streets will have adequate
vehicular and pedestrian infrastructure to serve the proposed
use consistent with the City’s Master Plan.
10.243.24 The proposed structures, uses, or activities will not have
significant adverse impacts on abutting and surrounding
properties on account of traffic, noise, odors, vibrations,
dust, fumes, hours of operation, and exterior lighting and
glare.
10.243.25 The proposed structures and uses will not have significant
adverse impacts on natural or scenic resources surrounding
the site, including wetlands, floodplains, and significant
wildlife habitat.
10.243.26 The proposed use will not cause or contribute to a
significant decline in property values of adjacent properties.
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-9
10.243.30 Where specific standards or criteria are set forth in this Ordinance for the
particular use permitted by conditional use permit, those standards and
criteria shall apply in lieu of the general standards in Section 10.243.20.
10.244 Conditions of Approval
Conditional use permits may be granted subject to appropriate conditions, including but
not limited to the following:
10.244.10 Front, side and rear yards in excess of the minimum requirements of this
Ordinance;
10.244.20 Landscaping and/or screening of the premises from the street or
adjacent property in excess of the minimum requirements of this
Ordinance;
10.244.30 Modification of the exterior features, buildings or other structures;
10.244.40 Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures more stringent
than the minimum or maximum requirements of this Ordinance;
10.244.50 Off-street parking and loading spaces in excess of the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance;
10.244.60 Regulation of the number, size, lighting of signs more stringent than the
requirements of the Ordinance; and
10.244.70 Other performance standards as may relate to the standards and criteria for
approval.
10.245 Certain Representations Deemed Conditions
Representations made at public hearings or materials submitted to the Board by an
applicant for a conditional use permit concerning features of proposed buildings,
structures, parking or uses shall be deemed conditions upon such conditional use
permit.
10.246 Expiration and Abandonment of Approvals
10.246.10 A conditional use permit shall expire unless a building permit is obtained
within a period of one year from the date granted, unless otherwise stated
in the conditions of approval. The Board may, for good cause shown,
extend such period by as much as one year if such extension is requested
and acted upon prior to the expiration date. No other extensions may be
requested.
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 2-10
10.246.20 Failure to use a property for a use authorized by a conditional use permit
for a period exceeding eight months shall result in the termination of the
conditional use permit.
10.247 Repetitive Application
If an application for a conditional use permit is denied by the Planning Board or other
such Board or person as may have jurisdiction, no application for a conditional use
permit for the same or similar use may be made for one year from the date of said denial,
unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that the circumstances
have altered and that further consideration of the application is warranted. In such an
event, the resubmitted application shall follow the same procedures as the original and
shall be treated as a new application.
Section 10.250 Penalty
Any person violating any provisions of this Ordinance, any of the conditions under
which a permit is issued, or any decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment or
Historic District Commission, may be fined in accordance with state law. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article 3 Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 3-1
Article 3 Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses
Section 10.310 Nonconforming Lots
Section 10.320 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
Section 10.330 Nonconforming Uses
Section 10.310 Nonconforming Lots
10.311 Any lot that has less than the minimum lot area or street frontage
required by this Ordinance shall be considered to be nonconforming, and
no use or structure shall be established on such lot unless the Board of
Adjustment has granted a variance from the applicable requirements of this
Ordinance.
10.312 Notwithstanding the provision of Section 10.311, a lot that has the
minimum lot area but has less than the minimum street frontage
required by this Ordinance shall be considered to be in compliance with
respect to the frontage requirement if one of the following conditions
applies:
10.312.10 The lot was shown on a recorded plan or described in a
recorded deed on or before March 21, 1966, and such lot
was not held in common ownership with any adjoining or
contiguous lot on or before March 21, 1966; or
10.312.20 The lot was shown on a recorded plan or described in a
recorded deed on or before March 21, 1966, and the
Planning Board has approved a plat demonstrating that such
lot and all adjoining or contiguous lots under common
ownership have been combined to create a lot or lots most
nearly consistent with the minimum street frontage
requirement; or
10.312.30 The lot was shown on a plan or described in a deed recorded
after March 21, 1966, and such lot was created in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Rules
and Regulations and such other ordinances and regulations
which properly apply and were in effect at the time of
recording in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
Section 10.320 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
10.321 A lawful nonconforming building or structure may continue and be
maintained or repaired, but may not be extended, reconstructed or enlarged
unless such extension, reconstruction or enlargement conforms to all the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
Article 3 Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 3-2
10.322 A lawful nonconforming building or structure that is damaged or
destroyed by any cause other than the willful act of the owner or the
owner’s agent may be restored or reconstructed, provided that such
restoration or reconstruction shall not enlarge the overall floor space or
height of the building or cause the building to become more nonconforming.
A building permit must be applied for within eighteen
months of the damage. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the
demolition of the remains of any building so damaged or destroyed.
10.323 Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, the following modifications to
a lawful nonconforming building or structure may enlarge or expand
the nonconformity, provided that the modification is the minimum
necessary to comply with the applicable code:
10.323.10 Installation or replacement of components required for
egress purposes pursuant to the Building Code; or
10.323.20 Installation or replacement of accessible egress components.
10.324 Any restoration, reconstruction, maintenance or repair work on a nonconforming
building or structure in the Historic District shall comply
with Section 10.630.
Section 10.330 Nonconforming Uses
10.331 A lawful nonconforming use may continue, but may not be extended,
enlarged or changed except in conformity with this Ordinance.
10.332 A lot, building or structure in which a lawful nonconforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding eight months, or which is superseded
by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use.
Failure to use a property for a nonconforming use for a period of eight
months shall create a presumption of abandonment of the use.
10.333 A nonconforming use located in a portion of a building or structure
shall not be extended throughout other parts of the building or structure.
10.334 A nonconforming use of land may not be extended into any part of the
remainder of a lot of land.
10.335 A lawful nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use, provided that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to
the district than the existing use, and the impact on adjacent properties is
less adverse than the impact of the existing use. Such determination shall
be made by application for a special exception from the Board of
Adjustment.
10.336 A nonconforming use of land which is incidental to or accessory to a
nonconforming use within a building shall be discontinued at the same
time the nonconforming use of the building is discontinued.
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-1
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
Section 10.410 Establishment and Purpose of Districts
Section 10.420 District Location and Boundaries
Section 10.430 Use Regulations
Section 10.440 Table of Uses – Residential, Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial
Districts
Section 10.450 Table of Uses – Pease/Airport Districts
Section 10.460 Table of Uses – Municipal and Conservation Districts
Section 10.470 Uses Permitted in the Transportation Corridor District
Section 10.410 Establishment and Purpose of Districts
The City of Portsmouth is hereby divided into the following zoning districts (the
statements of purpose are for descriptive purposes and are not regulatory):
District Purpose
Residential Districts
Rural Residential R
To provide areas for single-family dwellings
and appropriate accessory uses at rural
densities (up to one dwelling per five acres),
and limited agricultural uses.
Single Residence A
Single Residence B
SRA
SRB
To provide areas for single-family dwellings
at low to medium densities (approximately 1 to
3 dwellings per acre), and appropriate
accessory uses.
General Residence A
General Residence B
General Residence C
GRA
GRB
GRC
To provide areas for single-family, twofamily
and multifamily dwellings, with
appropriate accessory uses, at moderate to
high densities (ranging from approximately 5 to
12 dwelling units per acre), together with
appropriate accessory uses and limited
services.
Garden Apartment/
Mobile Home Park GA/MH
To provide areas for garden apartment
development at moderate densities (up to 4
dwelling units per acre), and to accommodate
existing developed mobile home parks.
Mixed Use Districts
Mixed Residential Office MRO To provide areas where a limited range of
business establishments, including live/work
units, can be located near or adjacent to
residential development, providing a
transition between residential neighborhoods
and commercial districts.
Mixed Residential
Business MRB
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-2
District Purpose
Gateway Neighborhood
Mixed Use Corridor G1
The purpose of this district is to facilitate a
broad range of housing types together with
compatible commercial, fabrication, and civic
uses in a high-quality pedestrian environment
with moderate to high density.
Gateway Neighborhood
Mixed Use Center G2
This district is intended to facilitate a broad
range of residential and mixed use
development at a pedestrian scale and
moderate density providing commercial uses
that benefit residents of the district and
surrounding neighborhoods along major
corridors.
Character Districts
Character District 4-L1
Character District 4-L2
CD4-L1
CD4-L2 To promote the development of walkable,
mixed-use, human-scaled places by providing
standards for building form and placement and
related elements of development.
Character District 4-W CD4-W
Character District 4 CD4
Character District 5 CD5
Business Districts
General Business GB
To provide for a wide range of retail and
commercial uses in areas with excellent
regional highway access.
Business B
To provide for a mix of retail, commercial and
residential uses in areas of the City where a
mix of such uses is desirable.
Waterfront Business WB
To accommodate and support business uses
that depend on the ocean or the Piscataqua
River for transport or resources.
Office Research OR
To provide for campus-style development of
offices buildings, research and
development facilities, and complementary
uses.
Industrial Districts
Industrial I
To accommodate industrial, wholesale and
storage uses whose operational and physical
characteristics do not have detrimental impacts
on surrounding areas.
Waterfront Industrial WI To provide for industrial and related uses that
depend on direct access to the Piscataqua River.
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-3
District Purpose
Pease/Airport Districts
Airport AIR
To provide for uses associated with the
operation of an airport, including aviationrelated
facilities, structures and activities.
Airport Industrial AI
To provide for industrial uses requiring
proximity to an airport and aviation-related
facilities, structures and activities servicing
industrial users.
Pease Industrial PI To provide for industrial uses which do not
require direct access to an airport.
Airport Business
Commercial ABC To provide for business, commercial and traderelated
enterprises in a campus setting.
Other Districts
Civic District CIVIC
To preserve existing buildings and uses that
are open to the general public and owned and
operated by a not-for-profit entity other than the
City of Portsmouth.
Municipal M
To recognize areas that are in municipal
ownership for governmental, civic, service,
educational or recreational use.
Natural Resource
Protection NRP
To recognize areas that are in governmental or
nonprofit ownership and are dedicated to
protection and enhancement of the City’s
natural resources and ecology.
Transportation Corridor TC
To provide for future transportation uses and
related facilities as well as recreational trail
use.
Section 10.420 District Location and Boundaries
10.421 District Location and Boundaries
10.421.10 Zoning districts are located and bounded as shown on a map entitled “City
of Portsmouth Zoning Map,” copies of which are on file in the offices of
the City Clerk and Planning Department. The Zoning Map, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this Zoning Ordinance
and may be reissued by the Planning Board to incorporate such amendments
as may be made by the City Council.
10.421.20 Any property owned or leased by the City of Portsmouth and not shown on
the Zoning Map as being in the Municipal or Natural Resource Protection
district shall be deemed to be in the Municipal district, and when so
identified shall be placed in that district.
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-4
10.421.30 The following maps are incorporated by reference in the Zoning Map:
10.421.31 The Regulating Plan and Special Requirements Maps for the
Character Districts (Maps 10.5A21A through 10.5A21C), as
most recently amended.
10.421.32 The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for the City of
Portsmouth, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), as most recently amended.
10.421.33 The “FAR Part 77 Imaginary Surfaces Plan” for Pease
International Tradeport, dated May 1995.
10.422 Interpretation of District Bounds
The location of district boundary lines shown upon the Zoning Map shall be determined
as follows:
10.422.10 Where a boundary is shown as following a street, railroad or utility, the
boundary shall be the center line thereof unless otherwise indicated.
10.422.20 Where a boundary is shown outside of a street, railroad or utility and
approximately parallel thereto, it shall be deemed parallel to the nearest
line thereof, and the figure placed on the Zoning Map between the
boundary and such line shall be the distance in feet between them as
measured at a right angle from such line, unless otherwise indicated.
10.422.30 Where a boundary is shown as following a water course, the boundary
shall coincide with the center line thereof as said center line existed at the
date of the Zoning Map as amended.
10.422.40 Where a boundary apparently follows a lot line, it shall be interpreted as
such. Such lot line shall be interpreted as one existing at the time of the
enactment of this Zoning Ordinance or a pertinent amendment.
10.422.50 Where a district boundary line divides a lot, either zoning district shall be
interpreted as extending 20 feet into the adjacent district.
10.422.60 In case of uncertainty, the Planning Board shall determine the exact
location of the zoning district boundary.
Section 10.430 Use Regulations
10.431 All buildings or structures hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered,
enlarged or moved, and all uses hereafter established, shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
10.432 No building, structure, or land shall be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than that which is permitted in the district in which it is
located.
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-5
10.433 Buildings, structures and land owned or leased by the City of Portsmouth
shall be exempt from all provisions of this Ordinance except Article 10,
Environmental Protection Standards. Nevertheless, the City is urged to
comply with all relevant land use controls whenever possible and feasible.
10.434 The use regulations for all zoning districts are listed in Section 10.440
(Residential, Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial Districts), Section
10.450 (Pease/Airport Districts) and Section 10.460 (Municipal and
Conservation Districts).
10.434.10 The following key applies to the Tables of Uses in Sections
10.440, 10.450 and 10.460:
Symbol Meaning
P use is permitted in the district
S use is allowed in the district upon the granting
by the Board of Adjustment of a special
exception
CU use is allowed in the district upon the granting
by the Planning Board of a conditional use
permit
N use is prohibited in the district
10.434.20 More than one use category on one lot:
10.434.21 Different uses are permitted on one lot where
each use is allowed in the underlying district.
10.434.22 When a proposed development includes
different uses on one lot, the use which
triggers the higher level of review for the
zoning district shall determine the level of
review for the entire application. (For
example, in the MRB district multifamily
dwellings are permitted and retail sales
require a special exception; therefore, a
proposed development including both these
uses would require a special exception.)
10.434.30 In addition to the basic use regulations by district as
described in 10.434.10, a particular use may be subject to
additional standards or requirements specified in other
sections of the Ordinance. The last column of the Table of
Uses provides cross-references to some key supplemental
standards and requirements; however, this column is
provided for informational purposes and is not regulatory. In
the case of any conflict between this reference column and
any other section of the Zoning Ordinance, such other
section of the Ordinance shall apply.
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-6
10.434.40 Any use not specifically authorized in Article 4 (including
uses defined in Article 15 but not listed in Article 4), shall
be deemed prohibited in all zoning districts.
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-7
Section 10.440 Table of Uses – Residential, Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial Districts
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
1. Residential Uses
1.10 Single family dwelling P P P P N P P P P N P P N N N N N
1.20 Accessory dwelling unit 10.814 (Accessory Dwelling Units)
1.21 Attached CU CU CU CU N CU CU CU CU N CU CU N N N N N
1.22 Detached CU CU CU N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
1.25 Garden Cottage CU CU CU CU N CU CU CU CU N N N N N N N N 10.815 (Garden Cottages)
1.30 Two-family dwelling N N P P P P P P P N P P N N N N N 10.640 (Downtown Overlay district)
1.40 Townhouse N N S P P P P P P N P P P N N N N 10.640 (Downtown Overlay district)
1.50 Multifamily dwelling 10.5A32 (Character district
permitted uses)
10.640 (Downtown Overlay district)
10.813 (Multifamily Dwellings in
the Business District)
1.51 3 or 4 dwelling units N N S P P P P P P N P P P N N N N
1.52 5 to 8 dwelling units N N N S P P P P P N P P P N N N N
1.53 More than 8 dwelling units N N N N P N N N P N P P P N N N N
1.60 Conversion of a building existing on
January 1, 1980, with less than the
required minimum lot area per
dwelling unit specified in Article 5
10.640 (Downtown Overlay
District)
10.812 (Conversion of Existing
Dwelling to Multifamily Dwelling)
1.61 To 2 dwelling units N N S S N P P P S N N N N N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-8
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
1.62 To 3 or 4 dwelling units N N S S N P P P S N N N N N N N N
1.63 To 5 to 8 dwelling units N N N S N S S S S N N N N N N N N
1.64 To more than 8 dwelling units N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
1.70 Live/work unit N N N N N P P P P N P P P N N N N
1.80 Manufactured housing park N N N N P N N N N N N N N N N N N 10.816 (Manufactured Housing Park
Dimensional Standards)
1.90 Planned unit development (PUD) 10.720 (Planned Unit
1.91 Developments) Open space PUD CU CU N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
1.92 Residential density incentive
PUD
N N CU N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
2. Institutional Residence or Care
Facilities
2.10 Assisted living facility
2.11 Assisted living center N N N N N N N N P P S S P N N N N
2.12 Assisted living home S S S S S S S S N N S S N N N N N
2.20 Residential care facility
2.21 5 or fewer residents S S S S S S S S N N S S S N N N N
2.22 More than 5 residents N N N N N S S S P S S S S N S N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-9
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
3. Educational, Religious, Charitable,
Cultural and Public Uses
3.10 Place of assembly
3.11 Religious S S S N N S S S S S S S S N N N N
3.12 Other nonprofit N N N N N S S S S S S S S N N N N
3.20 School
3.21 Primary or secondary N N N N N S S P P P S S P P N N N
3.30 Post-secondary N N N N N S S P P P S S P N P P N
3.30 Historic preservation building S S S S S P P P P P P P P N P N N 10.821 (Historic Preservation
Buildings and Museums)
3.40 Museum N N N N N P P N P P S S P N P N N 10.821 (Historic Preservation
Buildings and Museums)
3.50 Performance facility
3.51 Indoor performance facility 10.592 (location)
3.511 Occupancy up to 500 persons N N N N N N N N P P S S S N N N N 10.860 (hours of operation)
3.512 Occupancy more than 500 N N N N N N N N S P N N N N N N N
3.52 Outdoor performance facility 10.592 (location)
10.822 (yards)
10.860 (hours of operation)
3.521 Occupancy up to 500 persons N N N N N N N N S S S S N N N N N
3.522 Occupancy more than 500 N N N N N N N N S S N N N N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-10
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
3.60 Cemetery S S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
3.70 Club, fraternal or service
organization
N N N N N N S S P S S S S N N N N
3.80 Municipally operated park and related
activities
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P For other municipal uses see Section
10.460 (Municipal districts)
4. Recreational Uses
4.10 Religious, sectarian or private
non-profit recreational use
N S N N N S S N P P S S P N N N N
4.20 Cinema or similar indoor amusement
use with no live performance
N N N N N N N N P P S S P N N N N 10.825 (noise)
10.860 (hours of operation)
4.30 Indoor recreation use, such as bowling
alley or arcade
N N N N N N N N P P S S P N N N N 10.825 (noise)
10.860 (hours of operation)
4.40 Health club, yoga studio, martial arts
school, or similar use
4.41 Up to 2,000 sq. ft. GFA* N N N N N S S P P P P P P N N S N
4.42 More than 2,000 sq. ft. GFA N N N N N N N N S P S S S N N S N
4.50 Outdoor recreation use N N N N N N N N N S P P N N N N N 10.592 (location)
10.860 (hours of operation)
4.60 Amusement park, water park or
theme park
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
*GFA = gross floor area.
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-11
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
5. Office Uses, Non-Medical
5.10 Professional office N N N N N P P S P P P P P N P P N 10.833 (Mixed Residential districts)
5.20 Business office
(incl. real estate office)
N N N N N P P P P P P P P N P P N 10.833 (Mixed Residential districts)
5.30 Financial institution
5.31 Financial services office N N N N N P P P P P P P P N P P N
5.32 Retail bank N N N N N N S P P P P P P N S N N
5.40 Social service campus 10.823
5.41 Nonresidential N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N
5.42 Residential N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N
5.50 Media studio
5.51 Excluding any transmitting
antenna tower
N N N N N S S S P P S S P N N P N
5.52 Including accessory transmitting
antenna tower
N N N N N N N N N S N N S N N S N 10.834
5.60 Publishing facility or similar electronic
production operation
N N N N N S S S P P P P P N P P N
5.70 Call Center N N N N N N N N N P N N N N N S N
6. Medical Services and Health Care
6.10 Hospital N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-12
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
6.20 Medical offices and clinics
(outpatient only)
N N N N N S S S P P P P P N P N N
6.30 Clinics with inpatient care N N N N N N N N N S S N S N S N N
6.40 Ambulatory surgical center N N N N N N N N N S S N S N S N N
6.50 Substance abuse treatment facility N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
6.60 Psychiatric hospital for the criminally
insane
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
7. Services, Other Than Health Care
7.10 Day Care
7.11 Family day care facility P P P N N P P P N N P P N N N N N
7.12 Group day care facility
including private preschool and
kindergarten
S S S S N S S P P P S S P N N N N 10.824 (group day care facilities)
10.860 (hours of operation)
7.20 Personal services N N N N N N S S P P P S P N N N N
7.30 Consumer services such as copy shop,
bicycle repair, and pet grooming
N N N N N N S S P P P S P N N N N
7.40 Trade, craft and general service
establishments, such as shops for
plumbers, electricians, painters, paper
hangers, upholsterers, sign painters and
printers
N N N N N N N S P P P S P N P P P All storage of materials and
equipment shall be located within a
building
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-13
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
7.50 Veterinary Care N N N N N N N S N S S S S N S S N 10.832
7.60 Laundry and dry cleaning
establishments
7.61 Drop-off/pick-up only for items
to be dry cleaned or laundered
off site
N N N N N P P P P P P P P N S N N
7.62 Self-service laundry for use by
the general public
N N N N N S S P S P P S P N N N N
7.63 Dry cleaning establishment
with on-site cleaning facilities.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N
7.70 Undertaking establishment, funeral
parlor or mortuary chapel, excluding
crematorium
N N N N N N N P N P S S P N N N N
8. Retail Trade
8.10 Convenience goods 10.860 (hours of operation)
8.11 Convenience `goods 1
8.111 Hours of operation between
6:00 AM and 11:00 PM
N N N N N N P P P P P P P N N N N
8.112 24 hours per day operation N N N N N N N N P P S N S N N N N
8.12 Convenience goods 2
8.121 Hours of operation between
6:00 AM and 11:00 PM
N N N N N N P S P P P P P N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-14
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
8.122 24 hours per day operation N N N N N N N N S S S N S N N N N
8.30 Retail sales conducted within a
building
8.31 Not marine-related N N N N N N P S P P P P P N N N N
8.32 Marine-related N N N N N N N N P P P P P P N N N
8.40 Shopping center N N N N N N N N P P P P S N N N N
8.50 Retail sales, large format N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N N N
8.60 Fish market N N N N N N N N P P P P P P N N N 10.860 (hours of operation)
8.70 Manufacture of goods sold at retail on
the premises, such as crafts, coffee
roasting and bakery goods
N N N N N N S S P P P P P N N P N Maximum of 5 persons employed in
manufacture
8.80 Sexually oriented business N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N N N 10.930 (Sexually Oriented
Businesses)
9. Eating and Drinking Places
9.10 Nightclub or bar 10.590 (location)
9.11 Occupant load less than 250 N N N N N N N N P P P S N N N N N
9.12 Occupant load from 250 to 500 N N N N N N N N S S S S N N N N N
9.13 Occupant load greater than 500 N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
9.20 Restaurant, take-out only N N N N N N N N P P P P P N N N N
9.30 Restaurant, fast food N N N N N N N N P P P P P N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-15
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
9.40 Restaurant, place of public assembly
or function room
10.590 (location)
10.860 (hours of operation)
9.41 Occupant load less than 50 N N N N N N P N P P P P P N N N N
9.42 Occupant load from 50 to 250 N N N N N N N N P P P S S N N N N
9.43 Occupant load from 250 to 500 N N N N N N N N P S S S N N N N N
9.44 Occupant load greater than 500 N N N N N N N N S S N N N N N N N
9.50 Permanently moored vessel used as
restaurant or bar , with occupant
load less than 250
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
10. Lodging Establishments
10.10 Boarding house N N N N N N N N N S S N S N N N N
10.20 Bed and breakfast
10.21 Bed and Breakfast 1 N N S N N S S P P N S S P N N N N
10.22 Bed and Breakfast 2 N N N N N S S P P N S S P N N N N
10.30 Inn N N N N N N S S P P S S P N N N N
10.40 Hotel or motel 10.836 (Office Research districts)
10.41 Up to 125 rooms N N N N N N N N P S S S N N P N N
10.42 126 to 250 rooms N N N N N N N N P S S S N N S N N
10.42 251 to 500 rooms N N N N N N N N P S S N N N N N N
10.43 More than 500 rooms N N N N N N N N P S S N N N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-16
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
10.50 Conference hotel N N N N N N N N P P S N N N N N N
10.60 Conference center N N N N N N N N P P S N N N N N N
11. Motor Vehicle-Related Uses
11.10 Sales, renting or leasing of passenger
cars and light trucks, motorcycles,
tractors, snowmobiles and small
power equipment (e.g., lawnmowers),
including accessory repair services
N N N N N N N N N P S N S N N N N 10.592 (location)
10.843 (motor vehicle related uses)
11.20 Motor vehicle service station,
motor vehicle repair or washing
facility for passenger cars and light
trucks
N N N N N N N N N S S N S N N S N 10.581 (lot area)
10.592 (location)
10.843 (motor vehicle related uses)
11.30 Sales, rental, leasing, distribution, and
repair of trucks over 10,000 lb gross
vehicle weight (GVW), recreational
vehicles, marine craft or manufactured
housing, and related equipment
N N N N N N N N N S S N S N N S N 10.581 (lot area)
10.592 (location)
10.843 (motor vehicle related uses)
11.40 Impound lot (principal or accessory
use)
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N
11.50 Truck fueling facility N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N 10.581 (lot area)
10.592 (location)
10.843 (motor vehicle related uses)
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-17
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
11.60 Truck terminal N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N 10.592 (location)
10.843 (motor vehicle related uses)
12. Marine Craft Related Uses
12.10 Boat landings, boat docks, boathouses
and associated marine uses
12.11 Non-commercial P P P P P P P P P P P P P N N N N
12.12 Fishing boat landing 1 N S S N N N N N P P N N N P N N P 10.837.10 (Residential districts)
12.13 Fishing boat landing 2 N N N N N N N N N S N N N S N N P
12.20 Marina
12.21 With no repair, servicing or
fueling facilities
N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N N N
12.22 With repair, servicing or
fueling facilities
N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N N N 10.581 (lot area)
10.592 (location)
10.860 (hours of operation)
12.30 Repair of commercial marine craft and
marine-related structures
N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N S P 10.581 (lot area)
10.592 (location)
10.860 (hours of operation)
12.40 Landside support facility for
commercial passenger vessel
N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N N P
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-18
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
13. Wholesale Trade, Warehousing
and Distribution
13.10 Wholesale use
13.11 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N
13.12 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P P
13.20 Wholesale sales devoted to, and in
the same establishment as, a
permitted retail use
13.21 Occupying up to 20% of gross
floor area of establishment
N N N N N N N N P P S N P N N N N
13.22 Occupying 21% to 40% of
gross floor area of
establishment
N N N N N N N N N P N N P N N N N
13.30 Wholesale lumber yards, lumber and
contractor sales
13.31 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N
13.32 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P S
13.40 Warehousing or distribution of nonflammable,
non-hazardous materials,
not classified as a high hazard use
13.41 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-19
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
13.42 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N P P
14. Industrial Uses
14.10 Light industry
14.11 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N S S S N N N P N
14.12 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N P P
14.20 Research and development
14.21 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N P N S S N S N S P N
14.22 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N S N N S P S P P
14.30 Food processing 10.592 (location)
10.851 (use contained in building)
14.31 Not including seafood
processing
N N N N N N N N N P S N N N N P P
14.32 Including seafood processing N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N S S
14.40 Electronics manufacturing N N N N N N N N N S S N S N N P N
14.50 General manufacturing
14.51 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N S S N N N P N
14.52 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N P N P S
14.60 Biological or chemical laboratory
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-20
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
14.61 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N
14.62 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S
14.70 Recycling facility or recycling
plant
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N 10.592 (location)
10.853
14.80 High hazard use, including other
uses listed in this section but not
including uses described in 14.90
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N 10.593 (location)
14.90 Storage (other than normal accessory
use), processing, disposal, or transfer
of petroleum, petrochemicals, natural
gas and liquid petroleum products,
coal, alcohol, wood pulp, solid or
liquid waste, junk or hazardous waste
as classified by Federal or State law
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
15. Transportation and Utilities
15.10 Public or private transformer station,
substation, pumping station or
automatic telephone exchange, not
including any business office,
storage yard or storage building
15.11 Essential to service the area in
which it is located
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S P S
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-21
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
15.12 Providing community-wide or
regional service
N N N N N N N N N S N N N N N S S
15.20 Heliport or helipad
15.21 Helipad, as an accessory use
to a permitted hospital use
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S S
15.22 Heliport N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
16. Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities
16.10 Satellite dish receiver 42 inches or less
in diameter:
16.11 Building-mounted, maximum
height less than or equal to 4
feet from the roof surface
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
16.12 Ground-mounted, complying
with all yard requirements for
the district
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
16.20 Satellite dish receiver more than 42
inches in diameter:
16.21 Building-mounted, maximum
height less than or equal to 4
feet from the roof surface
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-22
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
16.22 Ground-mounted, complying
with all yard requirements for
the district
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
16.30 Whip antenna not more than 30 feet in
height
S S S S S S S S P P S S P P P P P
16.40 Other wirelesss telecommunications
facility not included above
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 10.460 (Municipal districts)
10.920 (Wireless telecommunications
facilities)
17. Agricultural Uses
17.10 Farm, not including the keeping of
farm animals
P P N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
17.20 Keeping of farm animals S S N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
18. Temporary Uses
18.10 Construction trailer P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
18.20 Temporary structure
18.21 Up to 30 days P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
18.22 31 to 90 days S S S S S S S S S S S S S S P P P
18.23 91 to 180 days N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S S S
18.24 More than 180 days N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-23
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
18.30 Manufactured housing not on a
foundation, as temporary replacement
housing for a dwelling on the same
lot destroyed by natural causes,
provided that there is an active
building permit for rebuilding the
destroyed dwelling
18.31 Up to 180 days P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
18.32 More than 180 days S S S S S S S S S S S S S S P P P
18.40 Carts or trailers, including outdoor
display area, used for the seasonal sale
of dry goods, Christmas trees, flowers,
fruits, vegetables, seasonal products
and prepared food
N N N N N N N N P P S N P N P P P
19. Accessory Uses
19.10 Accessory use to a permitted
principal use, but not including any
outdoor storage
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 10.811 (residential accessory uses)
19.20 Home occupation
19.21 Home occupation 1 P P P P P P P P P P P P P N N N N
19.22 Home occupation 2 S S S S N S S P P P P P P N N N N
19.30 Concessions and services located
within the principal building
N N N P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-24
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
19.40 Drive-through facility, as accessory
use to a permitted principal use
N N N N N N N N N CU CU N CU N CU N N 10.835 (accessory drive-through
uses)
19.50 Outdoor dining or drinking area, as
accessory use to a permitted
principal use
N N N N N N CU N P P P P CU N N N N
20. Accessory Storage
20.10 Indoor storage of motor vehicles or
boats as an accessory use
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
20.20 Outdoor storage of registered motor
vehicles owned by residents of the
premises or business. Such vehicles
may include only one commercial
vehicle, which shall be limited to no
more than 2 axles and 6 wheels.
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
20.30 Outdoor storage for not more than 9
consecutive months of boats owned by
residents of the property:
20.31 Not more than one motorboat
or sailboat longer than 12 feet
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
20.32 Any number of (a) motorboats
or sailboats up to 12 feet in
length, or (b) hand-powered
craft (canoes and kayaks)
without restriction as to length
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-25
Use R
SRA
SRB
GRA
GRB
GRC
(A)
GA/
MH
MRO
CD4-
L1
CD4-
L2 MRB
CD5
CD4
GB G1 G2
B
CD4-
W
WB OR I WI Supplemental Regulations
20.40 Outdoor storage of lobster traps,
lobster buoys and associated rope
P P P P P P P P N P P P P P N P P 10.811.20
20.50 Outdoor storage of raw or partially
finished material
20.51 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N
20.52 Marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N N N N N S N S S
20.60 Outdoor storage of machinery,
equipment and vehicles
20.61 Not marine-dependent N N N N N N N N N S N N S N N S N
20.62 Marine-dependent (other than
allowed by 20.30 or 20.40
above)
N N N N N N N N N S N N S S N S S

P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-27
Section 10.450 Table of Uses – Pease/Airport Districts
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
A. Airport-Related Uses
A1 Military aviation (activities associated with the US Department of
Defense, NH National Guard, or other State or Federal defense
related activities) and related airport activities
P P P P
A2 Medical emergency flights, provided that any arrivals or departures
between 11:00 PM and 6:00 AM shall be limited to locations
designated for emergency use during such hours
P P N P
A3 Civil aviation, with no arrivals or departures permitted between 11:00
PM and 6:00 AM:
A3.1 Commercial cargo/freight air transportation for Stage III
aircraft and aircraft with a gross weight of less than 75,000
pounds
P P N N
A3.2 General Aviation (all aviation activity except commercial
passenger service and the military)
P P N N
A3.3 Limited commercial passenger service for no more than 30
passengers per flight
P P N N
A3.4 Air charter service for no more than 30 passengers per flight P P N N
A4 Operation and maintenance activities associated with the airport
runway and apron
P P N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-28
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
A5 Aircraft servicing, maintenance and retrofitting
A5.1 Operations that require direct access to the aircraft, including
aircraft fueling
P P N N
A5.2 Operations that do not require direct access to the aircraft,
including but not limited to servicing and maintenance of
avionics, flight recorders, tires, brakes, sheet metal, batteries
and other aircraft components
P P P N
A6 Maintenance, replacement and operation of underground fuel storage
and distribution systems that were in existence prior to January 1,
1989, provided the following requirements are satisfied:
P P N N
(a) To protect the underlying aquifer, no additional fuel storage or
distribution systems shall be placed underground;
(b) Periodic inspections of not less than every six months shall be
conducted by the responsible authority and the results shall be
reported to appropriate Federal, State and Local authorities; and
(c) Operation shall conform to all applicable federal, state and
local statutes, ordinances, regulations and procedures.
A7 Above-ground fuel storage tank facility, provided that:
(a) Storage tanks shall be either double lined or vaulted;
(b) Storage tanks shall be diked with an impervious retention basin
capable of containing 1.3 times the holding capacity of the
tanks; and
(c) All applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and
regulations shall be complied with.
P S N N
A8 Airport terminal with associated ticket sales, food and beverage
services, retail sales and services, located within the structure,
including car rental agencies
P P N N
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-29
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
A9 Aircraft hangers, servicing and repair facilities, aircraft
administration buildings, freight terminals, retrofitting facilities and
offices for on-board equipment activities
P P N N
A10 Air freight terminal operations and activities P P N N
A11 Aerospace and aviation-related training facility P P P N
A12 Aircraft sales and leasing facility P P S S
A13 Aircraft and aircraft parts manufacture and retrofitting;
aircraft parts and components storage; and
aviation research and testing laboratories and activities
N P P N
3. Educational, Religious, Charitable, Cultural and Public Uses
3.30 School, post-secondary (including training center or similar
educational facility)
N N N P
3.60 Performance facility
3.61 Indoor performance facility 10.592 (location)
3.611 Occupancy for up to 500 persons N N N P 10.860 (hours of operation)
3.612 Occupancy for more than 500 persons N N N S
3.62 Outdoor performance facility 10.592 (location)
10.822 (yards)
3.621 Occupancy for up to 500 persons N N N P 10.860 (hours of operation)
3.622 Occupancy for more than 500 persons. N N N S
4. Recreational Uses
4.40 Outdoor recreational use N P P P
4.50 Health club, yoga studio, martial arts school. or similar use N N N P
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-30
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
5. Office Uses, Non-Medical
5.20 Business office N N P P
5.50 Media studio, including accessory transmitting antenna tower N S S P 10.834
5.80 Trade-related exhibition/conference center, offices and support
activities
N N N P
6. Medical Services and Health Care
6.10 Hospital N N N P
6.20 Medical office or clinic N N N P
9. Eating and Drinking Places
9.50 Restaurant, place of public assembly or function room 10.590 (location)
9.52 Occupant load up to 500 persons N N N P
9.53 Occupancy greater than 500 persons N N N S
10. Lodging Establishments
10.40 Hotel or motel N N N P 10.590 (location)
14. Industrial Uses
14.10 Research and development, including high hazard uses N P P P
14.30 Food processing, including seafood processing N S S S 10.592 (location)
10.851 (use contained in building)
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-31
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
14.50 General manufacturing
(a) with equal to or less than 40 percent associated warehousing P P P P
(b) with greater than 40 percent associated warehousing. S S S S
14.99 Foreign trade zone S S S S
15. Transportation and Utilities
15.10 Public or private transformer station, substation, pumping station, or
automatic telephone exchange, not including any business office,
storage yard or storage building
15.11 Essential to service the area in which it is located S S S S
15.12 Providing community-wide or regional service S S S S
15.30 Ground transportation of non-flammable and non-hazardous
materials, and related activities and operations, provided that such
use is located at least 100 feet from all property lines
N P S N
15.40 Passenger transportation terminal, including bus terminal, rail
terminal, commuter van, taxi and limousine services
P P N P
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-32
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
15.50 Shared vehicular parking garage as a principal use, subject to the
following:
(a) Dimensional standards shall be as specified in Article 5 except
as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3 acres
(2) Minimum open space: 25%
(3) Maximum building/structure height: 70 feet
(b) Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to:
(1) Group day care facility (no age restriction) with
associated outdoor fenced recreation areas
(2) Car rental agency
(3) Drop off/pick up only for items to be dry cleaned or
laundered off site
(4) News stand
(5) Convenience goods 1, Convenience goods 2
(6) Coffee shop
P P P P
16. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
16.10 Satellite dish receivers 42 inches or less in diameter
16.11 Building-mounted, maximum height less than or equal to 4
feet from the roof surface
P P P P
16.12 Ground-mounted, complying with all yard requirements for
the district
P P P P
16.20 Satellite dish receiver larger than 42 inches in diameter
16.21 Building-mounted, maximum height less than or equal to 4
feet from the roof surface
S S S S
P = Permitted S = Special Exception CU = Conditional Use Permit N = Prohibited
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-33
Use AIR AI PI ABC Supplemental Regulations
16.22 Ground-mounted, complying with all yard requirements for
the district
S S S S
16.30 Whip antenna not greater than 30’ in height P P P P
18. Temporary Uses
18.10 Construction trailer P P P P
19. Accessory Uses
19.10 The following accessory uses to a permitted principal use,
provided said uses combined occupy less than 20% of the total
gross floor area of the building:
19.11 Car rental agency.
19.12 Laundry and dry cleaning establishment
19.13 Personal services
19.14 News stand
19.15 Convenience goods 1, Convenience goods 2
19.16 Restaurant/coffee shop
P P P P
19.17 Group day care facility (no age restriction) for employees
located within the building
19.18 Recreational facility
19.19 Retail bank
10.824 (group day care facilities)
20. Accessory Storage
20.50 Outdoor storage of raw or partially finished material S S S S
20.60 Outdoor storage of machinery, equipment and vehicles S S S S
Article 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 4-34
Section 10.460 Table of Uses – Municipal and Conservation Districts
use Municipal NRP
M1 Municipal activities including, but not limited to, police,
government, fire department, library, and other public
activities
P N
M2 Public facilities, including parking facilities and garages P N
M3 Temporary activities as authorized by municipal
agencies having jurisdiction
P P
M4 Tree farms and related forestry activities P P
M5 Wildlife refuge P P
M6 Public parks and playgrounds P P
M7 Public nature trails, provided that no off road vehicles or
bicycles of any type shall be allowed
P P
M8 Airport related equipment, communications and
navigational aids and activities
S S
M9 uses of property which are expressly recognized in
conservation easement or conservation restriction deeds
by which the City of Portsmouth has acquired
conservation rights in the property which is the subject
of the deed
N P
M10 Telecommunications equipment including towers,
attached and detached antenna and cabinets, provided
that the City Council approves such installation
P N
Note: No septic tank or leach field shall be constructed, reconstructed or enlarged closer
than 75 feet to any wetland lying within an NRP district.
Section 10.470 Uses Permitted in the Transportation Corridor District
Land in the Transportation Corridor District may be used for the following purposes:
10.471 Rail transport
10.472 Municipal trail
10.473 Rail-trail or rail-with-trail
10.474 Underground utility lines, including but not limited to water, sewer,
drainage, natural gas, electric and telecommunications
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-1
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
Section 10.510 General Requirements
Section 10.520 Residential and Mixed Residential Districts
Section 10.530 Business and Industrial Districts
Section 10.540 Airport Districts
Section 10.550 Conservation Districts
Section 10.560 Municipal District
Section 10.570 Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
Section 10.580 Special Dimensional Standards for Certain Uses
Section 10.590 Minimum Distance Between Nonresidential Uses and Residential and Mixed
Residential Districts
Section 10.510 General Requirements
10.511 Interpretation
When this Article specifies two requirements for the same dimension (for example,
maximum building height stated both in feet and in stories, or minimum side yard
stated both in feet and as a percentage of building height), the more restrictive
requirement shall apply unless explicitly stated otherwise.
10.512 Street Access
Every structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot with access to a public
street or an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located so as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street
parking. This requirement shall not apply to lots in the Natural Resource Protection
district.
10.513 One Dwelling Per Lot
No more than one free-standing dwelling shall be built on any lot in a Rural, Single
Residence A or B, or General Residence A or B district, except where specifically
exempted by other provisions of this Ordinance.
10.514 Contiguous Lots in Common Ownership
10.514.10 Contiguous lots in common ownership shall not be separated or
transferred in ownership so as not to be in compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance except as provided in Section 10.514.20.
10.514.20 Contiguous lots in common ownership may be separated or transferred in
ownership, and such separation or transfer shall not be treated as a
subdivision, if all of the following apply:
10.514.21 The lots are located in Atlantic Heights and are identified on
the Plat recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-2
Deeds on July 17, 1919, and filed under the Recording
Number of D-0247; and
10.514.22 The lots contain a structure constructed prior to May 20,
1982, which is located so as to cross a lot line shown on the
Plat referenced in paragraph 10.514.21; and
10.514.23 The property owners provide prior written notification to the
Planning Director, who shall notify the Planning Board,
Building Inspector and Assessors Office.
10.515 Measurement Rules
10.515.10 Yards
10.515.11 For a corner lot or through lot, all requirements related to
the front yard shall apply to the principal front yard and
all secondary front yards.
10.515.12 Determinations of yards shall not include:
(a) gutters, cornices or eaves projecting not more than 30
inches from a vertical wall; or
(b) balconies, bay windows or awnings projecting not more
than 2 feet from a vertical wall, not exceeding 4 feet in
width, and cumulatively not exceeding 50% of the width of
the building face; or
(c) structures (such as decks and patios) less than 18 inches
above ground level.
10.515.13 Fences not over 4 feet in height shall be exempt from front
yard requirements, and fences not over 6 feet in height shall
be exempt from side and rear yard requirements.
10.515.14 A mechanical system (i.e. HVAC, power generator, etc.) that
is less than 36 inches above the ground level with a
mounting pad not exceeding 10 square feet shall be exempt
from yard requirements, but shall be set back at least 10 feet
from a property line; and shall not be located closer to the
street than the front of the principal structure.
10.515.20 Required Open Space
The calculation of open space on a lot shall not include any area with a
horizontal dimension that is 5 feet or less, unless the perimeter of the open
space connecting the endpoints of the 5-foot dimension line is less than 15
feet in length.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-3
Area “A” does not count toward
required open space requirement
because the perimeter connecting
the endpoints of the 5’ dimension
line is more than 15’ in length.
Area “B” does count toward
required open space because the
perimeter connecting the endpoints
of the 5’ dimension line is less than
15’ in length.
10.516 Exceptions to Yard Requirements
10.516.10 Front Yard Exception for Existing Alignments
If existing principal buildings on the same side of the same street, in the
same zoning district, and within 200 feet of a lot are located closer to the
street than the minimum required front yard specified in this Article, the
required front yard for the principal building on such lot shall be the
average of the existing alignments of all such principal buildings,
rounded to the nearest foot. For the purpose of this provision, buildings on
the subject lot shall not be included in the average of existing alignments.
10.516.20 Yard Adjoining a Railroad Right of Way
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, in any district where a
rear yard or side yard is required, the minimum yard adjoining a railroad
right of way shall be 15 feet.
10.516.30 Corner Lot Vision Obstruction
On a corner lot, no structure, accessory structure, landscaping, or
screening which obstructs visibility shall be erected or maintained between
the heights of 2.5 feet and 10 feet above the edge of pavement grades
within the area bounded by the sidelines of the intersecting street rightsof-
way and a straight line joining points along said street sidelines 20 feet
from the point of intersection of such sidelines or extensions thereof. This
provision shall not apply in the Character Districts 4-W, 4 and 5 (CD4-W,
CD4 and CD5).
5'
5' 3'
3'
12'
12'
A
B
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-4
Corner Lot Vision Obstruction (Sec. 10.516.30)
10.516.40 Projections Into Required Yards
In the Single Residence, General Residence and Mixed Residential
districts, building elements may project into required yards by the
amounts indicated in the following table:
SRA, SRB GRA GRB, GRC,
MRO, MRB
Front
Yard
Side or
Rear
Yard
Front
Yard
Side or
Rear
Yard
Front
Yard
Side or
Rear
Yard
Building Elements Maximum Projection Into Required Yard
Terraces, decks, steps and stoops
that are uncovered and unenclosed
and are less than 3 feet in height
and less than 100 square feet in
area
5’ 5’ 0’ 5’ 10’ 0’
Porches, porticos, steps or stoops
that are covered and unenclosed
and are less than 12 feet in height
(to top of roof) and less than 50
square feet in area
5’ 5’ 0’ 5’ 5’ 0’
Porches and porticos that are
covered and enclosed and are less
than 12 feet in height (to top of
roof) and less than 20 square feet
in area
5’ 5’ 0’ 5’ 5’ 0’
0’ = No projection allowed into required yard
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-5
10.517 Roof Appurtenances and Other Rooftop Features
10.517.10 A roof appurtenance may exceed the maximum allowed structure
height for the zoning district by up to the additional height allowed in
Section 10.521 or Section 10.531, as applicable, subject to the provisions
of Section 10.517.
10.517.20 In the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts, features for rooftop
access and use may exceed the maximum allowed structure height for
the zoning district as follows:
10.517.21 An elevator enclosure for an elevator providing rooftop
access may extend an additional 5 feet above the allowed
appurtenance height, provided that it is set back at least 30
feet from all edges of the roof and that the combined area of
all such enclosures shall not exceed 300 square feet in area.
10.517.22 Elevator vestibules and partial shelters such as trellises and
pergolas may extend up to the height allowed for rooftop
appurtenances, provided that all such features shall be set
back from all edges of the roof a distance at least equal to
their height above the allowed structure height, and that the
total area of such features shall not exceed 15 percent of the
total roof area of the structure.
10.517.23 Railings around rooftop use areas may extend above the
allowed structure height provided that they are less than
4 feet above the roof and that they are set back at least twice
their height from the edge of the roof.
10.517.30 All roof appurtenances and other features that exceed the allowed
structure height for the zoning district shall not exceed 33 percent of the
total roof area of the structure and, except for elevators and stair towers,
shall be set back at least 10 feet from any edge of the roof.
10.517.31 Solar energy panels shall not be subject to the 33 percent
limitation provided that they are not visible from a point 20
feet above the edge of the street right-of-way on the
opposite side of the street.
10.517.40 The area of roof appurtenances shall not be considered as part of the
building’s gross floor area calculations.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-6
Section 10.520 Residential and Mixed Residential Districts
10.521 Table of Dimensional Standards – Residential and Mixed Residential Districts 1
R SRA SRB GRA GRB GRC GA/MH MRO MRB
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Lot area 5 acres 1 acre 15,000 sf 7,500 sf 5,000 sf 3,500 sf 5 acres 7,500 sf 7,500 sf
Lot area per dwelling unit 5 acres 1 acre 15,000 sf 7,500 sf 5,000 sf 3,500 sf 10,000 sf 7,500 sf 7,500 sf
Continuous street frontage NA 150’ 100’ 100’ 80’ 70’ N/A 100’ 100’
Depth NA 200’ 100’ 70’ 60’ 50’ N/A 80’ 80’
Minimum Yard Dimensions
Front 50’ 30’ 30’ 2 15’ 5’ 5’ 30’ 2,4 5’ 5’ 2
Side 20’ 20’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 25’ 10’ 10’
Rear 40’ 40’ 30’ 20’ 25’ 20’ 25’ 15’ 15’
Maximum Structure
Dimensions
Structure height
Sloped roof 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 3 35’ 3,4 40’ 40’
Flat roof 35’ 30’ 30’ 30’ 30’ 30’ 35’ 3,4 30’ 30’
Roof appurtenance height 8’ 8’ 8’ 8’ 8’ 8’ 8’ 10’ 10’
Building coverage 5% 10% 20% 25% 30% 35% 20% 4 40% 40%
Minimum open space 75% 50% 40% 30% 25% 20% 50% 25% 25%
NA = Not Applicable NR = No Requirement
Notes:
1. See Article 5A and Article 5B for dimensional standards in Character and Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts.
2. See Section 10.533 for special front yard requirements on Lafayette Road.
3. Within the General Residence C and Garden Apartment/Mobile Home Park districts an additional 8’ of height may be added to the maximum structure height in order to
provide for multifamily dwellings that include vehicular parking spaces located within the residential building itself, if the additional height results in increased open
space when compared to a site plan showing what open spaces would remain if required parking spaces were located in the open and in accessory structures.
4. See Section 10.816 for requirements within a manufactured housing park.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-7
10.522 Multifamily Dwellings
The maximum building length of a multifamily dwelling shall not exceed 160 feet.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-8
Section 10.530 Business and Industrial Districts
10.531 Table of Dimensional Standards – Business and Industrial Districts 1
B GB WB I WI OR
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Lot Area 20,000 sf 43,560
sf 20,000 sf 2 acres 2 acres 3 acres 2
Lot Area per dwelling unit 2,500 sf NR NR NA NA NA
Continuous street frontage 100’ 200’ 100’ 200’ 200’ 300’ 2
Depth 80’ 100’ 100’ 200’ 200’ 300’ 2
Minimum Yard Dimensions
Front 20’ 30’ 30’ 70’ 70’ 50’ 2
Side 15’ 30’ 30’ 50’ 50’ 75’ 2
Rear 15’ 50’ 20’ 50’ 50’ 50’
Maximum Structure Dimensions
Structure height 50’ 60’ 35’ 70’ 3 70’ 3 60’ 3
Roof appurtenance height 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’
Building coverage 35% 30% 30% 50% 50% 30%
Floor Area Ratio NR NR NR NR NR NR
Minimum open space 15% 20% 20% 20% 20% 30%
Notes: NA = Not Applicable NR = No Requirement
1. See Article 5A and Article 5B for dimensional standards in Character and
Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts.
2. See Section 10.532.10 for requirements for lots adjacent to North Mill Pond.
3. See Section 10.532.20 for reduced structure height within 200’ of North Mill
Pond or Piscataqua River.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-9
10.532 Exceptions to Dimensional Standards for Certain Lots in the Industrial
and OR Districts
10.532.10 North Mill Pond
In the Office Research district, lots in the area bounded by North Mill Pond, Maplewood
Avenue, Islington Street and Bartlett Street shall be subject to the requirements of the
Industrial district with respect to minimum lot area, street frontage, lot depth, and
yards.
10.532.20 Building Height Setback from Waterfront
In the Industrial, Waterfront Industrial and Office Research districts, no portion of a
building that is less than 200 feet from the highest observable tide line of the
Piscataqua River or the North Mill Pond shall exceed 45 feet in height. Docking and
offloading structures and equipment (such as cranes) are exempt from this restriction.
10.533 Special Yard Requirements on Lafayette Road
Notwithstanding the minimum front yard requirements specified in Section 10.521 or
Section 10.531, for any lot adjoining Lafayette Road between the Route 1 Bypass and the
Rye town line, no building, structure, parking area, or display or storage area shall be
located less than 80 feet from the centerline of Lafayette Road or 30 feet from the
sideline of Lafayette Road, whichever represents the greater setback, except as
otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.
10.534 Inclusion of Waterfront Public Access in Open Space
In a Business or Industrial District, a portion of a lot that is used to provide public access
along a waterfront shall be counted as open space for the purpose of satisfying the
requirement for minimum open space on a lot, as follows:
10.534.10 Each square foot of lot area that is duly recorded and enforceable by the
City as waterfront public access shall be counted as 1.5 square feet of
required open space.
10.534.20 Each square foot of lot area that is used for, but not enforceable by the
City as, waterfront public access shall be counted as 1.0 square foot of
required open space.
Section 10.540 Airport Districts
In the Airport, Airport Industrial, Pease Industrial and Airport Business Commercial
districts, land use controls are governed by State statute. The statute provides that land
acquired by the Pease Development Authority (PDA) from the federal government is not
subject to the City of Portsmouth’s land use controls, including the Zoning Ordinance,
but instead is subject to land use controls adopted by the PDA, consistent with the City’s
Master Plan. The dimensional regulations in the following table therefore have no direct
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-10
regulatory effect, but do represent the City’s land use policy for these districts and thus
are set forth as guidance for the PDA.
Air PI AI ABC
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Area NR 5 acres 5 acres 10 acres
Continuous street frontage NR NR 100’ 300’
Depth NR NR 100’ 200’
Minimum Yard Dimensions
Front NR 70’ 70’ 70’
Side NR 50’ + 50’ 50’ + 50’ 30’ + 30’
Rear NR 50’ 50’ 50’
Maximum Structure Dimensions
Structure height 85’ 85’ 85’ 85’
Roof appurtenance height 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’
Building coverage NR 30% 50% 60%
Minimum open space NR 50% 50% 50%
NR = No requirement.
Section 10.550 Conservation Districts
NRP
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Area NR
Continuous street frontage NR
Depth NR
Minimum Yard Dimensions
Front 70’
Side 70’
Rear 70’
Maximum Structure Dimensions
Structure height 35’
Roof appurtenance height 10’
Building coverage NR
Minimum open space 95%
NR = No requirement.
Section 10.560 Municipal District
Lots and buildings in the Municipal district are exempt from all dimensional and
intensity regulations.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-11
Section 10.570 Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
10.571 No accessory building, structure or use shall be located in any required
front yard, or closer to a street than the principal building.
10.572 In a Character, Business or Industrial district, all accessory buildings and
structures shall conform to the side yard and rear yard requirements of
the applicable zoning district.
10.573 In a Residential or Mixed Residential district, an accessory building or
structure may be located in a required side yard or rear yard subject to
the following:
10.573.10 An accessory building or structure not more than 10 feet
in height and not more than 100 square feet in area shall be
set back at least 5 feet from any lot line.
10.573.20 An accessory building or structure more than 10 feet in
height or more than 100 square feet in area shall be set back
from any lot line at least the height of the building or the
applicable yard requirement, whichever is less.
10.574 All accessory buildings and structures shall be included in the
computation of building coverage.
10.575 No dumpster shall be located within 20 feet of a Residential or Mixed
Residential zoned lot nor within 10 feet of any lot line. (See also Section
10.1130, Landscaping and Screening.)
10.576 An accessory use that does not include a structure shall be set back at
least 10 feet from a side or rear lot line.
Section 10.580 Special Dimensional Requirements for Certain Uses
When this Section 10.580 specifies a minimum lot area or minimum yard requirement
for a specific use that is different from a lot area or yard requirement specified
elsewhere in this Article, the use shall comply with the more stringent requirement.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-12
10.581 Minimum Lot Area
Lots shall conform to the following minimum lot area requirements:
Use Minimum Lot
Area
Social service campus 25 acres
Hotel or motel in Industrial district 10 acres
Motor vehicle service station 1 acre
Sales, rental, leasing, distribution, and repair of
vehicles, recreational vehicles, marine craft,
manufactured housing and related
equipment
2 acres
Marine vessel repair 2 acres
Truck fueling facility 5 acres
Truck terminal 2 acres
Recycling facilities and recycling plants 2 acres
10.582 Minimum Yards
Use Minimum Yard
Social service campus 50 feet
Hotel or motel in Industrial districts
Front
Side
Rear
175 feet
100 feet
175 feet
Motor vehicle service station 50 feet
Section 10.590 Minimum Distance Between Nonresidential Uses and
Residential and Mixed Residential Districts
10.591 Minimum Distance Between Structures in Nonresidential Districts
and Residential or Mixed Residential Districts
In a General Business District, Industrial District (I, WI, OR) or Airport District (A, PI,
AI, ABC), no structure or additions to a structure shall be located within 100 feet of a
parcel in a Residential or Mixed Residential district or Character District 4-L1.
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-13
10.592 Additional Distance Between Specific Nonresidential Uses and
Residential or Mixed Residential Districts
10.592.10 Based on the location of the lot
A lot containing one of the following uses shall be separated from a Residential or
Mixed Residential district or Character District 4-L1 by the distance indicated:
Use No. Use
Minimum distance
between lot and any
Residential or Mixed
Residential district or
Character District 4-L1
3.51 Performance facility, indoor 200 feet
3.52 Performance facility, outdoor 500 feet
4.50 Outdoor recreation use 500 feet
7.50 Veterinary hospital with kennels 200 feet
9.10
9.50
9.60
Nightclub or bar
(as a principal or accessory use) 200 feet *
11.20 Motor vehicle service station 200 feet
11.50 Truck fueling facility 500 feet
11.60 Truck terminal 500 feet
12.20
12.30 Marine vessel repair 500 feet
14.30 Food processing 500 feet
14.70 Recycling facility or recycling plant 500 feet
* In Character District 4 or 5 (CD4 or CD5) or the Downtown Overlay District, a lot
containing a nightclub or bar may be located less than 200 feet from a Residential
or Mixed Residential district but shall not abut such district.
10.592.20 Based on the location of the use
The following uses shall be separated from a Residential or Mixed Residential district or
Character District 4-L1by the distance indicated:
Use No. Use
Minimum distance between
use and any Residential or
Mixed Residential district
or Character District 4-L1
Outdoor entertainment 200 feet
8.90 Sexually oriented business See Section 10.930
Article 5 Dimensional and Intensity Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5-14
10.40
10.50
Parking and access ways for hotel or motel
in an Industrial district
100 feet
11.10
12.30
Sales, rental, leasing, distribution and repair
of vehicles, recreational vehicles, marine
craft, manufactured housing and related
equipment, including areas for parking,
display or storage of vehicles, equipment,
goods or materials
200 feet
Required Distances Between Nonresidential Uses and Residential and Mixed Residential Districts
(Sections 10.591 and 10.592)
10.593 Additional Location Restrictions for Certain Nonresidential Uses
10.593.10 Any restaurant with an accessory use, such as a bar, place of public
assembly or function room, in a General Business or Gateway district shall
be located at least 200 feet from a residential district.
10.593.20 Any high hazard use shall be located at least 500 feet from any other
high hazard use (or a greater distance if deemed necessary by the
Planning Board), and shall include a vegetated buffer area at least 500 feet
in depth to screen such use from any Residential or Mixed Residential
district.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-1
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
Section 10.5A10 General
Section 10.5A20 Regulating Plan
Section 10.5A30 Character District Use Standards
Section 10.5A40 Character District Development Standards
Section 10.5A50 Civic Districts
Section 10.5A60 Definitions
Section 10.5A10 General
10.5A11 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of Article 5A is to encourage development that is compatible with the
established character of its surroundings and consistent with the City’s goals for the
preservation or enhancement of the area. This is accomplished by providing a range of
standards for the elements of development and buildings that define a place.
10.5A12 Applicability
10.5A12.10 Article 5A shall apply to the Character districts and Civic districts as
shown on the Regulating Plan.
10.5A12.20 Municipal districts are shown on the Regulating Plan for reference but are
governed by other sections of the Zoning Ordinance (specifically, Sections
10.460 and 10.560) and not by Article 5A.
10.5A13 Compliance with Regulating Plan
10.5A13.10 In the Character districts and Civic districts, all lots, buildings,
structures, uses, and development shall comply with the requirements
of Article 5A, as well as with all other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
that are not superseded by Article 5A.
10.5A13.20 No development, subdivision, re-subdivision or construction of or on any
building, lot or parcel of land shall occur except pursuant to the
Regulating Plan and in compliance with all standards and requirements
for the district.
10.5A14 Relationship to Other Provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
10.5A14.10 The provisions of Article 5A shall take precedence over all other
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that are in conflict with Article 5A.
10.5A14.20 All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that are not specifically modified
or superseded by Article 5A, or that are not in conflict with Article 5A,
shall apply to lots, buildings and uses in the Character districts and Civic
districts.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-2
10.5A15 Relationship to Other Regulations, Codes and Ordinances
10.5A15.10 Any proposed subdivision of land shall comply with the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations, in addition to the requirements of Article 5A.
10.5A15.20 Any development that requires Site Plan Review under the Site Plan
Review Regulations shall comply with such Regulations, in addition to the
requirements of Article 5A.
10.5A15.30 The provisions of Article 5A do not modify or supersede any provision of
the Building Code, other City ordinances or regulations, or State laws
relating to the development of land.
10.5A16 Figures
10.5A16.10 The standards and definitions in the following figures are an integral part
of Article 5A:
Figure 10.5A41.10A – Development Standards: Character District 4–
Limited (CD4-L1/CD4-L2)
Figure 10.5A41.10B – Development Standards: Character District 4–
West End (CD4-W)
Figure 10.5A41.10C – Development Standards: Character District 4
(CD4)
Figure 10.5A41.10D – Development Standards: Character District 5
(CD5)
Figure 10.5A43.10 – Façade Types
Figure 10.5A43.60 – Building Types
Figure 10.5A45.10 – Community Spaces
10.5A16.20 The diagrams, photographs and illustrations contained in the above figures
are provided only to provide reference to certain regulating elements and
indicate general character within the various districts and shall have
regulatory force and effect only to that extent.
10.5A17 Definitions
Terms used throughout Article 5A may be defined in the figures (Façade Types, Building
Types, and Community Spaces), in Section 10.5A60, in Article 15 or elsewhere in the
Zoning Ordinance. Terms not so defined shall be accorded their commonly accepted
meanings. In the event of any conflict between the definitions in Article 5A, those in
Article 15, other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, or any other local land use ordinances, rules or regulations, those of Article
5A shall take precedence unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-3
Section 10.5A20 Regulating Plan
10.5A21 General
10.5A21.10 Contents of Regulating Plan
The Regulating Plan is the Zoning Map for the Character districts and Civic districts.
The Regulating Plan consists of the following maps:
? Map 10.5A21A – Character Districts and Civic Districts
? Map 10.5A21B – Building Height Standards
? Map 10.5A21C – Special Requirements for Façade Types, Front Lot Line
Buildout, and Uses
10.5A21.20 Building Height Standards
10.5A21.21 Assignments for specific building heights require a building to have no
more than the designated maximum number of stories or the maximum
height in feet (whichever is lower) and no less than the designated
minimum number of stories.
10.5A21.22 When a lot is assigned to more than one building height standard the lot
shall be apportioned as follows:
(a) A building height standard designated along the front lot line or
street shall apply to the portion of the lot that is 50 feet or less from
such lot line or street.
(b) A building height standard designated along a water body shall
apply to the portion of the lot that is 100 feet or less from the mean
high water line.
(c) More than 50 feet from a front lot line or street and more than 100
feet from a water body, the building height may increase to the
highest building height standard designated for the lot.
(d) Where a lot has less depth from the front lot line, street or water
body than the required minimum distances stated above, the lowest
building height standard for the lot shall be applied to the required
linear distance from the lot line, street or water body.
10.5A21.30 Special Requirements for Façade Types, Front Lot Line
Buildout, and Uses
The following standards shall apply when so designated by the Regulating Plan:
(a) Specific façade type requirements apply to designated properties at the sidewalk
level. Where a permitted building type conflicts with a required façade type, the
façade type shall supersede.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-4
(b) For waterfront lots on Ceres Street, the maximum front lot line buildout shall be
50%, and buildings shall have a wood-sided appearance.
(c) Specific use requirements apply to designated properties along the waterfront area
(see Sections 10.5A34-35).
10.5A22 Regulating Plan Amendment
10.5A22.10 General
The Regulating Plan may be amended in accordance with the provisions of Section
10.150 (Changes and Amendments), subject to the further provisions of Section
10.5A22.20.
10.5A22.20 Application Requirements
An application for a Regulating Plan amendment initiated by or on behalf of the owner
of property shall be accompanied by a site plan for such property that complies with the
requirements for a request for Design Review under the Site Plan Review Regulations.
Section 10.5A30 Character District Use Standards
10.5A31 Buildings, structures and land within a Character district shall comply
with the use regulations set forth for the applicable district in Section
10.440, except as specified below:
10.5A32 A lot within the Downtown Overlay District shall comply with the
requirements of Section 10.642 Ground Floor Uses.
10.5A33 In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying Character districts, lots
in the Waterfront Use Overlay as shown on Map 10.5A21C shall also
permit uses 9.60, 12.20, 12.22 and 12.40 as set forth in Section 10.440
(Table of Uses).
10.5A34 In addition to the uses permitted in Character District 4, waterfront lots on
Ceres Street as shown on Map 10.5A21C shall also permit the uses
permitted in the Waterfront Industrial district as set forth in Section 10.440.
Section 10.5A40 Character District Development Standards
10.5A41 Development Standards
Development, structures and lots within Character districts shall comply with the
applicable general description and standards set forth in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D
(Development Standards) and elsewhere in Article 5A.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-5
FIGURE 10.5A41.10A DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—LIMITED (CD4-L1/CD4-L2)
These districts consist of medium density areas with a mix of medium to large houses. Upper floor
uses are almost entirely residential. Ground floors include some commercial office uses; areas zoned
CD4-L2 also allow some restaurant and retail uses on the ground floor. There are shallow front
yards and shallow to medium side yards, with variable private landscaping, and on-site accessory
parking. Streets have sidewalks and street trees, and define medium to large blocks.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-6
FIGURE 10.5A41.10A DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—LIMITED (CD4-L1/CD4-L2)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — PRINCIPAL BUILDING
Maximum principal
front yard
15 ft
Maximum secondary
front yard
12 ft
Side yard 5 ft min. to 20 ft max.
Minimum rear yard
Greater of 5 ft from
rear lot line or 10 ft
from center line of alley
Front lot line buildout 60% min. to 80% max.
BUILDING AND LOT OCCUPATION
Maximum building
block length
80 ft
Maximum façade
modulation length
50 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Maximum entrance
spacing NR
Maximum building
coverage 60%
Maximum building
footprint 2,500 sf
Minimum lot area 3,000 sf
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit 3,000 sf
Minimum open space 25%
Maximum ground floor
GFA per use NR
BUILDING FORM — PRINCIPAL BUILDING
Building height See Map 10.5A21.B
& Section 10.5A43.30
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Minimum ground story
height 11 ft
Façade glazing:
Shopfront façade
Other façade types
70% min.
20% min. to 40% max.
Roof type flat, gable, hip, gambrel,
mansard
Roof pitch, if any
Gable 6:12 min. to 12:12 max
Hip 3:12 min.
Mansard/gambrel 6:12 min. to 30:12 max.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-7
FIGURE 10.5A41.10A DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—LIMITED (CD4-L1/CD4-L2)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — OUTBUILDING
Minimum front yard 20 ft behind a façade
of a principal building
Minimum side yard 3 ft
Minimum rear yard 3 ft
BUILDING TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.60 for building type definitions
House permitted*
Duplex permitted*
Rowhouse permitted*
Apartment building permitted*
Live/work building permitted**
Small commercial
building
CD4-L1: not permitted
CD4-L2: permitted
Large commercial
building not permitted
Cottage not permitted
Paired House permitted*
Gateway Townhouse not permitted
Mixed-Use Building permitted**
Flex Space Building permitted
Community Building permitted
*Not permitted in the Downtown Overlay District
**Residential uses are not permitted on the ground
floor in the Downtown Overlay District
BUILDING & LOT USE
See Sections 10.5A30 and 10.440
FAÇADE TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.10 for façade type definitions
Except where required façade types are indicated
on Map 10.5A21C, the below standards apply:
Porch permitted
Stoop permitted*
Step
only permitted where
indicated on Map
10.5A21C
Shopfront
CD4-L1: only permitted
where indicated on Map
10.5A21C
CD4-L2: permitted
Officefront
only permitted where
indicated on Map
10.5A21C
Forecourt permitted*
Recessed-entry permitted
Dooryard permitted
Terrace not permitted
Gallery not permitted
Arcade not permitted
*Not permitted in the Downtown Overlay District
PARKING
See Section 10.5A44.30
COMMUNITY SPACE
See Section 10.5A45
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-8
FIGURE 10.5A41.10B DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—WEST END (CD4-W)
This district consists of a medium-to-high density area with a mix of building types and residential,
retail, and other commercial uses. There are shallow or no front yards and medium to no side yards,
with variable private landscaping and on-site accessory parking. Streets have sidewalks and street
trees or other pedestrian amenities, and define medium blocks.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-9
FIGURE 10.5A41.10B DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—WEST END (CD4-W)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — PRINCIPAL BUILDING*
Maximum principal
front yard
10 ft
Maximum secondary
front yard
15 ft
Side yard NR
Minimum rear yard
Greater of 5 ft from
rear lot line or 10 ft
from center line of alley
Minimum front lot line
buildout 50%
* Except for items listed under Section 10.5A42.12
BUILDING AND LOT OCCUPATION
Maximum building
block length
200 ft
Maximum façade
modulation length
80 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Maximum entrance
spacing 50 ft
Maximum building
coverage 60%
Maximum building
footprint
15,000 sf (or as allowed by
Section 10.5A43.40)
Minimum lot area 5,000 sf
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit 2,500 sf
Minimum open space 15%
Maximum ground floor
GFA per use 15,000 sf
BUILDING FORM — PRINCIPAL BUILDING
Building height See Map 10.5A21.B
& Section 10.5A43.30
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Minimum ground story
height 12 ft
Façade glazing:
Shopfront façade
Other façade types
70% min.
20% min. to 50% max.
Roof type flat, gable, hip, gambrel,
mansard
Roof pitch, if any
Gable 6:12 min. to 12:12 max
Hip 3:12 min.
Mansard/gambrel 6:12 min. to 30:12 max.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-10
FIGURE 10.5A41.10B DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4—WEST END (CD4-W)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — OUTBUILDING
Minimum front yard 20 ft behind a façade
of a principal building
Minimum side yard 0 ft
Minimum rear yard 3 ft
BUILDING TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.60 for building type definitions
House not permitted
Duplex not permitted
Rowhouse permitted
Apartment building permitted
Live/work building permitted*
Small commercial
building permitted
Large commercial
building permitted
Cottage not permitted
Paired House not permitted
Gateway Townhouses not permitted
Mixed-Use Building permitted*
Flex Space Building permitted
Community Building permitted
*Residential uses are not permitted on the ground
floor
BUILDING & LOT USE
See Sections 10.5A30 and 10.440
FAÇADE TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.10 for façade type definitions
Except where required façade types are indicated
on Map 10.5A21C, the below standards apply:
Porch not permitted
Stoop permitted
Step permitted
Shopfront permitted
Officefront permitted
Forecourt not permitted
Recessed-entry permitted
Dooryard permitted
Terrace not permitted
Gallery permitted
Arcade permitted
PARKING
See Section 10.5A44.30
COMMUNITY SPACE
See Section 10.5A45
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-11
FIGURE 10.5A41.10C DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4 (CD4)
This district consists of a medium-to-high density transitional area with a mix of building types and
residential, retail, and other commercial uses. There are shallow or no front yards and medium to no
side yards, with variable private landscaping. Streets have sidewalks and street trees or other
pedestrian amenities, and define small to medium blocks.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-12
FIGURE 10.5A41.10C DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4 (CD4)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — PRINCIPAL BUILDING*
Maximum principal
front yard
10 ft
Maximum secondary
front yard
15 ft
Side yard NR
Minimum rear yard
Greater of 5 ft from
rear lot line or 10 ft
from center line of alley
Front lot line buildout
On Ceres Street 50% max. (See Map
10.5A21C)
Everywhere else 50% min.
* Except for items listed under Section 10.5A42.12
BUILDING AND LOT OCCUPATION
Maximum building
block length
200 ft
Maximum façade
modulation length
80 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Maximum entrance
spacing 50 ft
Maximum building
coverage 90%
Maximum building
footprint
15,000 sf (or as allowed by
Section 10.5A43.40)
Minimum lot area NR
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit NR
Minimum open space 10%
Maximum ground floor
GFA per use 15,000 sf
BUILDING FORM — PRINCIPAL BUILDING
Building height See Map 10.5A21.B
& Section 10.5A43.30
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Minimum ground story
height 12 ft
Minimum second story
height 10 ft
Façade glazing:
Shopfront façade
Other façade types
70% min.
20% min. to 50% max.
Roof type flat, gable, hip,
gambrel, mansard
Roof pitch, if any
Gable 6:12 min. to 12:12 max
Hip 3:12 min.
Mansard/gambrel 6:12 min. to 30:12 max.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-13
FIGURE 10.5A41.10C DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 4 (CD4)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — OUTBUILDING
Minimum front yard 20 ft behind a façade
of a principal building
Minimum side yard 0 ft
Minimum rear yard 3 ft
BUILDING TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.60 for building type definitions
House not permitted
Duplex not permitted
Rowhouse permitted*
Apartment building permitted*
Live/work building permitted**
Small commercial
building permitted
Large commercial
building permitted
Cottage not permitted
Paired House not permitted
Gateway Townhouses not permitted
Mixed-Use Building permitted**
Flex Space Building permitted
Community Building permitted
*Not permitted in the Downtown Overlay District
**Residential uses are not permitted on the ground
floor in the Downtown Overlay District
BUILDING & LOT USE
See Sections 10.5A30 and 10.440
FAÇADE TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.10 for façade type definitions
Except where required façade types are indicated
on Map 10.5A21C, the below standards apply:
Porch not permitted
Stoop permitted
Step permitted
Shopfront permitted
Officefront permitted
Forecourt not permitted
Recessed-entry permitted
Dooryard permitted
Terrace not permitted
Gallery permitted
Arcade permitted
PARKING
See Section 10.5A44.30
COMMUNITY SPACE
See Section 10.5A45
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-14
FIGURE 10.5A41.10D DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 5 (CD5)
This district consists of a high density center with a mix of building types and residential, retail and
other commercial uses. There are no front yards or side yards, and limited landscaping and public
parking facilities. Streets have sidewalks and trees or other pedestrian amenities, and define small to
medium blocks.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-15
FIGURE 10.5A41.10D DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 5 (CD5)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — PRINCIPAL BUILDING*
Maximum principal
front yard
5 ft
Maximum secondary
front yard
5 ft
Side yard NR
Minimum rear yard
Greater of 5 ft from
rear lot line or 10 ft
from center line of alley
Minimum front lot line
buildout 80%
* Except for items listed under Section 10.5A42.12
BUILDING AND LOT OCCUPATION
Maximum building
block length
225 ft
Maximum façade
modulation length
100 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Maximum entrance
spacing 50 ft
Maximum building
coverage 95%
Maximum building
footprint
20,000 sf (or as allowed by
Section 10.5A43.40)
Minimum lot area NR
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit NR
Minimum open space 5%
Maximum ground floor
GFA per use 15,000 sf
BUILDING FORM — PRINCIPAL BUILDING
Building height See Map 10.5A21.B
& Section 10.5A43.30
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Minimum ground story
height 12 ft
Minimum second story
height 10 ft
Façade glazing:
Shopfront façade
Other façade types
70% min.
20% min. to 50% max.
Roof type flat, gable, hip, gambrel,
mansard
Roof pitch, if any
Gable 6:12 min. to 12:12 max
Hip 3:12 min.
Mansard/gambrel 6:12 min. to 30:12 max.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-16
FIGURE 10.5A41.10D DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHARACTER DISTRICT 5 (CD5)
BUILDING PLACEMENT — OUTBUILDING
Minimum front yard 20 ft behind a façade
of a principal building
Minimum side yard 0 ft
Minimum rear yard 3 ft
BUILDING TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.60 for building type definitions
House not permitted
Duplex not permitted
Rowhouse not permitted
Apartment building not permitted
Live/work building permitted*
Small commercial
building permitted
Large commercial
building permitted
Cottage not permitted
Paired House not permitted
Gateway Townhouses not permitted
Mixed-Use Building permitted*
Flex Space Building permitted
Community Building permitted
*Residential uses are not permitted on the ground
floor in the Downtown Overlay District
BUILDING & LOT USE
See Sections 10.5A30 and 10.440
FAÇADE TYPES
See Figure 10.5A43.10 for façade type definitions
Except where required façade types are indicated
on Map 10.5A21C, the below standards apply:
Porch not permitted
Stoop permitted
Step permitted
Shopfront permitted
Officefront permitted
Forecourt not permitted
Recessed-entry permitted
Dooryard not permitted
Terrace not permitted
Gallery permitted
Arcade permitted
PARKING
See Section 10.5A44.30
COMMUNITY SPACE
See Section 10.5A45
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-17
10.5A42 Building Placement
10.5A42.10 Yards
10.5A42.11 Yards shall be as required in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D (Development
Standards).
10.5A42.12 Yards may be increased above the maximum permitted for truncated
corners or other subtractive massing techniques, alleys, vehicular
accessways, increased sidewalk width or community spaces.
10.5A42.20 Façade Alignment
The façade facing the principal front yard shall be parallel to the front lot line. Where
the front lot line is curved, the façade shall be parallel to a straight line connecting the
points of intersection of the front lot line and the side lot lines.
10.5A42.30 Outbuildings and Backbuildings
A detached outbuilding, or an outbuilding attached to a principal building with a
backbuilding, may be built on each lot to the rear of the principal building, as
illustrated generally in Figure 10.5A42.10 (Principal Building/Backbuilding/
Outbuilding).
FIGURE 10.5A42.10 PRINCIPAL BUILDING/BACKBUILDING/ OUTBUILDING
10.5A42.40 North Mill Pond Public View Corridors
All new buildings or structures located within 400’ of the North Mill Pond shall be
located in such a way as to maintain existing public views with a terminal vista of the
North Mill Pond from the intersecting streets of Dover Street, Cabot Street, Cornwall
Street and Langdon Street. Except for existing obstructions, the public view corridor
shall be maintained for a minimum width of the existing public right-of-way of the
nearest intersecting street as listed above.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-18
10.5A43 Building Form and Façades
10.5A43.10 Façade Types
The façade facing the principal front yard shall conform to Figure 10.5A43.10 (Façade
Types) and Figures 10.5A41.10A-D (Development Standards), and to any applicable
façade type requirements indicated on the Regulating Plan. Permitted building form
and façade types may be combined.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-19
The façade is set back from the
front lot line with an attached
porch or stoop permitted to
encroach. This may be used
with or without a fence to
maintain street spatial
definition.
Permitted districts:
CD4-L1, CD4-L2, G1, G2
The façade is aligned close to
the front lot line with the
ground floor elevated from the
sidewalk for privacy. The
entrance has an exterior stair and
landing.
This type is recommended for
ground floor residential use.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L1,
CD4-L2, G1, G2
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-20
The façade is aligned close to
the front lot line with the
ground floor elevated from the
sidewalk for privacy. The
entrance has an exterior single
step without a landing.
This type is recommended for
ground floor residential, office
or retail use.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, G1, G2
Only permitted in CD4-L1 &
CD4-L2 where indicated on
Map 10.5A21C.
The façade is aligned close to
the front lot line with the
building entrance at sidewalk
grade and with substantial
glazing on the ground floor.
This type is conventional for
retail, office or restaurant use.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L2,
G1, G2
Only permitted in CD4-L1 where
indicated on Map 10.5A21C.
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-21
The façade is aligned close to
the front lot line with the
building entrance at or elevated
above sidewalk grade. It may
have substantial glazing on the
sidewalk level.
This type is conventional for
office use.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, G1, G2
Only permitted in CD4-L1 &
CD4-L2 where indicated on
Map 10.5A21C.
The two ends of the façade are
close to the front lot line and
the central portion is set back.
Permitted districts:
CD4-L1, CD4-L2, G1, G2
This façade type is not
permitted in the Downtown
Overlay District.
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-22
The façade is aligned close to
the front lot line and the
primary building entrance is
recessed within the façade.
This type is conventional for
residential use.
Permitted districts:
CD4-L1, CD4-L2, CD4,
CD4-W, CD5, G1, G2
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES (CONTINUED)
The building facade is aligned
close to the street line, and the
frontage is defined by a low
wall, decorative fence or hedge
providing a strong spatial
definition from the public
sidewalk. The result is a small
semi-private yard containing the
principal entrance. The yard may
be slightly raised, sunken, or atgrade,
and may be planted or
landscaped. A paved walkway
from the sidewalk to the front
door is required. This type is
commonly associated with
ground floor residential use.
Permitted districts: G1, G2,
CD4-L1, CD4-L2, CD4-W, CD4
This façade type is not
permitted in the Downtown
Overlay District.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-23
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES (CONTINUED)
Building facade is at or near the
street line with an elevated
terrace that may encroach into
the front yard or setback
providing level or terraced public
circulation along the façade. This
type can be used to provide atgrade
access while
accommodating a grade change
along a street line. Frequent
steps up to the terrace are
necessary to avoid dead walls
and maximize access. This type
is required to be used in
conjunction with other facade
types to define individual or
shared entries facing the street.
Permitted districts: G1, G2,
CD4-W
The building facade is set back
from the street line with an
attached one or two story
cantilevered shed or a
lightweight colonnade that is
built to the street line. This type
is intended for buildings with
ground floor commercial,
hospitality or retail uses. This
facade type is required to be used
in conjunction with other types
to define individual or shared
first floor entries facing the
street.
Permitted districts: G1, G2,
CD4-W
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-24
FIGURE 10.5A43.10 FAÇADE TYPES (CONTINUED)
Only the ground floor level of
the building facade is set back
from the street line. The
building facade for the upper
floors is at the street line and is
supported by a colonnade with
habitable space above. This
façade type is intended for
buildings with ground floor
commercial, hospitality or retail
uses. This type is required to be
used in conjunction with other
facade types to define individual
or shared first floor entries
facing the street.
Permitted districts: G1, G2,
CD4-W, CD4, CD5
Arcade
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-25
10.5A43.20 Façade Modulation
10.5A43.21 Except as listed in 10.5A43.22, a façade shall be modulated by major
breaks in the façade plane and/or changes in exterior materials or
rooflines. No individual section of a façade shall be longer than the
maximum façade modulation length listed in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D
(Development Standards).
10.5A43.22 In the Historic District, Façades that have a high degree of fenestration,
traditional masonry detailing, and traditional window styling (including
windows recessed in the openings and with multiple panes) shall be
exempt from the façade modulation requirements listed in Figures
10.5A41.10A-D (Development Standards).
10.5A43.30 Building and Story Heights
10.5A43.31 Specific height requirement areas are designated on Map 10.5A21B. The
maximum building height in each height requirement area shall be as
follows:
Height
Requirement
Area
Minimum
Height
in Stories
Maximum
Height
in Stories
Maximum
Height in
Feet
1 story 1 1 20
2 stories 2 2 35
2 stories (short 3rd) 2 2 + short 3rd 35
2-3 stories 2 3 40
2-3 stories (short 4th) 2 3 + short 4th 45
2-4 stories 2 4 50
2-4 stories (short 5th) 2 4 + short 5th 60
2-5 stories 2 5 60
10.5A43.32 A roof appurtenance may exceed the maximum allowed building
height as specified on Map 10.5A21B (Building Height Standards) by 10
feet, subject to the following:
(a) All roof appurtenances and other features that exceed the allowed
building height for the zoning district shall not exceed 33 percent of the
total roof area of the structure and, except for elevators and stair
towers, shall be set back at least 10 feet from any edge of the roof.
(b) Solar energy panels shall not be subject to the 33 percent limitation
provided that they are not visible from a point 20 feet above the edge of
the street right-of-way on the opposite side of the street.
(c) The area of roof appurtenances that comply with this section shall not
be considered as part of the building’s gross floor area calculations.
10.5A43.33 A development that is not located in an incentive overlay district and that
contains at least one acre of lot area shall be allowed an additional story
in height (up to 10 feet) if at least 20% of the property is assigned and
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-26
improved as a community space. Such community space shall count
toward the required open space listed in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D
(Development Standards). The size, location and type of the community
space shall be based on the size and location of the development, and the
proposed and adjacent uses.
10.5A43.40 Maximum Building Footprint
10.5A43.41 No building or structure footprint shall exceed the applicable maximum
building footprint listed in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D (Development
Standards) except as provided in Sections 10.5A43.42-44 below.
10.5A43.42 In the CD5 district, a detached liner building may have a building
footprint of up to 30,000 sq. ft. if it meets all other development
standards and is integrated into a parking structure through the provision
of community space or shared access.
10.5A43.43 For a building that contains ground floor parking, a parking garage or
underground parking levels, and is not subject to Section 10.5A43.42,
the Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to allow a building
footprint of up to 30,000 sq. ft. in the CD4 or CD4-W districts, and up to
40,000 sq. ft. in the CD5 district, if all of the following criteria are met:
(a) No story above the ground floor parking shall be greater than 20,000
sq. ft. in the CD4 or CD4-W districts or 30,000 sq. ft. in the CD5 district.
(b) All ground floor parking areas shall be separated from any public or
private street by a liner building.
(c) At least 50% of the gross floor area of the ground floor shall be
dedicated to parking.
(d) At least 30% of the property shall be assigned and improved as
community space. Such community space shall count toward the
required open space listed under Figures 10.5A41.10A-D
(Development Standards) and community space required under
Section 10.5A46.20. The size, location and type of the community
space shall be determined by the Planning Board based on the size and
location of the development, and the proposed and adjacent uses.
(e) The development shall comply with all applicable standards of the
ordinance and the City’s land use regulations.
10.5A43.44 The building footprint of a parking structure shall be no greater than
40,000 sq. ft., and the façade length shall be no greater than 300 feet.
10.5A43.50 Streetscreens
Any streetscreen in a front yard shall be built on the same plane as the façade of the
principal building and shall be between 3.5 and 4.0 feet in height.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-27
10.5A43.60 Building Types
Buildings in each Character district shall be of one or more of the building types
specified for such Character district in Figure 10.5A43.60 (Building Types).
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-28
A residential building that has the
appearance of a single-family
dwelling, with yards on all sides.
Permitted districts:
CD4-L1, CD4-L2
This building type is not permitted
in the Downtown Overlay District.
A residential building with two
vertically-separated units with
separate entrances. The building may
have yards/setbacks on all sides, or
it may be divided along the party
wall by a lot line where permitted by
the standards of the Character
district.
Permitted districts:
CD4-L1, CD4-L2
This building type is not permitted in
the Downtown Overlay District.
A building that may occupy the full
width of the lot and shares a party wall
with one or more buildings of the same
type, with a minimal yard/setback
along the front of the lot or
development site.
Permitted districts:
CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L1, CD4-L2
This building type is not permitted in
the Downtown Overlay District.
FIGURE 10.5A43.60 BUILDING TYPES
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-29
A building designed for residential use
that has the appearance of a
multifamily dwelling, with
yards/setbacks on all sides.
Permitted districts:
CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L1, CD4-L2, G1,
G2
This building type is not permitted in
the Downtown Overlay District.
A building designed to accommodate a
ground floor commercial use and a
residential use above or beside.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L1, CD4-L2, G1,
G2
Residential uses are not permitted on the
ground floor in the Downtown Overlay
District.
A building designed for non-residential
use with a shopfront or officefront
façade type and minimal or no front
yard/setback along the front of the lot or
development site, and that is no more than
3 stories in height.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, CD4-L2, G1, G2
FIGURE 10.5A43.60 BUILDING TYPES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-30
A building with a shopfront or
officefront façade type and minimal
or no yard/setback along the front of
the lot or development site, and that is 4
or more stories in height.
Permitted districts:
CD5, CD4, CD4-W, G1, G2
A small detached single family
dwelling with narrow massing.
Permitted districts: G1, G2
A building designed for residential use
with narrow massing and horizontally
attached or semi-attached dwelling
units generally perpendicular to the
front of the lot or development site.
These buildings contain up to 3
dwelling units and are often designed
to resemble large farmhouses with
attached carriage houses.
Permitted districts: G1, G2, CD4-L1,
CD4-L2
This building type is not permitted in
the Downtown Overlay District.
FIGURE 10.5A43.60 BUILDING TYPES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-31
These small footprint attached single
family residential buildings have
narrow massing and may be located on
individual or common lots. Each unit is
separated horizontally by a common
wall and groups of buildings may be
separated by a common driveway or
community space.
Permitted districts: G1, G2
A variable footprint building type that
typically accommodates a variety of
ground floor commercial uses and
upper residential and office uses at the
scale that compliments the historic
character of the neighborhood.
Permitted districts: G1, G2, CD-4,
CD4-W, CD5, CD4-L1/L2
A building located and designed to
accommodate a small footprint for
fabrication and light industrial uses.
Flex buildings are also used to provide
affordable space to small and creative
business enterprises.
Permitted districts: G1, G2, CD4-W,
CD4-L1/L2
FIGURE 10.5A43.60 BUILDING TYPES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-32
FIGURE 10.5A43.60 BUILDING TYPES (CONTINUED)
A building located and
designed to accommodate
public or civic uses such as a
neighborhood center and
similar public gathering
facilities and spaces.
Community Buildings may
be privately owned and
operated as an accessory
building and amenity for a
residential and mixed use
developments.
Permitted districts: All
Districts
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-33
10.5A44 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
10.5A44.10 General
10.5A44.11 Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all buildings, structures and
uses in the Character districts and Civic districts shall comply with the offstreet
parking requirements set forth in Section 10.1110.
10.5A44.12 Buildings, structures and uses in the Character districts and Civic
districts that are also within the Downtown Overlay District shall comply
with the additional standards in Section 10.643.
10.5A44.20 Number of Required Spaces
10.5A44.21 Uses in the Character districts and Civic districts that are not located in the
Downtown Overlay District shall provide off-street parking in
accordance with Section 10.1112.
10.5A44.22 Uses in the Character districts and Civic districts that are included in the
Downtown Overlay District shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements for the Downtown Overlay District in accordance with
Section 10.1115.
10.5A44.23 Subject to approval by the Planning Board, any portion of the required offstreet
parking spaces may be dedicated to public use.
10.5A44.30 Parking, Loading, and Driveway Locations and Standards
10.5A44.31 All off-street parking spaces shall be located at least 20 feet behind any
façade of a principal building, except when in an underground parking
level. This restriction shall not apply to off-street parking for a singlefamily
or two-family dwelling.
10.5A44.32 Parking lots and loading areas shall be screened from the street by a
building or streetscreen except for any driveway.
10.5A44.33 Driveways at the street and within a required front yard shall be no
wider than 24 feet.
10.5A44.34 All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall include a
pedestrian exit directly to a front lot line.
10.5A44.35 The above-ground portion of a parking structure or garage shall have a
liner building at least the height of the ground floor along the entire
width of any front yard except for driveways and pedestrian entrances.
10.5A44.36 A parking lot containing more than 75 parking spaces shall have least one
internal pedestrian walkway at least 8 feet wide that is paved differently
from the parking spaces with respect to texture, material, style, and/or
color.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-34
10.5A44.40 Parking Lot Landscaping
Parking lots that contain 10 or more spaces shall conform to the following:
10.5A44.41 Landscape islands:
(a) Parking lots shall contain one landscaped island for every 10
parking spaces.
(b) A parking lot with more than one landscaped island shall have such
islands distributed throughout the parking lot.
(c) Each landscaped island shall be a minimum of 325 square feet.
10.5A44.42 Trees:
(a) Parking lots shall contain at least one tree for every 7 parking
spaces.
(b) No parking space shall be more than 75 feet from a tree within the
lot, as measured from the center of the tree to the nearest line
demarcating the space.
(c) All trees shall be separated from paved surfaces by at least 3 feet.
10.5A44.43 All landscaping required pursuant to this Section 10.5A44.40 shall be
located and designed in a manner to protect the vegetation from vehicular
damage.
10.5A44.50 Loading Docks, Storage and Service Areas
Loading docks, storage and service areas shall not be permitted between the principal
building and any front lot line.
10.5A45 Community Spaces
10.5A45.10 Figure 10.5A45.10 (Community Spaces) describes the types of
community spaces that may be provided as part of a development in
accordance with Sections 10.5A42, 10.5A43 or 10.5A46.10.
10.5A45.20 A community space that is provided on site and otherwise qualifies as
open space shall count towards the open space requirement for the
development.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-35
An area of natural, semi-natural, or planted space set aside
for human enjoyment and recreation or for the protection
of wildlife or natural habitats. A park may consist of
grassy areas, trees and other natural or planted landscape
features, and may also contain walking paths and trails,
monuments, fountains, playground equipment, benches,
picnic tables and similar amenities.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A linear community space that may follow natural
corridors providing unstructured and limited amounts of
structured recreation. A greenway may be spatially
defined by landscaping rather than buildings. Its
landscape shall consist of paths and trails, waterbodies,
and trees, naturalistically disposed.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A paved/brick pedestrian connector between buildings.
Pedestrian alleys provide shortcuts through long
blocks and connect community spaces and parking
areas with streets. Pedestrian alleys may be covered
by a roof and/or lined by shopfronts. The minimum
width shall be 15 feet.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A wide pedestrian sidewalk (a minimum of 10’ in width
unless otherwise defined by the Ordinance) located
between the building façade and the public right of way.
Wide pedestrian sidewalks provide space between the
façade and the curbline for comfortable pedestrian
movement, street trees and street furniture.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
FIGURE 10.5A45.10 COMMUNITY SPACES
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-36
A community space designed and equipped for the
recreation of children. A playground should be fenced and
may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be
interspersed within residential areas and may be placed
within a block. Playgrounds may be included within
parks and greens. The minimum size shall be 500 sq. ft.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A community space available for unstructured recreation
and community purposes. A square is spatially defined by
buildings. Its landscape shall consist of paths, ground
cover and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be
located at the intersection of important streets. The
minimum size shall be 1/8 acre.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A community space available for community purposes
and commercial activities. A plaza should be spatially
defined by buildings. Its landscape should consist primarily
of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be located
at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size
shall be 1/8 acre.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
A community space available for informal activities in
close proximity to neighborhood residences. A pocket
park is spatially defined by buildings. Its landscape shall
consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. The
minimum size shall be 500 sq. ft.
Permitted Districts: All Districts
FIGURE 10.5A45.10 COMMUNITY SPACES (CONTINUED)
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-37
FIGURE 10.5A45.10 COMMUNITY SPACES (CONTINUED)
A publicly accessible open space designed and
equipped for active recreation and organized sports.
Playing fields and courts may include grass, artificial
turf, clay, dirt, stone dust, concrete, asphalt, ice or other
pervious or impervious materials to support various
sporting events.
Permitted districts: All Districts
A space for active and passive recreation and gathering
purposes. A common or green is a free-standing site
with thoroughfares on all sides and landscape consisting
of naturally disposed lawns, paths, and trees.
Permitted districts: All Districts
A space designed as individual garden plots available to
residents for urban agriculture purposes, including
storage facilities for necessary equipment. Community
gardens may be freestanding or incorporated as a
subordinate feature of a community park, neighborhood
park, or pocket park.
Permitted districts: All Districts
An outdoor dining cafe community space is permitted
as an ancillary activity of a food and drink
establishment where the principal use is otherwise
allowed in the district. The area must provide deeded
public access to qualify as Community Space in the
Character Districts.
Permitted districts: G1, G2, CD4-L2, CD4, CD4-W,
CD-5
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-38
FIGURE 10.5A45.10 COMMUNITY SPACES (CONTINUED)
A courtyard or court is an enclosed area, often
surrounded by a building or complex that is open to the
sky.
Permitted districts: All Districts
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-39
10.5A46 Incentive Overlay Districts
The Incentive Overlay Districts are designated on Map 10.5A21B. In such areas, certain
specified development standards may be modified as set forth in Section 10.5A46.10
below, if the development provides community space or workforce housing in
accordance with Section 10.5A46.20, as applicable:
10.5A46.10 Incentives to Development Standards
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS
INCENTIVES
North End Incentive
Overlay District
West End Incentive
Overlay District
Maximum building coverage No Change 80%
Maximum building footprint 30,000 sf 30,000 sf1, 2
Maximum building block
length No Change No Change 3
Minimum lot area No Change 2,000 sf
Minimum lot area
per dwelling unit No Change No minimum
Maximum building height Plus 1 story
up to 10 ft4
Plus 1 story
up to 10 ft4,5
Minimum ground story
height No Change 9 feet
Minimum off-street parking No Change Non-residential:
25% reduction from
underlying standard
Ground story parking Permitted with a liner
building 6
Permitted with a liner
building 6
1 In CD4-L1 and CD4-L2 the maximum building footprint shall be 3,500 SF. Where the
building footprint exceeds 2,500 SF, individual building blocks shall be separated by
open space, community space, or surface parking areas of at least 30 feet in width.
Parking areas located between buildings are not required to be set back from the
building façade.
2 For properties located within 200 feet of the North Mill Pond in the CD4-W District, the
maximum building footprint shall be 20,000 sq. ft.
3 In CD4-L1 and CD4-L2 the maximum building block length shall be 100 feet.
4 In order to receive the building height incentive, the sidewalk width in front of any
façade shall be at least 10 feet plus two feet for each story of building height above
three stories. Any property area needed to comply with this requirement shall count as
open space as required in Figures 10.5A41.10A-D (Development Standards) and as
community space; even if less than 15 feet in width.
5 For parcels over 80,000 sq. ft. in area that are located south of Islington Street, up to
two stories or 20 feet may be added to the maximum building height provided both
requirements listed under Section 10.5A46.22 (1) and (2) are met.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-40
6 If ground story parking is proposed, at least 50% of the ground story facing a street
shall include a liner building.
10.5A46.20 Requirements to Receive Incentives to the Development
Standards
10.5A46.21 For a lot located adjacent to, or within 100 feet of, North Mill Pond,
Hodgson Brook or the Piscataqua River, the development shall provide
community space equal to 20% of the lot area that includes a
continuous public greenway at least 20 feet in width with a multi-use path
and that is parallel and located within 50 feet of the waterfront. Trail
connections to abutting street(s) and sidewalks shall be provided and
there shall be no buildings between the waterfront and the greenway unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board. The greenway shall include
legal and physical access to abutting lots or public ways. When access is
not available due to current conditions on an abutting lot, provisions shall
be made for future access in a location determined by the Planning Board.
10.5A46.22 For a lot that is more than 100 feet from North Mill Pond, Hodgson Brook
or the Piscataqua River, the development shall include either a
community space or workforce housing as specified below:
(1) Community space option – All of the following criteria shall be met:
(a) The community space shall be a community space type that
is permitted within the applicable Character district.
(b) The community space shall constitute at least 20% of the gross
area of the lot and shall not have any dimension less than 15
feet.
(c) The community space shall adjoin the public sidewalk and
shall be open on one or more sides to the sidewalk.
(d) The community space shall include trees and other
landscaping to provide shade and reduce noise, and pedestrian
amenities such as overlooks, benches, lighting and other street
furniture.
(e) The community space shall be located on or adjacent to the
same lot as the development, except as provided in (f) below.
(f) The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to allow
a proposed community space to be located on a different lot
than the development if it finds that all of the following criteria
will be met:
(i) An appropriate community space cannot feasibly be
provided on the same lot as the development.
(ii) The proposed community space is within the same
Incentive Overlay District as the development.
(iii) The proposed community space is suited to the scale,
density, uses and character of the surrounding properties.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-41
(2) Workforce housing option – One or more of the following criteria
shall be met:
(a) At least 30% of the dwelling units within a building, but no
less than three units, shall be workforce housing units for sale
(affordable to a household with an income of no more than 100
percent of the area median income for a 4-person household).
Such units shall be at least the average gross floor area of the
proposed units in the building or 1,000 sq. ft., whichever is
greater. The workforce housing units shall be distributed
throughout the building wherever dwelling units are located; or
(b) At least 10% of the dwelling units within a building, or at least
two units, shall be workforce housing units for rent
(affordable to a household with an income of no more than 60
percent of the area median income for a 3-person household).
Such units shall be at least the average gross floor area of the
proposed units in the building or 800 sq. ft., whichever is
greater. The workforce housing units shall be distributed
throughout the building wherever dwelling units are located.
10.5A46.23 When a proposed development in an Incentive Overlay District includes
community space in excess of the amount required to support a proposed
incentive under Section 10.5A43.43 or Sections 10.5A46.10 through
10.5A46.22, the Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to
allow the excess community space to be credited to the developer or its
assigns for use in another development in the same Incentive Overlay
District.
(1) The conditional use permit shall specify the total amount of community
space provided, the portion of such community space to be
credited toward incentives in the proposed development, and the
amount of excess community space that may be credited toward a
future project in accordance with the standards set forth in Section
10.5A43.43 or Sections 10.5A46.10 through 10.5A46.22.
(2) The conditional use permit may allow for conveyance to the City of
unimproved land in lieu of community space that conforms to the
types shown in Figure 10.5A45.10, subject to the following:
(a) The application for a conditional use permit to credit
unimproved land in lieu of community space shall include a
complete site plan and design for the proposed community
space.
(b) In order for a future development to receive incentive credit for
the excess unimproved land, the future developer will be
required to improve the land to be a conforming community
space as determined by the Planning Board at the time of site
plan approval, except as provided in (c) below.
(c) At any time after receiving title to such unimproved land, the
City may, at its option, improve such land to be a conforming
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-42
community space. If the City exercises this option, in order for
a future development to receive the incentive credit, the future
developer shall pay to the City an amount representing the cost
to the City of carrying out the improvements that were required
to improve the land to be a conforming community space.
(3) The terms of the conditional use permit shall be documented in a
Prospective Development Incentive Agreement (PDIA) to be entered
into between the developer and the Planning Department. The
maximum term of a PDIA shall not exceed fifteen (15) years,
following which the rights to any unused incentive shall become null
and void.
(4) The only effect of a conditional use permit and PDIA under this
section shall be to increase the allowable building footprint or
building height, or to reduce the required off-street parking, in
accordance with Section 10.5A43.43 or Sections 10.5A46.10 through
10.5A46.22.
(5) The granting of a conditional use permit and the execution of a PDIA
under this Section 10.5A46.23 shall not be deemed to supersede or
waive any of the other provisions of this Article 5A or other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance, nor shall such approval be considered to
represent the granting of land use approval for any future development.
(6) Future use of the excess community space to support a future project
shall require the granting of a conditional use permit by the Planning
Board, whether or not the community space is on the same parcel as
the future project.
Section 10.5A50 Civic Districts
10.5A51 Purpose
10.5A51.10 Civic districts are designated to preserve existing buildings and uses
which are open to the general public and owned and operated by a not-forprofit
organization or entity other than the City of Portsmouth.
10.5A52 Standards
10.5A52.10 Permitted uses in the Civic district are uses open to the general public and
dedicated to arts, culture, education, religion, recreation, government,
transit, gardening, horticulture, public gathering, assembly or meeting.
10.5A52.20 Structures may be converted to other civic uses permitted under
10.5A52.10.
10.5A52.30 When specified in the Site Plan Review Regulations, Site Plan approval is
required for changes made to existing structures or the lot.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-43
10.5A52.40 New structures, alterations and expansions of existing structures in the
Civic district are exempt from the requirements of 10.5A42 and 10.5A43
provided that all uses remain civic.
10.5A52.50 Structures in the Civic district that are proposed for and/or converted to
non-civic uses permitted under 10.5A30 shall require Regulating Plan
amendment as set forth in Section 10.5A22.
Section 10.5A60 Definitions
This Section provides definitions for certain terms in Article 5A and Article 5B that are
not otherwise defined in Article 5A, Article 5B, or Article 15:
Backbuilding
A single-story structure connecting a principal building to an outbuilding.
See Figure 10.5A42.10 (Principal Building/Backbuilding/Outbuilding).
Block
The aggregate of private lots, service streets/rear alleys and rear lanes,
circumscribed by streets, paths or pedestrian alleys.
Building Stepback
The step-like recession in the profile of a building from the street right-of-way
line to control the enclosure of the street and allow light to reach the public
realm. Where height limitation requires, buildings must be setback or
stepbacked from the street right-of-way line a specified distance for every added
height interval.
Community space
As applicable to Article 5B, an area that is privately-owned and oriented and
accessible to the public, or as applicable to Article 5A, an area dedicated for
public use with permanent deeded access to the City of Portsmouth. Such areas
must conform to the types shown in Figure 10.5A45.10.
Development Site
Any lot or group of contiguous lots owned or controlled by the same person or
entity, assembled for the purpose of a single development.
Development Site Area
The cumulative area of all contiguous lots that the site is composed of. Site
area does not include existing or proposed right-of-way, whether dedicated or not
dedicated to public use.
Entrance spacing
The distance between any two publicly accessible pedestrian entrances to a
building along a façade.
Façade
The side of a building facing a front yard.
Article 5A Character-Based Zoning
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5A-44
Façade glazing
The portion of a façade that consists of transparent windows and doors.
Front lot line buildout
The portion of the width of the required front yard or front building setback that
is occupied by a building.
Liner building
A building that is at least 20 feet deep measured from the façade and is
specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking structure from the
street. A liner building may be separated from a parking structure by
community space if directly integrated with subsurface parking or vehicular
access to a parking structure.
Outbuilding
A building, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal
building, and sometimes connected to the principal building by a
backbuilding. See Figure 10.5A42.10 (Principal Building/Backbuilding/
Outbuilding).
Path
A pedestrian way traversing a park, square or other open space, or otherwise
separated from streets by landscaped areas, and ideally connecting directly with
the urban sidewalk network.
Public Realm
Includes exterior open spaces and linkages that are physically and/or visually
accessible to the general public, during all business hours, or the majority of the
day for residential buildings, regardless of ownership.
Regulating Plan
The zoning map or set of maps that shows the Character districts, Municipal
districts, Civic districts and any additional requirements of areas subject to, or
potentially subject to, regulation by Article 5A.
Streetscreen
A freestanding wall or fence built on the same plane as a façade to mask a
parking lot, structure or use from the street, provide privacy to a side yard,
and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-1
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
Section 10.5B10 General
10.5B11 Purpose
10.5B11.10 The purpose of Article 5B is to implement and support the goals of the
City’s Master Plan and Housing Policy to encourage walkable mixed-use
development and continued economic vitality in the City’s primary
gateway areas, ensure that new development complements and enhances
its surroundings, provide housing stock that is suited for changing
demographics, and accommodate the housing needs of the City’s current
and future workforce.
10.5B11.20 The standards set forth herein are intended to:
a) Promote development that is consistent with the goals of the Master
Plan to create vibrant, authentic, diverse, connected and resilient
neighborhoods;
b) Encourage high quality housing for a variety of household types and
income ranges.
c) Guide the physical character of development by providing a menu of
building and site development types that are based on established
community design principles;
d) Create quality places by allowing for whole site development with
meaningful public spaces and neighborhood centers.
10.5B12 Applicability
10.5B12.10 Article 5B shall apply to the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor
(G1) and Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Center (G2) (collectively
referred to as Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts) as shown on
the City of Portsmouth Zoning Map.
10.5B12.11 No development, subdivision, re-subdivision or construction of or on any
building, lot or parcel of land shall occur except in compliance with all
standards and requirements for these districts.
10.5B13 Relationship to Other Provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
10.5B13.10 The provisions of Article 5B shall take precedence over all other
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that conflict with Article 5B.
10.5B13.20 All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that are not specifically modified
or superseded by Article 5B, or that are not in conflict with Article 5B,
shall apply to lots, buildings and uses in the Gateway Neighborhood
Mixed Use Districts.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-2
10.5B14 Relationship to Other Regulations, Codes and Ordinances
10.5B14.10 Any proposed subdivision of land shall comply with the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations, in addition to the requirements of Article 5B.
10.5B14.20 Any development that requires Site Plan Review under the Site Plan
Review Regulations shall comply with such Regulations, in addition to the
requirements of Article 5B.
10.5B14.30 The provisions of Article 5B do not modify or supersede any provision of
the Building Code, other City ordinances or regulations, or State laws
relating to the development of land.
10.5B15 Figures and Tables
10.5B15.10 The standards and definitions included in the figures and tables in this
Article are an integral part of Article 5B.
10.5B15.20 The diagrams, photographs and illustrations contained in the figures in this
Article are provided only to provide reference to certain regulating
elements and indicate general character within the various districts and
shall have regulatory force and effect only to that extent.
10.5B16 Allowed Uses
Buildings, structures, and land within the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
shall comply with the use regulations set forth in Section 10.440, Table of Uses. The
Planning Board shall be the Conditional Use Permit Granting Authority for all uses
requiring a Conditional Use Permit in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts.
10.5B17 Definitions
Terms used throughout Article 5B may be defined in the figures, Section 10.5A60,
Article 15 or elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. Terms not so defined shall be accorded
their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of any conflict between the definitions
in Article 5B, Article 5A, Article 15, other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, or any other
local land use ordinances, rules or regulations, those of Article 5A shall take precedence
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Section 10.5B20 General Standards for All Buildings and Development
10.5B21 Building Setback Encroachments
Determination of building setbacks from lot lines shall not include the exceptions
specified in Section 10.515 and 10.516 as well as the following:
10.5B21.10 Chimneys and flues may encroach up to four (4) feet, provided that at least
two (2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of any lot line.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-3
10.5B21.20 Unenclosed fire escapes or emergency egress stairways may encroach up to
four (4) feet into a required side or rear building setback from lot lines,
provided that at least two (2) feet is maintained from the vertical plane of
any lot line.
10.5B21.30 Certain Building Façade Types as permitted in 10.5B60.
10.5B22 Building Height, Setback and Stepback
10.5B22.10 Building Height Exceptions: Roof decks, roof gardens, and related
structures and appurtenances shall not be counted in the building height
limits. All other building height exceptions shall comply with Section
10.517.
10.5B22.20 Building Stepback and Street Enclosure: Buildings taller than 35 feet
that front on streets with right-of-way widths of 60’ or less shall be
required to be set back or stepped back from the right-of-way line in
accordance with Figure 10.5B22.10. The purpose of this requirement is to
enhance the pedestrian environment and prevent excessive shadowing on
narrower streets in the district.
Distance from street right-ofway
line
Maximum building
height
0’ to 24’ 35’
25’ to 49’ 45’
50’ or more 60’
Figure 10.5B22.10 - Building Setback/Stepback Standards
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-4
10.5B22.30 Building Setbacks and Separation: Front, side, and rear building
setbacks from lot lines are specified by building type. Where buildings
are located on the same lot and not attached by a common wall, the
minimum separation between buildings shall be 10 feet unless otherwise
specified in this Section.
10.5B22.40 Special Setback Requirements on Lafayette Road: For all lots and
development sites with frontage on Lafayette Road buildings shall be
setback a minimum of 70 feet and a maximum of 90 feet from the
centerline of the road. For all lots and development sites with frontage
on the Route 1 Bypass buildings shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet
and a maximum of 50 feet from the sideline of the road.
10.5B23 Façade Composition Standards
10.5B23.10 Façade Glazing: For building types with specific Façade Glazing
requirements as defined in Section 10.5B34, the following general
standards shall apply:
(a) Façades shall have windows and doors with highly transparent, low
reflectivity glass for a percentage of the total area of a façade,
measured for each story independently.
(b) Façade glazing of a ground story façade is measured between two
(2) feet and twelve (12) feet above the abutting sidewalk.
(c) Façade glazing requirements are only applicable to façades facing a
front lot line.
Figure 10.5B23.10 - Ground Floor Façade Glazing
10.5B23.20 Façade Modulation
(a) Building façades shall be vertically articulated with architectural
bays between six (6) feet and fifty (50) feet in width to create an
equal, central, and/or ends focused composition as illustrated in
Figure 10.5B23.30.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-5
Figure 10.5B23.30 - Façade Modulation
(b) Buildings greater than one hundred (100) feet in width shall be
designed to read as a series of smaller buildings with varied
architectural design and façade glazing patterns or include a change
in vertical plane of the façade of at least four (4) feet (in depth or
projection) for at least one (1) bay in width for every one hundred
(100) feet of total façade width. This change in plane applies to the
entire height of the façade.
10.5B23.30 Horizontal Articulation and Massing Elements: Building façades shall be
horizontally articulated with a clearly defined base, middle, and top.
10.5B23.40 Pedestrian Access: Where pedestrian access is required for specific
building types, entrances shall be located on the street-facing façade of a
building, provide both ingress and egress, and be operable and accessible.
This requirement does not exclude the building from providing pedestrian
access to the side or rear of the building.
10.5B24 Roof Types and Design
10.5B24.10 Roof Shapes and Rooflines: The shape and proportion of the roof shall be
visually compatible with the architectural style of the building and with
those of neighboring buildings. Pitched roofs shall have a minimum slope
as follows:
(a) Shed: 2:12 minimum
(b) Hip: 3:12 minimum
(c) Gable: 6:12 minimum to 12:12 maximum.
(d) Gambrel: 6:12 minimum to 30:12 maximum.
10.5B24.20 Flat Roofs: Buildings with flat roofs shall be capped by an articulated
parapet wall design that acts as a structural expression of the building
façade and its materials, visible from all sides of the building.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-6
Figure 10.5B24.20 - Parapet Wall Standards
10.5B25 Building Length and Number of Dwelling Units
10.5B25.10 The maximum building length for residential and mixed use building
types shall be no more than 200 linear feet.
10.5B25.20 Unless otherwise specified in Section 10.5B34, no more than 24 dwelling
units per building shall be allowed without a conditional use permit from
the Planning Board as provided in Section 10.5B72.
Section 10.5B30 Building Types and Standards
10.5B31 General
10.5B31.10 All new buildings in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts shall
be building types specified in this Section and defined in Section
10.5A43.60.
10.5B32 Building Lots
10.5B32.10 Lot Dimensions: Building lot requirements designate the range of lot
sizes that a given building type as identified in this Section can be built on.
If a lot is smaller than the minimum required for a certain building type, a
different building type must be selected.
10.5B32.20 Number of Buildings: No more than one principal building type is allowed
on a lot except where otherwise specified in Section 10.5B40.
10.5B32.30 Special Frontage Requirement: Lots with both frontage on and
driveway access from Lafayette Road, Woodbury Ave, or Market Street
must have a minimum of 100 feet of street frontage.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-7
10.5B33 Building Placement and Orientation
10.5B33.10 Building Placement: All buildings and structures must be located outside
of any required front, side, or rear building setbacks from lot lines
except as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. The façade of a
principal building must be built at or in front of any required maximum
front building setback from the lot line for each story of a building.
10.5B33.20 Front Lot Line Build Out: All buildings must have a front lot line build
out of at least 50% for residential and community building types, and 75%
for commercial and mixed use buildings types.
Figure 10.5B33.21 – Front Building Setback and Front Lot Line
Build Out
A: Minimum and maximum building front setback from lot lines; B:
front lot line buildout is the width of the front façade of the building
or buildings as a percentage of the total lot width.
10.5B33.30 Façade Orientation: The primary façade of a principal building must be
built parallel to a front lot line or to the tangent of a curved front lot line.
On a corner lot, the façade may be retracted at a 45-degree angle
between the curb radius to allow for community space and for safe sight
distance at the corner. All other requirements pertaining to corner visibility
in Section 10.516.30 shall apply.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-8
10.5B34 Building Type Standards
10.5B34.10 Cottage 10.5B34.20 Paired House
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 30 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 5 ft min. to 20 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 5 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 10 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
1
Maximum dwelling unit
size
1,400 GFA; 2
Bedrooms
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 1.5 stories or 20 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 10 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Maximum building
footprint 1,000 sf
Maximum façade
modulation length
18 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
20% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type gable, hip
Façade types dooryard, stoop,
step, porch
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
Only allowed in a Pocket Neighborhood
Development (see Section 10.5B41)
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line
10 ft min. to 30 ft
max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 10 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
3
Dwelling unit size NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 2.5 stories or 35 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 12 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Maximum building
footprint NR
Maximum façade
modulation length
18 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
20% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type gable, hip, gambrel
Façade types dooryard, stoop,
step, porch
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
Only allowed in a Pocket Neighborhood
Development (see Section 10.5B41)
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-9
10.5B34.30 Gateway Townhouse 10.5B34.40 Apartment Building
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth 50 ft
Minimum street frontage 20 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 5 ft min. to 15 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 10 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
1
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 2.5 stories or 35 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 12 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Maximum building
footprint NR
Maximum façade
modulation length
required every 4th
Unit (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
20% ground floors
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
dooryard, stoop,
recessed entry,
step, porch
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
A maximum of 8 units can be attached by a common
wall before a separation of 20 feet or more is
required.
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line
10 ft min. to 30 ft
max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Dwelling units per
building
4 min. to 24 max.
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 4 stories or 50 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 24 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
36”
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Maximum building
footprint NR
Maximum façade
modulation length
50 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
20% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type All
Façade types
forecourt, recessed
entry, dooryard,
step, porch
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-10
10.5B34.50 Live/Work Building 10.5B34.60 Small Commercial Building
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 20 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 0 ft min. to 15 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 10 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 15%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
1
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 2.5 stories or 35 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 18 ft
Finished floor surface of
ground floor above
sidewalk grade
0” min. to 24” max.
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Maximum building
footprint NR
Maximum façade
modulation length
18 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
50% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
dooryard, recessed
entry, porch,
shopfront, terrace
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 0 ft min. to 20 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 10 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 10%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
NR
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 3 stories or 40 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 18 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
24”
Maximum building
coverage 70%
Maximum building
footprint 10,000 sf
Maximum façade
modulation length
50 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
50% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
forecourt, recessed
entry, porch,
officefront,
shopfront, terrace,
gallery, arcade
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-11
10.5B34.70 Large Commercial Building 10.5B34.80 Mixed Use Building
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 100 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 0 ft min. to 50 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 10%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
NR
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 4 stories or 50 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 18 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
24”
Maximum building
coverage 70%
Maximum building
footprint 40,000 sf
Maximum façade
modulation length
100 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
50% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
forecourt, recessed
entry, porch,
officefront,
shopfront, terrace,
gallery, arcade
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 0 ft min. to 50 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
24
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 4 stories or 50 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 18 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
24”
Maximum building
coverage 60%
Maximum building
footprint 20,000 sf
Maximum façade
modulation length
100 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
50% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
forecourt, recessed
entry, porch,
officefront,
shopfront, terrace,
gallery, arcade
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-12
10.5B34.90 Flex Space/Fabrication Building 10.5B34.100 Community Building
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line 0 ft min. to 30 ft max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 10%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
NR
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 2.5 stories or 40 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 12 ft
Maximum finished floor
surface of ground floor
above sidewalk grade
24”
Maximum building
coverage 70%
Maximum building
footprint 20,000 sf
Maximum façade
modulation length
100 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
20% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
dooryard, recessed
entry, officefront,
shopfront, terrace
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum lot depth NR
Minimum street frontage 50 ft
Front building setback
from lot line
10 ft min. to 40 ft
max.
Minimum side building
setback from lot line 15 ft
Minimum rear building
setback from lot line 20 ft
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
BUILDING AND LOT USE
Maximum dwelling units
per building
NR
Maximum dwelling unit
size
NR
DESIGN STANDARDS
Maximum building height 3 stories or 45 ft
Minimum street facing
façade height 18 ft
Finished floor surface of
ground floor above
sidewalk grade
2 ft min. to 6 ft max.
Maximum building
coverage NR
Maximum building
footprint NR
Maximum façade
modulation length
100 ft (see Section
10.5A43.20)
Minimum street facing
façade glazing
30% ground floor
Street facing entrance required
Maximum street facing
entrance spacing NR
Roof type all
Façade types
dooryard, forecourt,
stoop, recessed
entry, step, porch,
terrace, gallery,
arcade
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-13
Section 10.5B40 Development Site Standards
10.5B41 General
10.5B41.10 Allowed by Conditional Use Permit approval from the Planning Board, a
development site is any lot or group of contiguous lots owned or
controlled by the same person or entity, assembled for the purpose of a
single development and including more than one principal building or
building type. Unless otherwise specified by this Ordinance,
development site standards as provided in this Section supersede lot
dimensional standards for individual building types provided in Section
10.5B34 including lot depth, street frontage, building coverage, and
open space coverage. Where no equivalent development site standard
is provided, the building type standards shall apply.
10.5B41.20 Site Area: Development site area is the cumulative area of all
contiguous lots that the site is composed of.
10.5B41.30 Site Width: Development site width is the cumulative width of all
contiguous lots that the site is composed of and measured along the front
lot line between the side lots of the development site.
10.5B41.40 Site Depth: Development site depth is the distance between the front and
rear property lines measured along a line midway between the outside edge
of all contiguous lots.
Figure 10.5B41 – Development Site Envelope Standards
10.5B41.50 Permitted Building Types: A development site may include a
combination of building types as permitted in Section 10.5B43 that are
assembled on an individual lot or group of contiguous lots for the
purpose of a single development.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-14
10.5B41.60 Perimeter Buffer: The perimeter buffer requirements apply to the outside
boundary of the development site where the site abuts adjoining
properties that are not part of the development site, but not along the
primary street frontage. In addition to the minimum perimeter buffer
required, the Planning Board may require landscaping, fencing, or an
increase in the building setback from lot lines where adjacent land uses
may be incompatible. Perimeter buffer requirements supersede parking
setback requirements and building setbacks from lot lines requirements
for individual building types.
10.5B41.70 Development Block Standards: These standards establish maximum
block length along public streets or private accessways within a
development site as a method to ensure that access and walkability are
integrated into the placement of buildings, community spaces, and site
utility areas. Generally, blocks are laid out in order to orient buildings to
the street and public realm while concentrating utility elements such as
electrical service, parking, and refuse collection to the center of blocks, at
the rear of the buildings.
Figure 10.541.70 – Development Block Diagram
1) Size and Dimension: Each development site has a standard for the
maximum block length and block perimeter under Section 10.5B42
and illustrated in Figure 10.5B41.70 above.
2) Access and Service: Where shared parking areas or community
spaces are located within the interior of the block, a vehicular and/or
pedestrian accessway shall be provided every 200 linear feet along a
block face.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-15
10.5B41.80 Open Space and Community Space Coverage
1) Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, community space
coverage shall be counted toward the minimum required open space
coverage for the development site.
2) In the G1 District, the minimum community space coverage shall
be equal to 10% of the total site area of the development site.
3) In the G2 District, the minimum community space coverage shall
be equal to 20% of the total site area of the development site.
10.5B41.90 Public Street Frontage: All development sites must have a minimum of
50 feet of frontage on a public street providing access to internal
accessways located within the development sites. All development
sites with direct access to Lafayette Road must have a minimum of 100
feet of frontage along the corridor.
10.5B41.100 Building Setbacks for Interior Lot Lines: Where a development site
includes a more than one building type, the minimum building setback
to interior lot lines shall be 0 feet.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-16
10.5B42 Development Site Standards
10.5B42.10 Pocket Neighborhood Development
A Pocket Neighborhood is a cohesive cluster of homes gathered around a variety of common open
space amenities. In the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts, the following Pocket
Neighborhood Development Sites are permitted:
(a) Cottage Court: This Pocket Neighborhood
consists of multiple small, detached single family
dwellings, arranged around a courtyard. The
shared courtyard takes the place of private yard
space and becomes an important communityenhancing
element of this development site. The
cottage court is appropriately scaled to fit within
or nearby medium-density neighborhoods. The
pocket neighborhood enables appropriately
scaled, well-designed, higher density
developments important for providing a broad
choice of housing types in a walkable
environment. Cottage courts consist of
cottages, paired houses, and community
building types meeting the design standards in
Table 10.5B34 and the density thresholds in
Section 10.5B70.
(b) Cohousing/Housing Cooperative: Cohousing is a
community of private dwellings clustered around
shared building and community spaces. Each
attached or single family dwelling has traditional
residential amenities, including a private kitchen.
Shared spaces typically feature a common house,
which may include a large kitchen and dining area,
laundry, and recreational spaces. Other shared
spaces include community garden plots,
recreational fields, and shared work spaces.
Cohousing developments consists of cottages,
paired houses, and community building types
meeting the design standards in Table 10.5B33
and the density thresholds in Section 10.5B70.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Minimum development
site area 10,000 sf
Minimum site width 75 ft
Minimum site depth 100 ft
Minimum perimeter buffer NR
Maximum development
block dimensions
block length 300 ft;
block perimeter 1,200
linear ft
Maximum building
coverage 50%
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
Community space types
greenway,
courtyard, park,
pocket park,
playground,
recreation field or
court, community
garden, common or
green
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
Cottages, paired houses, community buildings
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS
Maximum cottage unit size 1,400 GFA and 2
bedrooms
Maximum cohousing unit
size
1,800 GFA and 3
bedrooms
Minimum courtyard design 3,000 GFA and 40 ft
width
Minimum courtyard area
per dwelling unit 600 sf
Buildings shall be centered on a common courtyard
in groups of 16 or less.
Cottage courts and cohousing developments may
include a community garden, common house, cowork
space, and other common access site amenities.
For cottage court development blocks, the cottages
will face a central courtyard in the interior areas of
the block, and a service road will provide access to
parking areas and building lots along the perimeter
of the block.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-17
10.5B42.20 Mixed Use Development 10.5B42.30 General Residential
Development
A development project containing multiple residential,
nonresidential, and mixed use building types. Mixed
Use Developments may include a combination of
horizontally and vertically mixed buildings and uses
on site subject to all applicable building type standards
in Section 10.5B30.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Minimum development
site area 20,000 sf
Minimum site width 100 ft
Minimum site depth 100 ft
Minimum perimeter buffer
75 ft from a
Residential District,
Mixed Residential
District, or Character
District 4-L1
Maximum development
block dimensions
block length 800 ft;
block perimeter
2,200 linear ft
Maximum building
coverage 70%
Minimum open space
coverage 20%
Community space types all
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
apartment building, gateway townhouse,
live/work building, small commercial building,
large commercial building, mixed use building,
small flex space/fabrication building,
community building
A development project containing one or more
residential building types in accordance with allowed
building types and design standards in Section
10.5B34.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Minimum development
site area
10,000 sf
Minimum site width 75 ft
Minimum site depth 100 ft
Minimum perimeter buffer
75 ft from a
Residential District,
Mixed Residential
District, or Character
District 4-L1
Maximum development
block dimensions
block length 500 ft;
block perimeter
1,500 linear ft
Maximum building
coverage
50%
Minimum open space
coverage
20%
Community space types
greenway, park,
pocket park,
playground,
recreation field or
court, common or
green, community
garden, square,
plaza
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
apartment building, gateway townhouse,
live/work building, community building
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-18
10.5B42.40 General Commercial Development
A development project containing one or more
commercial building types in accordance with allowed
building types and design standards in Section
10.5B34.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Minimum development
site area 10,000 sf
Minimum site width 75 ft
Minimum site depth 100 ft
Minimum perimeter buffer 100 ft from a
Residential District,
Mixed Residential
District, or Character
District 4-L1
Maximum development
block dimensions
block length 700 ft;
block perimeter
2,000 linear ft
Maximum building
coverage 70%
Minimum open space
coverage 10%
Community space types park, pedestrian
alley, wide
pedestrian
sidewalk, common
or green, outdoor
dining café,
greenway, square,
plaza, courtyard
PERMITTED BUILDING TYPES
small commercial building, large commercial
building, small flex space/fabrication building
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-19
10.5B43 Review and Approval Process
10.5B43.10 Conditional Use Permit Criteria: Prior to granting a conditional use permit
for development sites in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
according to the requirements of this Article, the Planning Board shall
make the following findings.
1) The development project is consistent with the Portsmouth Master
Plan.
2) The development project has been designed to allow uses that are
appropriate for its context and consistent with City’s planning goals
and objectives for the area.
3) The project includes measures to mitigate or eliminate anticipated
impacts on traffic safety and circulation, demand on municipal
services, stormwater runoff, natural resources, and adjacent
neighborhood character.
4) The project is consistent with the purpose and intent set forth in
Section 10.5B11.
Section 10.5B50 Pre-Existing Buildings and Lots
10.5B51 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the continued utilization of
existing buildings in Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts constructed prior to
the effective date of Article 10.5B. Where the provisions of this section conflict with
Article 3: Non-Conforming Lots, Buildings, Uses and Structures, this section shall apply.
10.5B52 Non-Conforming Building Additions and Retrofits
A building in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts that existed prior to the
effective date of Article 5B may be expanded or altered without complying with all of the
standards of Section 10.5B34, but shall comply with the following minimum standards
for the allowed building type as defined in 10.5A36.60 that is most similar to the existing
building:
10.5B52.10 Front Addition: Any addition to the front of the building is allowed up to
the minimum front building setback from the lot line for the specified
building type.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-20
10.5B52.20 Rear Addition: Rear additions are allowed up to the minimum rear
building setback from the lot line for the specified building type.
10.5B52.30 Side Addition: Side additions are allowed up to the minimum side building
setback from the lot line and to a maximum length of 200 feet for
residential and mixed use building types and consistent with the
maximum façade modulation length for the specified building type.
10.5B52.40 Story Addition: Story additions are allowed up to the maximum story and
building height for the specified building type.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-21
10.5B52.50 Residential Density: Maximum density is 1 dwelling unit per 2,000 gross
floor area of the existing building being converted or expanded for
residential use.
10.5B53 New Buildings
New building(s) that are constructed on a lot or development site that includes one or
more non-conforming buildings that existed prior to the effective date of Article 5B,
shall comply with the standards for development sites as required by Section 10.5B40
except as follows:
10.5B53.10 If the minimum front lot line buildout has not been met, new buildings
must be placed within the minimum and maximum front building setback
from the lot line.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-22
Section 10.5B60 Building Façade Types
10.5B61 General
At least one (1) façade type as defined in Section 105A43.10 is required for each
principal building type.
10.5B62 Permitted Building Façade Types by Building Type
10.5B62.10 Building Façade Types
BUILDING TYPES
FAÇADE TYPES
A. Cottage
B. Paired House
C. Apartment Building
D.Gateway Townhouse
E. Live/Work Building
F. Large and Small
Commercial Building
G. Mixed-Use Building
H. Flex Space/ Fabrication
Building
A. Dooryard P P P P P P
B. Forecourt P P P
C. Stoop P P P
D. Recessed Entry P P P P P P
E. Step P P P P
F. Porch P P P P P P P
G. Officefront P P P
H. Shopfront P P P P
I. Terrace P P P P
J. Gallery P P
K. Arcade P P
P = Permitted
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-23
Section 10.5B70 Density Thresholds and Bonuses
10.5B71 Residential Density
10.5B71.10 New development or redevelopment that consists of one principal
residential or mixed residential building according to the standards for
building type in Section 10.5B34 on a single lot shall comply with the
following density requirements for the maximum number of dwelling
units per acre.
Dwelling Units Per Acre
Building Type
Gateway Corridor
(G1)
Gateway Center
(G2)
P CU P CU
Cottage NR NR NR NR
Paired House NR NR NR NR
Apartment Building 16 24 16 24
Gateway Townhouse 16 24 16 24
Live-Work/Building 16 24 16 24
Mixed Use Building 16 24 16 24
P = Permitted
CU = Conditional Use Permit under the provisions for Density Bonuses in Section 10.5B72
10.5B71.20 New development or redevelopment that is constructed according to the
standards for a development site in Section 10.5B43 shall comply with
the density requirement for the maximum number of dwelling units per
acre for all of the buildings in the development.
Dwelling Units Per Acre
Development Sites
Gateway Corridor
(G1)
Gateway Center
(G2)
P CU P CU
Pocket Neighborhood 16 20 12 16
Mixed Use Development 20 36 20 36
General Residential
Development 20 36 20 36
P = Permitted
CU = Conditional Use Permit under the provisions for Density Bonuses in Section 10.5B72
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-24
10.5B72 Density Bonus Incentives
A conditional use permit may be granted by the Planning Board for increased housing
density or for increased building height and footprint as described in this section. Such
conditional use permit shall be contingent upon satisfying the requirements of Section
10.5B73.
10.5B72.10 Dwelling Units Per Building: The Planning Board may, by conditional
use permit, allow up to a maximum of 36 dwelling units per building.
10.5B72.20 Dwelling Units per Acre: The Planning Board may, by conditional use
permit, allow higher density up to the maximum established in Section
10.5B71.
10.5B72.30 Building Height and Building Footprint: The Planning Board may, by
conditional use permit, allow an increase in the maximum building height
by one (1) story or 10’ and an increase in the maximum building footprint
and square footage by 20 percent.
10.5B73 Bonus Incentive Requirements
In order to be eligible one of the bonus incentives outlined in section 10.5B72, a
development shall include workforce housing according to the requirements of
10.5B73.10. In order to be eligible for multiple bonus incentives outlined in Section
10.5B72 a development shall also provide public realm improvements according to the
requirements of 10.5B73.20. Required documentation for these improvements must be
submitted with the application as outlined in Section 10.5B74.
10.5B73.10 Workforce Housing Requirement: At least 20% of the dwelling units in
the development, but no less than three units, shall be workforce
housing units for sale or rent complying with the following criteria:
1) For sale units shall be at least the average gross floor area of the
proposed units in the building or 1,000 sq. ft., whichever is greater.
2) Rental units shall be at least the average gross floor area of the
proposed units in the building or 800 sq. ft., whichever is greater.
3) The workforce housing units shall be distributed throughout the
building wherever dwelling units are located.
10.5B73.20 Public Realm Improvements: All public realm improvements used for a
density bonus shall be recommended in plans adopted by the City of
Portsmouth including but not limited to the Master Plan, Bicycle and
Pedestrian Plan, and Capital Improvement Program. Eligible improvements
include the following:
1) Design and construction of an off-road trail or path that is at least
equal to the linear public street frontage of the site and expands the
Portsmouth Bicycle and Pedestrian Network consistent with the
Portsmouth Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan. The trail or path shall be
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-25
located on or adjacent to the project’s building lot or development
site, except as provided in (4) below.
2) Design and construction of a public park or athletic facility that is
designed for active or passive recreation equal to at least 20% of the
project’s gross floor area that is located on or adjacent to the
project’s building lot or development site, except as provided in (d)
below.
3) On-site public realm improvements provided for the purpose of
satisfying the requirements of this section shall not be counted toward
the required minimum community space coverage.
4) The Planning Board may allow a proposed public realm improvement
to be located on a different lot than the development it if finds that all
of the following criteria will be met:
(a) An appropriate public realm improvement cannot feasibly be
provided on the same lot as the development.
(b) The proposed public realm improvement is within the same
Zoning District as the development.
10.5B74 Approval of Density Bonus Incentives
10.5B74.10 Required Information: In order to be eligible for bonus incentives as
described in 10.5B72, the following submissions must be included with an
application for a Conditional Use Permit:
10.5B74.11 Workforce Housing:
1) A description of the workforce housing units,
identifying quantity, location, and type;
2) Documentation that the proposed units qualify as
workforce housing units as defined by this Ordinance;
3) Proposed covenant or other legally binding documents
that provide enforceable restrictions as to price and
occupancy to ensure long-term availability and
affordability of the units.
10.5B74.12 Public Realm Improvements:
1) A written description of the intended site development
or District improvements, the relevant City plan, the
public benefit provided, provision for design,
construction, management and maintenance if required,
and plans showing the location and type, size and extent
of each of the eligible improvements.
2) A specific time frame for the completion of all required
on-site and off-site improvements shall be incorporated
as a condition of approval of the Planning Board.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-26
3) A list of all permits and approvals required in connection
with any proposed public realm improvements with the
application. These approvals shall be obtained prior to
approval of the development, unless authorized by the
Planning Board.
10.5B74.13 Any requests by the applicant for the Planning Board to
modify specific standards and requirements set forth in this
Section 10.5B70 as allowed under Section 10.5B74.30 and a
detailed justification for the requested modification.
10.5B74.20 Planning Board Findings: Prior to granting a conditional use permit for
density bonus incentives under this section, the Board shall make the
following findings:
10.5B74.21 The proposed project (and any conditions of approval)
satisfies the requirements in Section 10.5B73;
10.5B74.22 The proposed project is consistent with the purpose and
intent set forth in Section 10.5B11.
10.5B74.30 Modification of Standards: In granting a conditional use permit, the
Planning Board may modify specific standards and requirements set forth
in Section 10.5B20, 10.5B30, 10.5B40 and 10.5B70 provided that the
Planning Board finds such modification will promote design flexibility and
overall project quality, or that such modification is required for the
development to provide a proposed workforce housing component, and
that such modification is consistent with the purpose and intent set forth in
Section 10.5B11.
10.5B74.31 In considering a request for a modification of the standards
and requirements, the Planning Board may request that the
applicant provide additional documentation and information
from the applicant demonstrating that the requirements of this
Ordinance are prohibitive to the successful completion of the
project as proposed. Such information shall include, but not
be limited to, project cost factors related to land acquisition,
improvements for roads, utilities & drainage, insurance, labor,
building materials, and profit to identify a total gross cost of
the project and per unit gross costs.
Section 10.5B80 Parking and Loading Requirements and Standards
10.5B81 General
10.5B81.10 Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all buildings, structures,
uses, and development sites in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use
Districts shall comply with the off-street parking and loading
requirements set forth in Section 10.1110 and Section 10.1120.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-27
10.5B82 Number of Required Spaces
10.5B82.10 Uses in the Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts shall provide offstreet
parking in accordance with Section 10.1112, except as follows:
a) For developments located on a public transit route with year-round,
5-days-per-week, fixed-route service and where at least 50% of the
building(s) are within ¼ mile of a transit stop, the minimum offstreet
parking required for motor vehicles shall be reduced by 20%
of the total required for all uses.
10.5B83 Location of Motor Vehicle Parking Facilities
10.5B83.10 Required off-street parking spaces shall not be located between a
principal building and a street or within any required perimeter buffer
area.
10.5B83.20 Development sites that include multiple lots shall not be subject to the
requirements of 10.1113.10 requiring off-street parking spaces to be
located on the same lot as the principal use. Off-street parking spaces
shall be located within the same development site for the principal use
they are intended to serve.
Section 10.5B90 Pedestrian Access and Circulation
10.5B91 Pedestrian walkways shall provide connections through the lot/site to the
public street right-of-way, and between the lot/site and adjacent land
uses.
10.5B92 At least one 8-foot wide pedestrian walkway shall be provided throughout
the lot/site, connecting adjacent streets, accessways, sidewalks and
off-street parking areas to the entrances of all principal buildings.
10.5B93 Pedestrian areas shall be clearly distinguished from vehicular and bicycle
traffic areas through the use of paving materials, landscaping, or other
means.
10.5B94 A lot/site with more than one principal building or off-street parking
area shall include an internal pedestrian network that provides logical and
direct routes for pedestrians throughout site.
10.5B95 Parking lots shall include internal walkways spaced not more than 150
feet apart. Where possible, these walkways shall be aligned to connect with
major building entries or other destinations.
Article 5B Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 5B-28
Section 10.5B100 Community Space
10.5B101 General Requirements
10.5B101.10 Community spaces meeting one or more of the types described in Figure
10.5A45.10 must be provided according to the standards for development
sites as described in Section 10.5B40.
10.5B101.20 A community space that is provided on-site and otherwise qualifies as
open space as defined by this Ordinance shall count towards the open
space coverage requirement for the development.
10.5B101.30 In the G2 Districts, community spaces shall be designed to support new
mixed use centers, provide convenient access to residents, and support
neighborhood events and activities.
10.5B102 Permitted Community Spaces by Development Site Type
Only community space Types that are listed as permitted shall count toward the
required community space coverage requirement specified for the development site.
COMMUNITY SPACE TYPES
DEVELOPMENT SITES
Mixed Use
Development
Pocket
Neighborhood
General Residential
Development
General Commercial
Development
Park P P P P
Greenway P P P P
Pedestrian Alley P P P
Wide Pedestrian Sidewalk P P P
Pocket Park P P P P
Playground P P P
Recreation Field P P P
Common or Green P P P P
Community Garden P P P
Outdoor Dining Cafe P P
Square P P P
Plaza P P P
Courtyard P P P P
P = Permitted
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-1
Article 6 Overlay Districts
Section 10.610 Overlay Districts Generally
Section 10.620 Flood Plain District
Section 10.630 Historic District
Section 10.640 Downtown Overlay District
Section 10.650 Osprey Landing Overlay District
Section 10.660 Airport Approach Overlay District
Section 10.670 Highway Noise Overlay District
Section 10.610 Overlay Districts Generally
10.611 Relationship to Underlying Zoning Districts
Overlay districts apply special rules to manage land use in specific areas that may be
portions of a single zoning district or that may overlap two or more zoning districts. The
rules for overlay districts supplement the regulations contained in other sections of this
Ordinance. Except as specifically provided otherwise in the regulations for an overlay
district, all regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply. Where there is a
conflict between the regulations of an overlay district and those of the underlying
district, the overlay district regulations control.
10.612 Establishment of Overlay Districts
The following overlay districts are established:
Overlay District Name Abbreviation
Flood Plain District FP
Historic District HD
Downtown Overlay District DOD
Osprey Landing Overlay District OL
Airport Approach Overlay District AA
North End Incentive Overlay District1 NOD
West End Incentive Overlay District1 WOD
Highway Noise Overlay District HNOD
10.613 Overlay District Locations
10.613.10 The Flood Plain District (FP) consists of:
(a) all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its “Flood Insurance
Study for the County of Rockingham County, NH” dated May 17,
2005 or as amended, together with associated Flood Insurance
1 Administrative note: See Section 10.5A46 for North End Incentive Overlay District and West End
Incentive Overlay District descriptions and requirements.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-2
Rate Maps (FIRM) dated May 17, 2005 or as amended, which are
declared to be part of this Ordinance and are hereby incorporated by
reference; and
(b) all extended flood hazard areas as defined in Section 10.622.20,
each of which shall be contiguous and adjacent to a special flood
hazard area and shall be delineated on the basis of mapped or
surveyed elevations.
10.613.20 The Historic District is identified on the Zoning Map.
10.613.30 The Downtown Overlay District (DOD) is identified on the Zoning Map.
10.613.40 The Osprey Landing Overlay District (OL) is identified on the Zoning
Map.
10.613.50 The Airport Approach Overlay District (AA) consists of:
(a) the Approach Zones shown on the Airport Obstruction Chart AOC
678 with the associated Obstruction Data Sheet ODS 678 (Surveyed
October 1990, 1st Edition, for Pease Air Force Base, Portsmouth,
NH), along with two detailed drawings (Exhibits 1 and 2), a legend
(Exhibit 3), and the accompanying FAR Part 77.25, Civil Airport
Imaginary Surfaces (Exhibit 4), all of which documents collectively
are hereinafter called the “Airport Obstruction Chart” or “AOC”; and
(b) all the land within a distance of two miles from the airport reference
point shown on the Pease International Tradeport Approach Map.
10.613.60 The Highway Noise Overlay District (HN) is identified on the Zoning
Map.
Section 10.620 Flood Plain District
10.621 Purpose
10.621.10 The regulations in this Section shall apply to land in the Flood Plain
District, and shall overlay and supplement the regulations of any
underlying district.
10.621.20 If any provision of this Section differs or appears to conflict with any other
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall
be controlling.
10.622 Definitions
10.622.10 Rules of Construction
10.622.11 The definitions of words and terms in Section 10.622.20
apply to the Flood Plain District regulations (Section
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-3
10.620). When a term is used in the Flood Plain District
Regulations and is defined in Section 10.622.20, it shall have
that meaning, which shall supersede any definition in
Article 15.
10.622.12 When a term is used in Section 10.620 and is not defined in
Section 10.622.20, its meaning shall be determined in
accordance with Article 15.
10.622.13 When a term appears in a section of the Zoning Ordinance
other than Section 10.620, its meaning for the purpose of
that section shall be determined in accordance with
Article 15.
10.622.20 Terms Defined for the Flood Plain District
Area of special flood hazard
The land in the floodplain within the City of Portsmouth subject to a one percent
or greater possibility of flooding in any given year. The area is designated on the
FIRM as Zones A and AE.
Base flood
The flood having a one percent possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE)
The water surface elevation having a one percent possibility of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year as defined on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) currently in effect.
Basement
Any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
Building
See structure in this Section.
Development
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation, or drilling operation or storage of equipment or materials.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, only storage of equipment or materials that
has the potential to increase flood levels is included in this definition.
Extended flood hazard area
Any contiguous area of land adjacent to a special flood hazard area and less
than two feet above the base flood elevation in that special flood hazard
area.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-4
FEMA
The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FIRM
See flood insurance rate map.
Flood or flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
An official map, incorporated with this Ordinance, on which FEMA has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) and the Risk Premium
Zones applicable to the City of Portsmouth.
Flood insurance study
An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination and
determination of mudslide or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood plain or flood-prone area
Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Flood proofing
Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their
contents.
Floodway
See regulatory floodway.
Highest adjacent grade
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure
Any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; or
c. Individually listed on the New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-5
Lowest floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this Ordinance.
Manufactured home
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management
purposes the term “manufactured home” includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 days. This includes
manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision.
Manufactured home park or subdivision
For the purposes of the Flood Plain District, a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level
The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood
elevations (BFE) shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
New construction
A structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
January 1, 2020 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure.
Recreational vehicle
A vehicle that is:
(a) built on a single chassis;
(b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and
(d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Special flood hazard area (SFHA)
See Area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction (including substantial improvement)
The date on which the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-6
(a) The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
(b) “Permanent construction” does not include any of the following:
(1) land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
(2) the installation of streets and/or walkways;
(3) excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms;
(4) the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main
structure.
Structure
For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
Substantial damage
Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, additions, rehabilitation,
alterations, or improvements to a structure in which the cost equals or exceeds
40 percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the
structure should equal:
(a) the appraised value at the time of the submission of a building permit
application for the repair or improvement; or
(b) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to
comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a historic
structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.
Violation
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required under this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-7
Water surface elevation
The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where
specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains.
10.623 Building Permits
10.623.10 All proposed development in a special flood hazard area or extended
flood hazard area shall require a building permit.
10.623.20 The Code Official shall review all building permit applications for new
construction or substantial improvements to determine (a) whether the
proposed building site will be in a special flood hazard area and (b) if
so, that all new construction or substantial improvements will comply
with the requirements of this section.
10.623.30 The Code Official shall not grant a building permit until the applicant
certifies that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State
law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
10.624 Water and Sewer Systems
Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are
proposed in a special flood hazard area, the applicant shall provide the Code Official
with assurance that these systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and onsite
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during periods of flooding.
10.625 Flood Information
10.625.10 For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A or
AE the applicant shall furnish the following information to the Code
Official:
(a) A completed and certified copy of a FEMA Elevation Certificate that
includes the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor of the structure and whether or not the structure has a
basement.
(b) If a non-residential structure includes floodproofing, a completed
and certified copy of the FEMA Floodproofing Certificate for Non-
Residential Structures that includes the as-built elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed and
certification of floodproofing.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-8
10.625.20 The Code Official shall maintain the above information for public
inspection and shall furnish such information upon request.
10.626 Watercourse Alteration, Relocation or Encroachment
10.626.10 In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse
the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies
of such notification to the Code Official in addition to the copies required
by provisions of State law. Further, the applicant shall be required to
submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as
determined by the Code Official, including notice of all scheduled
hearings before the Wetlands Bureau.
10.626.20 The applicant shall submit to the Code Official certification provided by a
registered professional engineer assuring that the flood carrying capacity
of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained.
10.626.30 The Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
floodway data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for
requiring that all development located in Zone A meet the following
floodway requirement:
“No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway
that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the base flood discharge.”
10.626.40 Along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated,
no new construction, substantial improvement or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect on the proposed
development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
10.627 Determination of Base Flood Elevation
10.627.10 In a special flood hazard area (SFHA) the Code Official shall
determine the base flood elevation in the following order of precedence
according to the data available:
10.627.11 In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the
community’s flood insurance study and accompanying
FIRM;
10.627.12 In Zone A, the Code Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available
from any Federal, State or other source including data
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-9
submitted for development proposals submitted to the
community (i.e. subdivisions, site approvals);
10.627.13 In Zone A where a base flood elevation is not available,
the base flood elevation shall be at least two feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
10.628 Construction Standards in Special Flood Hazard Areas and Extended
Flood Hazard Areas
10.628.10 In Zones A and AE, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall:
(a) be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(b) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(c) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and
(d) be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed
and located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
10.628.20 Any new construction of a residential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to at least two (2) feet above the
base flood elevation if in Zone A or AE, and to at least two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation of the adjacent special flood hazard
area if in an extended flood hazard area.
10.628.30 Any substantial improvement of a residential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one (1) foot above the
base flood elevation if in Zone A or AE.
10.628.40 Any new construction of a nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least two (2) feet above
the base flood elevation if in Zone A or AE, and to at least two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation of the adjacent special flood hazard
area if in an extended flood hazard area; or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) be floodproofed so that below two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation in Zone A or AE, or below two (2) feet above the base
flood elevation of the adjacent special flood hazard area in an
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-10
extended flood hazard area, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.
10.628.50 Any substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one (1) foot above
the base flood elevation if in Zone A or AE; or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) be floodproofed so that areas below one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation in Zone A or AE, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.
10.628.60 Any manufactured home to be placed or substantially improved within a
special flood hazard area shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least two (2)
feet above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to resist
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces;
10.628.70 For any new construction or substantial improvement, fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted
provided they meet the following requirements:
(a) the enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely or the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
(b) the area is not a basement;
(c) the area shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or
must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-11
(i) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwater.
10.628.80 Any recreational vehicle placed on a site within Zones A and AE for
180 or more consecutive days shall either:
(a) be fully licensed, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have
no permanently attached additions, or
(b) meet all standards of Section 10.623.10 of this ordinance and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
Section 10.628.60 of this ordinance.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
10.629 Variances and Appeals
10.629.10 Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Code Official
made under this Section 10.620 may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment as set forth in accordance with the provisions of State law.
10.629.20 If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by the
provisions of State law, the applicant shall have the burden of showing in
addition to the usual variance standards under State law:
(a) That the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
(b) That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated
regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge will result; and
(c) That the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
10.629.30 The Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct below the required elevation
may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-12
(b) Such construction below the required elevation increases risks to life
and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions.
10.629.40 The community shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all variance actions, including their justification
for their issuance, and
(b) Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report
submitted to FEMA’s Federal Insurance Administrator.
Section 10.630 Historic District
10.631 Purpose, Objectives and Applicability
10.631.10 The Historic District is established to preserve the architectural and historic
resources of the City of Portsmouth; to foster its architectural and historic
character and its sense of place; to conserve property values; to strengthen
the local economy; and to promote the use of the District for education,
pleasure and welfare of residents and visitors.
10.631.20 This Section is intended to achieve the following objectives:
(1) To preserve the integrity of the Historic District;
(2) To maintain the special character of the District as reflected in the
scale, mass, location and style of buildings;
(3) To assess the historical and architectural value of buildings and
structures, their settings, and their local or national significance in
terms of the represented time period, visible architecture, construction
materials, or relationship to a historically recognized individual
or event;
(4) To encourage designs for new buildings and structures, additions
to buildings and structures, and the reuse of existing buildings and
structures that complement and enhance the City’s architectural and
historic character and contribute to its sense of place;
(5) To foster Portsmouth’s heritage and economic well-being through
the conservation and enhancement of property values; and
(6) To promote the District’s contribution to the education, pleasure and
welfare of the City’s residents and visitors.
10.631.30 Within the Historic District, demolition, new construction or additions,
some signs, and most alterations are all subject to review by the
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-13
Commission or Code Official. In each instance, the appropriate level of
review shall be based upon the scope of the proposed activities.
10.631.40 The provisions of this Section shall apply to lots and structures located
within the Historic District, and are in addition to all other regulations
contained in the Zoning Ordinance. Nothing contained in this Section shall
be interpreted to permit a use or activity which is contrary to any other
provision of the Zoning Ordinance.
10.631.50 Where the Historic District boundary bisects a portion of a structure, the
entire structure shall be deemed to be within the Historic District. In case
of uncertainty, the Planning Board shall determine the District’s boundary.
10.632 Guiding Principles for Review
10.632.10 The Historic District includes most of the City’s oldest structures. While
not every structure in the District has historic significance on its own, the
District’s architectural value and its sense of place are shaped by the interaction
and focus of many and varied structures, and the City’s architectural
and historic character is derived from the combination of features that
have gained significance over time. Therefore, it is in the public interest to
ensure architectural review and approval of all new structures and significant
changes to existing structures within the District.
10.632.20 A tension often exists between the public’s interest in preserving and
enhancing the City’s historic fabric and sense of place, and other interests
that might damage that goal. Therefore, the Commission’s role includes
assisting applicants to understand and respect the Historic District and its
relationship to the heritage and economic well-being of the City.
10.632.30 The Design Guidelines adopted by the Commission and approved by the
City Council are intended as a tool to help manage change and protect the
City’s architectural and historical resources. They are used in the review
process to encourage the retention and repair of the existing historic fabric
and to provide a framework for the review of new construction within the
historic context of the surrounding neighborhood.
10.633 Scope of Review
10.633.10 Activities Requiring a Certificate of Approval
A Certificate of Approval from the Commission is required for any construction,
demolition, repair, renovation or alteration of a building or structure except as
specifically exempted under Section 10.633.20.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-14
10.633.20 Exemptions from Certificate of Approval
The following activities shall not require a Certificate from the Commission but require
review and certification by the Code Official:
(1) Ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature, which does
not involve a change in design, materials or outer appearance thereof;
(2) Painting or repainting structures without regard to color;
(3) Maintenance and repair of exterior walls, chimney repairs, entryway repairs, or
deck repairs provided these are of the same design and material (including the
use of lime-based mortar for repointing historic brick);
(4) Placement or replacement of shutters that are (1) constructed of wooden material,
(2) one-half the width of the sash they are covering, (3) installed with hinges and
dogs, and (4) louvered, paneled or constructed of boards as appropriate to the
style of the building;
(5) Replacement roofing on existing structures provided that (1) the roof plane and
remains the same and the material remains the same regardless of color, or
(2) asphalt roofing is replaced with slate, composite-slate, or wood shingles;
(6) Replacement of an exterior door, window or storm window, provided that (1) the
same design and materials are used, or (2) materials are used that restore the
original architectural features, including but not limited to the number and
arrangement of window lights; using true and non-removable divided lights; and
ensuring that the size of the opening does not change;
(7) Placement or replacement of roof-mounted mechanical or electrical equipment
and ventilation terminators where the equipment (1) is not located on a roof
surface that faces or is visible from a public way, (2) does not exceed 27 cubic
feet, and (3) does not extend more than 3 feet above the roof plane;
(8) Placement or replacement of wall-mounted mechanical or electrical equipment
and ventilation terminators where the equipment (1) is painted a similar color to
match or blend with the wall color, (2) does not extend more than six inches out
from the wall plane, and (3) does not vent directly into a public way; and where
(4) all duct work or equipment feeds enter the building’s interior at ground level
so as not to be visible;
(9) Placement or replacement of ground-mounted mechanical or electrical equipment
(including a generator) where (1) the equipment is located behind the structure
and is not in public view, and (2) all duct work or equipment feeds are located in
the building’s interior or immediately adjacent to the equipment;
(10) Placement or replacement of storm windows, storm doors, screen windows and
screen doors, provided they are constructed with wood frames, with any metal or
vinyl tracks concealed by the wood frames. Window guards provided they are
constructed with bars or rods of wrought iron, or metal formed and painted to
resemble wrought iron. Mesh guards are not exempt;
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-15
(11) Placement or replacement of chimney caps or bishop pots that are constructed of
masonry or bluestone, or of other material with a black, dark brown or copper
finish;
(12) Placement or replacement of gas and electric meters if mounted on an exterior
wall, not facing or visible from a public way. Landscaping or fencing may be
used as a visual screen;
(13) Construction, alteration or demolition of any structure or element of a
structure that the Code Official documents as being necessary to avoid an
immediate health or safety emergency prior to the Commission convening a
meeting to consider the matter. In such instance, the Code Official shall
immediately provide written notification to the Commission of such action;
(14) New signs and refacing of existing signs, except that new freestanding signs
and signs requiring review and approval by the Board of Adjustment shall not
be exempt;
(15) Awning replacement if a canvas fabric is used and no alterations (including but
not limited to the wall fittings and fastenings) are made to the structure;
(16) Placement of a temporary toilet, trailer, tent or tensile structure;
(17) Accessible ramp systems on single-family or two-family dwellings provided
the ramp and rail system consists of black metal modular components;
(18) The placement, removal or replacement of wood or metal fence (except for
chain-link which may only be removed) provided the replacement fence is in
substantially the same location with substantially the same height, material, and
design;
(19) The replacement of exterior lighting provided the replacement lighting is
substantially in the same in location with substantially the same height, material,
and design;
(20) The replacement or restoration of wood siding (including removal of non-wood
materials) provided the replacement siding is the same exposure, material, and
design;
(21) Placement or replacement of terraces, walks, driveways, and sidewalks and inground
swimming pools provided that any such element is substantially at the
existing grade plane of the property;
(22) Placement or replacement of building accessories and décor, such as windowmounted
portable air conditioning units, play equipment, residential trash
enclosures, snow guards, benches, trellises, non-commercial boat rack storage
structures, window boxes, raised planters, mailboxes less than 18” in all
dimensions, flags, hose reels, door bells and knockers, weathervanes, bells, wind
chimes, birdfeeders, artwork, sculpture, and other similar exterior décor;
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-16
(23) New or replacement piers, floats, docks or gangways for single-family and
two-family dwellings provided any vertical handrail support systems are
constructed with metal, wire, rope or wood;
(24) Placement or replacement of wood, brick or granite steps or landings;
(25) Placement or replacement of a commercial solid waste enclosure provided the
enclosure: (1) is fully enclosed with the use of gates; (2) is constructed of wood
or stone material; and (3) is no greater than 60” in height or 100 sq. ft. in area;
(26) Placement or replacement of wood or copper gutters and downspouts.
(27) Parking ticket kiosks, freestanding signs and other site elements related to public
parking in private parking lots when authorized under a permit from the
Department of Public Works.
10.633.30 Administrative Approval
The Code Official may grant administrative approval for minor modifications on work
for which a Certificate of Approval has previously been issued, provided that the Code
Official determines that the modifications do not alter the overall quality or character of
the work which had been certified as appropriate by the Commission, and indicates this
determination as a written addendum to an existing Certificate of Approval. Such
approval shall be subject to Historic District Commission approval at the next meeting of
the Historic District Commission. A list of the administrative approvals shall be
submitted to the Historic District Commission prior to the meeting and the administrative
approvals shall be automatically ratified unless rejected specifically by the Historic
District Commission at that meeting.
10.634 Application Procedure
10.634.10 Application Submission
The property owner or authorized representative shall submit to the Commission, through
the Code Official, a written application for a Certificate of Approval (Certificate) as
elaborated in Section 10.634.20, along with all required fees. The application shall be
accompanied by a completed Building / Change of Use Permit Application, where
required. The applicant shall also be required to submit digital files in Portable Document
Format (PDF) of all application materials including the application form, plans, photos,
renderings, and other supporting documents used at both a Work Session(s) and Public
Hearing. The applicant may request a waiver from this requirement if they are unable to
comply due to undue financial burden or other hardship.
10.634.20 Application Contents
An application for a Certificate of Approval shall state the location and nature of the
matter or item for which the Certificate is sought and shall include scaled site plans,
building plans, elevations, samples, photographs, sketches or other information
reasonably required by the Code Official to determine the aptness of the application
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-17
under this Section. Such plans shall clearly state the overall height, width and depth of
the proposed building.
10.634.21 For a project whose cost of exterior renovations would
exceed $50,000, the application shall include scaled and
dimensioned plans of the project, and streetscapes showing
the project as viewed from any side having frontage on or
access to a public street or public walkway, or having
waterfront frontage, unless otherwise waived by the
Commission following a work session. Where possible, the
view shall include an architectural rendering of the existing
structure. The Commission may require that a view be
submitted showing the project as viewed from abutting
properties.
10.634.22 For a project whose cost of exterior renovation would be
$50,000 or less, the application shall include photographs
showing existing conditions as viewed from a public street
or public walkway or from the water, and perspective
drawings superimposed on the photographs in a manner
which shows the proposed work.
10.634.23 An electronic and/or physical scale massing model shall be
required for new construction of any proposed building or
addition over 10,000 s.f. gross floor area. Said model shall
include the proposed building and all existing and approved
buildings within 250 feet of the proposed building on every
street which the proposed building abuts. Said model shall
accurately reflect the scale and relationships of the project
and its surrounding buildings. Electronic or physical models
of buildings may be required for smaller projects at the
discretion of a majority of the Commission. The type, scale
and details shall be stated, if said model is required.
10.634.30 Entry Onto Site
By virtue of applying for a Certificate, the applicant authorizes Code Officials and
Commissioners to enter onto the subject site to view existing conditions and structures.
10.635 Review by the Commission
10.635.10 No Ex Parte Communication
Commissioners shall not receive information about an application or potential application
from or on behalf of an applicant or a pending applicant except during a duly convened
Commission meeting. If information should be given to a Commissioner, it shall be
disclosed at the next meeting of the Commission. (This prohibition on ex parte
communication does not apply to information provided by City officials as part of the
administration of this Section.)
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-18
10.635.20 Work Sessions
10.635.21 Applicants may always request a work session with the
Commission to explore design alternatives. Applicants are
strongly encouraged to request a work session when the cost
of exterior improvements exceeds $25,000.
10.635.22 Upon receipt of a written request (containing a conceptual
site plan and conceptual level information listed under
10.634.20) by a potential applicant for a work session, either
prior to or after the submission of an application for a
Certificate, the Commission shall, at a regularly scheduled
public hearing or other authorized time, convene into a work
session. The purpose of this session shall be to consider and
comment on various design alternatives, issues and options
for any project coming under this Section with the aim of
providing guidance in preparing an application for public
hearing.
10.635.23 A notice of a work session, containing the information set
forth in Section 10.635.50, shall be published and posted in
the same fashion as a public hearing before the Board of
Adjustment, and shall be mailed to all persons required to
be notified of a public hearing before the Board of
Adjustment. The work session shall be included as part of
the Commission’s agenda for that meeting.
10.635.24 At the work session, the requesting party shall present the
project and then seek Commission comments and suggestions
which will be made by those members who are in
attendance. No vote, decision or action shall be made at a
work session. These are advisory only.
10.635.25 Work sessions can be continued and can be convened at any
point in the Commission’s process.
10.635.30 Public Hearings
10.635.31 Public hearings shall be advertised, abutters notified and
legal notices posted in accordance with State law regarding
hearings by the Board of Adjustment. A decision by the
Commission is only binding following a duly convened
public hearing.
10.636.32 Public hearings may include a Consent Agenda for
consideration of applications for which Commission
approval is anticipated to be routine or expeditious, subject
to the following:
(1) An application may be included on the consent agenda if
(a) the Code Official and the Chairman of the
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-19
Commission jointly recommend in favor of approval;
and (b) the applicant concurs in writing with any
stipulations or limitations included in the Code
Official’s recommendation.
(2) Applications included on the consent agenda shall be
considered, voted on and approved as a group rather than
individually.
(3) Any person wishing to address the Commission on a
matter contained on the consent agenda shall be
permitted to do so during the public hearing on the
consent agenda or, if the application is removed from the
consent agenda as provided in paragraph (5) below,
during the hearing on that matter.
(4) Applicants are encouraged to attend the Commission
meeting in the event that the Commission or a member
of the public has questions or concerns.
(5) An application may be removed from the consent agenda
and considered separately as a regular agenda item by
majority vote of the Commissioners present.
10.635.40 Site Visits
10.635.41 Site visits are encouraged when feasible, and when they are
appropriate to meet the objectives of this Section.
10.635.42 The Commission may schedule a site visit on its own initiative
or at the request of an applicant or other person. A site
visit shall comply with state law regarding public meetings.
The applicant shall be responsible for any expense required
to accommodate the public on a site visit.
10.635.43 During a site visit, Commission members shall observe the
premises or site and shall direct questions or comments
solely towards the applicant and/or City officials. A site visit
is not the forum for a public discussion of an application
with the Commission as a whole or Commissioners
individually.
10.635.44 In a site visit, questions and comments by the applicant shall
be directed to the Commission as a whole. Comments shall
be limited to identifying significant architectural features and
responding to any questions that the Commission may have.
10.635.50 Notices
Notices of public hearings and work sessions shall provide the following information.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-20
(1) Identification of the Applicant.
(2) Identification of work site by Assessor Plan and lot number and street address.
(3) Zoning District.
(4) A brief description of work using one or more of the following statements:
(a) The application entails exterior renovations to an existing structure.
(b) The application entails new construction to an existing structure.
(c) The application entails a new free standing structure.
(d) The application entails a request for demolition.
(e) The application entails a request concerning signs.
(f) The application includes a request for a partial approval.
(g) The application entails an adjustment to a previous approval.
(h) The application is for work otherwise authorized under this Section.
(5) An invitation to all interested parties to attend the work session or public hearing
and hear testimony by providing the time, date, and location of the Commission
meeting.
(6) An invitation to the public to review the complete application.
10.635.60 Review Factors
In conducting reviews under this Section, the Commission shall consider factors that
render a site architecturally or historically significant, including:
(1) the historical time period, context or immediate setting;
(2) the structure’s architecture, including stylistic features, design elements and
mass;
(3) construction materials, including technological systems and features; and
(4) importance relative to a historically recognized individual or event.
10.635.70 Review Criteria
The Commission shall review an application for a Certificate of Approval and determine
whether the application is consistent with and furthers the purpose and objectives set
forth in Section 10.631. In making this determination, the Commission shall make
Findings of Fact by referring to the following criteria:
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-21
(1) The special and defining character of surrounding properties, including architectural
details, design, height, scale, mass, width of surrounding structures, street
frontages, types of roofs, façades and openings.
(2) The significant historical or architectural value of an existing structure for
which a Certificate is sought, including its setting, scale and mass; and the
general size of new construction with consideration of such factors as height,
width, materials and architectural details.
(3) The extent to which a proposed project’s exterior design, scale, arrangement,
texture, detailing and materials complement or enhance the existing structure
and are compatible with surrounding properties and the Commission’s adopted
Design Guidelines.
(4) Encouraging the innovative use of technologies, materials and practices
provided these are compatible with the character of surrounding properties.
10.636 Decision by the Commission
10.636.10 Approval or Disapproval
At the conclusion of its review, the Commission shall issue in writing one of the
following:
10.636.11 Certificate of Approval: If the majority of the Commission
members present and voting decides that the applicant’s
proposal meets the objectives of this Section, and after the
consideration of each element of the Scope of Review, the
Commission shall issue a Certificate of Approval signed by
the Chair together with any changes, conditions or stipulations
necessary to secure the objectives of this Section.
10.636.12 Notice of Disapproval: If the majority of the Commission
members present and voting decides that the applicant’s
proposal does not meet the objectives of this Section, the
Commission shall issue a Notice of Disapproval signed by
the Chairman of the Commission and which states the
manner in which the proposal does not comply with the
purpose and objectives set forth in Section 10.631, or the
review criteria set forth in Section 10.635.70. The issuance
of such a denial shall prohibit the Code Official from
issuing a demolition permit, building permit, change of
use permit or other permits for the specified work.
10.636.20 Partial Approval
Except as authorized by this Section, the Code Official shall not allow construction work
to commence on any application coming under the Commission’s review until the
Commission has granted a Certificate for the entire application before it. The only partial
approvals the Commission may consider must meet all of the following stipulations.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-22
10.636.21 A request to consider a partial approval must be scheduled,
advertised and conducted as part of a public hearing.
10.636.22 In order to approve a request for a partial approval, the
Commission must grant a waiver of this requirement by a
two-thirds majority of the members present, voting and
constituting a quorum. In considering this waiver, the
Commission shall consider such factors as:
(a) Site safety if this would become a concern due to delays
in commencing the project;
(b) Demolition where such demolition has been approved
or where public safety is a concern; and
(c) Other mitigating factors where, in the opinion of the
Commission, the public interest is better served by the
project proceeding in phases.
10.636.23 Where the Commission has acted to grant a waiver, the
Commission shall state what actions are authorized to
commence and which still require Commission consideration.
Prior to the start of any activity coming under a partial
approval, the applicant shall place on file in the application
for a Building/Change of Use Permit a statement indicating
an awareness of an obligation to complete this application
process and that all outstanding work has not been approved
and is still subject to review under this Section.
10.636.30 Time Period for Review
The Commission shall file a Certificate of Approval or a Notice of Disapproval within 30
days after the filing of a complete application for the Certificate unless the applicant
agrees to a longer time period.
10.636.40 Application to Commission for Rehearing
10.636.41 Any party may apply to the Commission for a rehearing in
respect to any matter determined, covered or included in its
decision or order, specifying in the application for rehearing
the ground therefor; and the Commission may grant such
rehearing if in its opinion good reason therefor is stated in
the application.
10.636.42 An application for a rehearing shall set forth fully every
ground upon which it is claimed that the decision or order
complained of is unlawful or unreasonable.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-23
10.636.43 An application for a rehearing shall be made within 30 days
after the decision of the Commission. The 30-day period
shall begin on the day after the date of the Commission’s
vote; except that if the minutes of the meeting at which the
vote was taken, including the written decision, are not filed
within five business days after the vote, the 30-day period
shall begin on the date on which the written decision was
filed.
10.636.44 Upon the filing of an application for a rehearing, the
Commission shall within 30 days either grant or deny the
application for a rehearing, or suspend the order or decision
complained of pending further consideration. Any order of
suspension may be upon such terms and conditions as the
Commission may prescribe.
10.636.50 Appeals of Commission’s Decision
10.636.51 Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may
appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment; provided
that no appeal from any order or decision of the Commission
shall be taken unless the appellant has first made application
for rehearing as provided in this Section.
10.636.52 An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be made within
30 days after the decision of the Commission. The 30-day
period shall begin on the day after the date of the
Commission’s vote; except that if the minutes of the meeting
at which the vote was taken, including the written decision,
are not filed within five business days after the vote, the
30-day period shall begin on the date on which the written
decision was filed.
10.636.53 No ground not set forth in an application to the Commission
for rehearing shall be given consideration by the Board of
Adjustment unless the Board for good cause shown allows
the appellant to specify additional grounds.
10.636.60 Reapplication After Disapproval
10.636.61 An applicant who has received a Notice of Disapproval may,
and is encouraged to, make modifications to the proposed
plans based on the Notice of Disapproval and submit a
revised application.
10.636.62 Within one year after the date of the Commission’s denial
the applicant may reapply to the Commission with no
additional filing fees other than incurred costs for posting,
publishing and abutter notification. Following that one-year
period, a new application shall be submitted, along with all
required fees.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-24
10.636.70 Expiration of Approvals
10.636.71 A Certificate of Approval shall lapse one year from date of
the Commission’s action unless the applicant requests an
extension of no more than one year prior to the expiration of
the original action. Such extensions may be granted without
a public hearing unless the Commission deems one to be in
the public interest.
10.636.72 No more than one extension shall be granted unless
authorized following a public hearing convened to consider
such a request.
10.637 Review of Permit Applications Within the District
10.637.10 The Planning Board shall consult with Code Officials and the Commission
upon a request to review applications for Certificates to determine that the
Ordinance’s objectives are being properly followed.
10.637.20 Code Officials shall make themselves available to discuss any proposed
changes with citizens or anyone contemplating work in the district.
Section 10.640 Downtown Overlay District
10.641 Establishment and Purpose
10.641.10 The Downtown Overlay District (DOD) is an overlay district applied to
portions of the Character Districts. All properties located in the DOD must
satisfy the requirements of both the DOD and the underlying districts.
10.641.20 The purpose of the DOD is to promote the economic vitality of the
downtown by ensuring continuity of pedestrian-oriented business uses
along streets.
10.642 Ground Floor Uses
Within the DOD, the ground floor of any building shall consist entirely of the following
uses:
1. Nonresidential principal uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
2. Entries, lobbies, stairs, and elevators providing pedestrian access to permitted
upper-floor residential uses, not exceeding 20 percent of the ground floor area.
Section 10.650 Osprey Landing Overlay District
10.651 Purpose
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-25
The purpose of the Osprey Landing Overlay District is to assure conformance with the
requirements for rental housing and affordable housing that are set forth in the
covenants and regulatory documents of the New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority
and the U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development, all as previously approved
by the City of Portsmouth and set forth in agreements of record at the Rockingham
County Registry of Deeds.
The intent of this Section is to recognize the requirements set forth in said covenants and
regulatory documents as particularly applied to the “Apartment Component.”
10.652 Rental Housing Requirements
At least two-thirds of all dwelling units in the Osprey Landing Overlay District, and at
least 329 dwelling units in parcels 213-2-1500, 217-2-1300 and 218-2-1100, shall be
rental housing.
10.653 Affordable Housing Requirements
10.653.10 The following percentages of rental units in the Osprey Landing Overlay
District shall be maintained as affordable housing for the periods
indicated:
Maximum income for
occupancy, as
percentage of area
median income adjusted
for family size
Minimum percentage of rental units in
Osprey Landing Overlay District
Through
November
8, 2014
Through
November
8, 2024
Through
November
8, 2034
50% 20% 20% 20%
60% 16% 16% 0%
80% 14% 0% 0%
Total required
affordable units 50% 36% 20%
10.653.20 The dwelling units intended to meet the affordability criteria specified
herein shall be interspersed with the market rate rental dwelling units.
Section 10.660 Airport Approach Overlay District
10.661 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the height of structures and trees for the
protection of life and property in relation to use of the aerial approaches to the runways
of the Pease International Tradeport.
10.662 Applicability
The regulations of this Section apply to all land within the Airport Approach Overlay
District as defined in Section 10.613.50.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-26
10.663 Civil Airport Imaginary Surfaces
The following information, based on Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 77, Objects
Affecting Navigable Airspace, describes the “civil airport imaginary surfaces” for Pease
International Tradeport:
10.663.10 Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs
with a radius of 10,000 feet from the center of each end of the primary
surface of the runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs [FAR 77.25(a)(2)].
10.663.20 Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet [FAR 77.25(b)].
10.663.30 Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the runway. The
primary surface has a width of 1,000 feet and extends 200 feet beyond each
end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the
same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline [FAR
77.25(c)(3)(iii)].
10.663.40 Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the
primary surface. An approach surface is applied to each end of the runway
based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end.
(a) The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the
primary surface and it expands uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet
[FAR 77.25(d)(1)(vi)].
(b) The approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet
at a slope of 50 to 1 with an additional 40,000 feet at a slope of 40 to
1 [FAR 77.25(d)(2)(iii)].
10.663.50 Transitional surface: These surfaces extend outward and upward at right
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of
the approach surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the
precision approach surface which project through and beyond the limits of
the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally
from the edge of the approach surface and at right angles to the runway
centerline [FAR 77.25(e)].
10.664 Restrictions
10.664.10 No structure shall be erected or altered, and no tree shall be allowed to
grow, within the civil airport imaginary surfaces defined in Section
10.663.
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-27
10.664.20 No use may be made of land in the Airport Approach Overlay District in
such manner as to create electrical interference with radio aids or
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for
flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in
the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport by the creation and discharge of smoke, steam, dust or other
obstructions to visibility or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or
maneuvering of aircraft.
10.665 Permits and Variances
10.665.10 Within the Airport Approach Overlay District, no variance or permit shall
be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport
hazard or that would permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be
made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than
it was on December 12, 1957, or than it is when application for a permit is
made.
10.665.20 Within the Airport Approach Overlay District, the authorization of a
variance by the Board of Adjustment shall be required for any material
change (including erecting new structures; replacing, rebuilding or
substantially altering or repairing existing structures; planting new trees;
or allowing the growth of existing trees) in violation of Section 10.664.
10.665.30 In granting a variance under this Section, the Board shall impose such
conditions as it deems advisable to effectuate the purposes of this
Ordinance and reasonable in the circumstances, including requiring the
owner of the structure or tree in question at its own expense to install,
operate and maintain thereon, such marker and lights as may be necessary
to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. Said marker or
lights shall be subject to approval by the Pease Development Authority.
10.666 Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Trees
The regulations of this Section 10.660 shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of December 12, 1957, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use.
10.667 Pease International Tradeport Approach Plan
This Airport Approach Plan is based upon the ultimate development of the following:
1. Runway dimensions 11,318 feet long, 150 feet wide.
2. Airport Reference Point
(center of runway)
coordinates
Lat 43? 04’ 40.328” N
Lon 70? 49’ 25.604” W
3. Airport elevation 101’ MSL
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-28
4. Width of primary surface 1000’
5. Width of transitional
surface
a) 1,050’ from edge of primary surface (slopes
from airport elevation up to 251’ MSL)
b) 5,000’ from edge of the approach surface
6. Width of horizontal surface 8,450’ from the edge of the primary transitional
surface
7. Width of conical surface 4,000’ from the edge of the horizontal surface
(slopes from 251’ MSL up to 451’ MSL)
8. Dimensions of approach
surfaces
a) 50:1 surface - 1,000’ wide centered on
extended runway centerline starting 200’ from
the end of the runway, then extending 10,000’
horizontally at which point it is 4,000’ wide.
b) 40:1 surface - starts at the end of the 50:1
surface (4,000 wide) then extends horizontally
40,000’ at which point it is 16,000’ wide.
c) South end of runway:
50:1 - starts at 85’MSL and slopes up to
285’MSL
40:1 starts at 285’MSL and slopes up to
1,285’MSL
d) North end of runway:
50:1 - starts at 95’MSL and slopes up to
295’MSL
40:1 starts at 295’MSL and slopes up to
1,295’MSL
Section 10.670 Highway Noise Overlay District
10.671 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to minimize the impact of highway traffic noise on
individuals, businesses and other activities, and to protect the general health, safety and
welfare of the City by regulating certain uses, activities, and development within areas
subject to projected intense highway traffic noise. This Section is adopted specifically to
make the City of Portsmouth eligible for participation in the New Hampshire Department
of Transportation’s Type II noise abatement program.
10.672 Applicability
10.672.10 The provisions of this Section shall apply to all land within the Highway
Noise Overlay District as defined in Section 10.613.60, except land subject
to the land use regulations of the Pease Development Authority.
10.672.20 The provisions of this Section shall overlay and supplement the regulations
of any underlying district. If any provision of this Section differs from or
appears to conflict with any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance or
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-29
other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or more stringent standard shall be controlling.
10.673 Standards
Noise sensitive land uses within the Highway Noise Overlay District shall be planned,
designed and constructed to comply with the following standards:
Structures and Uses Loudest Traffic Hour Sound Level
Interior of dwelling, institutional
residence or residential care facility,
hospital or lodging establishment
45 dBA
Interior of other noise sensitive use 55 dBA
Uses with outdoor activity areas,
measured at edge of the active use area
closest to the highway
65 dBA
10.674 Conditional Use
10.674.10 Within the HNOD, noise sensitive land uses shall require a conditional
use permit from the Planning Board.
10.674.11 An addition or extension to a single-family or two-family
dwelling that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, or that was constructed subject to a validly
issued conditional use permit, shall be exempt from the
standards in Section 10.675 and from the requirement for a
conditional use permit, provided that the building footprint
area of the addition or extension, together with the footprint
area of all prior such additions and extensions, shall not
exceed 25 percent of the area of the building footprint of
the principal heated structure existing prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance or constructed pursuant to a validly
issued conditional use permit. This 25 percent threshold shall
not be based on pre-existing attached or detached garages,
sheds, decks, porches, breezeways, or similar buildings or
structures.
10.674.20 A noise analysis prepared in compliance with Section 10.675 must be
submitted with any application for a conditional use permit under this
section.
10.674.30 An application for a conditional use permit for a noise sensitive land
use in the Highway Noise Overlay District may be approved only if a
noise analysis prepared in compliance with Section 10.675 demonstrates
that any applicable exterior and interior sound level standards established
in Section 10.673 will be met through one or more of the following
measures:
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-30
(a) Site design to ensure that noise sensitive land uses are placed
outside of the applicable noise contour;
(b) Site design that achieves noise mitigation through placement of
accessory structures between the noise source and the noise receiver;
(c) Installation of a noise barrier; or
(d) Superinsulated building design and construction.
10.674.40 The Planning Board shall grant a conditional use permit for a noise
sensitive land use only upon finding that any applicable exterior and
interior sound level standards will be met as demonstrated by a noise
analysis.
10.675 Noise Analysis
A noise analysis must be prepared by a registered engineer or qualified
professional transportation noise analyst who has been trained in the use
of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Transportation Noise
Model or a replacement model that has been approved by the FHWA. A
noise analysis must include the following:
(1) A description of the proposed development.
(2) A narrative description of the proposed site configuration and any
proposed noise mitigation measures.
(3) A diagram showing the proposed site configuration including the
location of noise sensitive land uses and any proposed noise
mitigation measures.
(4) Unadjusted 60, 65 and 70 dBA noise contours for the loudest traffic
hour sound levels shown as an overlay on the site diagram. Noise
contours must be developed using the FHWA Transportation Noise
Model (or a replacement model that has been approved by the FHWA).
(5) If the noise analysis shows that projected noise levels will exceed the
sound level standard for the applicable activity at the location
specified, the noise analysis must include:
(a) Any adjusted noise contours and site-specific analyses used to
adjust the noise contours based on improved topography;
(b) Calculations to support the noise level reduction of any proposed
noise mitigation measure;
(c) A description of the width, depth, height, length, and materials
used in any proposed noise barrier; and
Article 6 Overlay Districts
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 6-31
(d) A description of construction methods and materials used in any
proposed superinsulated building design. The sound transmission
class must be provided for materials used.

Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-1
Article 7 Flexible Development
Section 10.710 General
Section 10.720 Planned Unit Developments
Section 10.710 General
10.711 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to permit large parcels to be developed in a more flexible
manner than would otherwise be allowed in the underlying zoning district, provided that
the development advances specific goals of the Master Plan and addresses community
and environmental impacts. In order to achieve these objectives, the Planning Board is
authorized to grant conditional use permits for specific types of development that
consider the entire site as an integrated project and give broad consideration to impacts
and relationships to surrounding areas.
10.712 Conditional Use Permit
10.712.10 The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit for a
development authorized in this Article, in accordance with the specific
provisions and standards set forth herein for the particular development
type.
10.712.20 The Planning Board shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations to
implement the conditional use permit review and approval processes.
10.712.30 The applicant is encouraged to request a work session with the Planning
Board prior to submitting an application for a conditional use permit.
10.712.40 While the intent of this Article is to provide flexibility in the design and
review of developments, not every parcel is suitable for a particular
flexible development option. Nothing contained herein shall compel the
Planning Board to approve a conditional use permit under this Article.
10.712.50 A development authorized by conditional use permit under this Article
shall comply with all applicable zoning, site plan and subdivision
regulations other than those waived or modified hereunder.
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-2
Section 10.720 Planned Unit Developments
10.721 Planned Unit Development Types and Purposes
10.721.10 This Section provides for two types of planned unit development (PUD),
each intended to advance specific community goals:
10.721.11 An open space planned unit development (OS-PUD)
permits the clustering of residential dwelling units so as to
preserve natural features and create usable open space.
10.721.12 A residential density incentive planned unit development
(RDI-PUD) permits an increase in the allowable
residential development intensity of a parcel based on the
provision of dwelling units that will be restricted for sale or
rental at below-market prices, in order to further the housing
goals of the Portsmouth Master Plan.
10.721.20 The provisions of Sections 10.722 through 10.724 and Section 10.727
apply to all PUDs.
10.722 Permitted Uses
10.722.10 A PUD may include the following uses, provided that each dwelling unit
has direct access to the ground with no shared or common hallways or
stairwells:
(a) Single family dwelling
(b) Two-family dwelling
(c) Townhouse
(d) Multifamily dwelling
10.722.20 A PUD may include the following accessory uses provided that they
serve only the residents of the PUD and their guests and not the community
at large:
(a) Recreational facilities;
(b) Up to 3,000 square feet of space for a self-service laundry and for
pickup and delivery, on a periodic basis only, for dry cleaning,
tailoring or shoe repair. Such use shall conform to the off-street
parking requirements of Article 11.
10.722.30 A dwelling unit in a PUD may include accessory uses as permitted in
the underlying zoning district, including home occupations, except that
the following accessory uses are not permitted in an RDI-PUD: family
day care facility; home occupation 2.
10.722.40 An OS-PUD may include a group day care facility.
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-3
10.723 Base Residential Density
10.723.10 The base residential density in a PUD shall be either of the following, at
the option of the applicant:
10.723.11 The number obtained by dividing the developable area of
the parcel by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit
required in the underlying zoning district.
10.723.12 The number of lots that could be developed in a
conventional subdivision of the lot, as demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board.
10.723.20 Where the PUD includes area in more than one zoning district, the number
of dwelling units for each district shall be calculated separately, and the
number from each district shall be added together to determine the
maximum number of units that could be placed in the overall project site.
10.724 Streets and Infrastructure
10.724.10 Vehicular circulation within a PUD may be provided by public or private
streets or by private accessways.
10.724.20 Public and private streets shall comply with the requirements of the City’s
Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Site Review Regulations for
residential streets. If the PUD is developed with private accessways
such that there is insufficient width to accommodate said requirements, the
conditional use permit shall include a condition prohibiting a future
petition for acceptance as a public street.
10.724.30 Utilities shall be placed underground and shall comply with the requirements
of the City’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Site Review
Regulations. Facilities shall be designed to meet City standards and
specifications as indicated by the Department of Public Works.
10.724.40 The Planning Board may, at its sole discretion, grant waivers to street
design standards or utility standards according to procedures established in
the City’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations. If such a waiver is granted,
the conditional use permit shall include a condition prohibiting a future
petition for acceptance as a public street.
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-4
10.725 Open Space Residential PUD
10.725.10 Required Lot Area
An OS-PUD shall include at least 10 acres of land, which may consist of one or more lots
provided that such lots shall be separated by no more than 50 feet.
10.725.20 Maximum Residential Density
The maximum residential density of an OS-PUD shall be the base residential density
as determined under Section 10.723.
10.725.30 Dimensional Requirements
10.725.31 Minimum continuous street frontage on an existing public street or
streets: 100 feet, which may consist of two separate 50-foot rights-ofway.
10.725.32 Minimum external yards:
Front 100 feet from the right-of-way line of a public
street
Side and rear 50 feet from lot lines at the perimeter
of the OS-PUD
External yards shall be landscaped and shall not be used for vehicular
parking.
10.725.33 Minimum internal yards:
Front 20 feet, measured from the right-of-way line
of a public or private street, or from the
edge of pavement of a private accessway
Side and rear 25 feet from lot lines within the OS-PUD
10.725.34 Minimum separation between structures: 30 feet
10.725.40 Common Open Space
10.725.41 A minimum of 25 per cent of the total site area shall be permanently
dedicated for common open space.
10.725.42 The percentage of the minimum required open space that is developable
area shall not be less than the percentage of developable area in the OSPUD
as a whole.
10.725.43 Common open space shall be preserved in perpetuity by restrictive
covenant which shall be enforceable by the City of Portsmouth and such
common open space shall be owned by one of the following:
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-5
(a) A private, non-profit corporation, association, or other non-profit
legal entity established by the applicant for the benefit and
enjoyment of the residents of the PUD and over which the residents
of the PUD have control (such as a condominium agreement or
homeowners association);
(b) A public body (such as the City) which shall maintain the land as
open space for the benefit of the general public; or
(c) A private non-profit organization (such as The Nature Conservancy)
which has as a purpose the preservation of open space through
ownership and control, provided that the residents of the PUD shall
have access to the common open space for appropriate recreational
uses.
10.725.44 Linear open space that connects or contributes to other public or private
open space is encouraged.
10.725.45 Regulated public access to the common open space is encouraged.
Suitable controls governing such public access shall be considered as part
of the conditional use permit review.
10.726 Residential Density Incentive Planned Unit Development (RDI-PUD)
10.726.10 Required Lot Area
The minimum required lot area for an RDI-PUD shall be one acre.
10.726.20 Residential Density Incentive
10.726.21 An RDI-PUD conditional use permit shall permit an increase in the total
number of dwelling units based on the number of affordable units
provided, as set forth in this Section 10.726.20. The number of dwelling
units in excess of the base residential density determined under Section
10.723 are referred to as “incentive units.”
10.726.22 The preliminary number of incentive units shall be equal to the number of
affordable units multiplied by 1.50. For the purpose of this computation,
“affordable unit” shall mean a dwelling unit affordable to, and
restricted to occupancy by, households with annual incomes at or below
120 percent of the area median family income, adjusted for household
size, as of the date of application.
10.726.23 Fractional incentive units shall be rounded to the nearest whole number
(i.e., fractions less than 0.5 shall be rounded down, and fractions of 0.5 or
more shall be rounded up).
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-6
10.726.24 The total number of dwelling units permitted through an RDI-PUD
conditional use permit shall be the sum of (1) the preliminary number of
incentive units computed in accordance with paragraph 10.726.22 above,
and (2) the base residential density as determined under Section 10.723,
provided that the total number of dwelling units shall not exceed 150
percent of the base residential density.
10.726.30 Maximum number of dwelling units per building and per lot
10.726.31 A free-standing building in an RDI-PUD may contain up to 6 dwelling
units.
10.726.32 An RDI-PUD shall not be subject to the requirements of the underlying
zoning district as to maximum number of dwelling units per lot.
10.726.40 Dimensional Requirements
10.726.41 Minimum side yard and rear yard dimensions at the perimeter of the site
shall be increased by two times the percentage increase in density over the
base residential density. For example, if the density of the RDI-PUD is
25 percent greater than the base residential density, the side yards and
rear yards shall be increased by 50 percent (two times 25 percent) over the
requirements in the applicable zoning district.
10.726.42 Minimum internal yards:
Front 20 feet measured from the right-of-way line
of a public or private street, or from the
edge of pavement of a private accessway
Side and rear 25 feet from lot lines within the RDI-PUD
10.726.43 Minimum separation between structures: 30 feet
10.726.50 Recreational Open Space
The Planning Board may require that common open space be reserved for recreational
use for the residents of the RDI-PUD, in addition to the open space which will result
from the minimum external and internal yard requirements. Such recreational uses may
include, but not be limited to, children’s play areas, walking trails, and picnic and seating
areas.
10.726.60 Design Requirements
10.726.61 The development shall be constructed in a manner that is harmonious
with neighboring developments, housing, and natural surroundings.
10.726.62 Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the development to
ensure a true mix of market-rate and affordable housing.
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-7
10.726.63 The exterior design of units within the development shall be comparable
and, to the extent possible, indistinguishable, regardless of restrictions on
price or occupancy.
10.727 Application, Review and Approval Procedure
10.727.10 Application
An application for a conditional use permit under this Section shall include all information
required under the Subdivision Regulations and Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.727.20 Planning Board Review
10.727.21 The Planning Board shall review an application for a PUD conditional use
permit according to the procedures, required exhibits and standards
applicable to a subdivision as contained in the City’s Subdivision Rules
and Regulations, and regulations adopted by the Board to implement this
Section.
10.727.22 The Planning Board shall afford the Conservation Commission an
opportunity to comment on the particulars of a proposed PUD, including
but not limited to the natural features of the parcel and how these may be
impacted by the proposed project.
10.727.23 A conditional use permit by the Planning Board shall be subject to Site
Plan Review under the City’s Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.727.24 As appropriate to verify compliance with this Section, the Legal
Department may review as to content and form any restrictive covenants,
cooperative agreements or similar instruments requiring the participation of
the City, and any condominium or cooperative agreements that are enacted
as part of a project.
10.727.30 Planning Board Findings
10.727.31 Prior to granting a conditional use permit for an PUD, the Planning Board
shall make the following findings:
10.727.311 The site is appropriate for an OS-PUD or RDI-PUD, as
applicable.
10.727.312 The anticipated impacts of the proposed PUD on traffic,
market values, stormwater runoff or environmental factors
will not be more detrimental to the surrounding area than the
impacts of conventional residential development of the site.
10.727.32 In addition to the above findings, prior to granting a conditional use permit
for an RDI-PUD, the Planning Board shall make the following findings:
10.727.321 The proposed RDI-PUD includes affordable units as
required in this Section, and the residential density increase
Article 7 Flexible Development
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 7-8
authorized by the conditional use permit is consistent with
the level of housing affordability provided.
10.727.322 Covenants or other legally binding documents have been
executed restricting the affordable units as to (a) rental
costs or sale and resale prices, and (b) occupancy
restrictions. Said covenants shall be for the longest legally
binding term, and shall be recorded at final approval of the
development.
10.727.40 Planning Board Action
10.727.41 At its discretion, the Planning Board shall consider one of the following
courses of action when considering a project under this Section:
10.727.411 To grant a conditional use permit for the maximum number
of allowable dwelling units authorized under this Section;
10.727.412 To grant a conditional use permit for a number of dwelling
units which is less than the maximum number authorized
under this Section; or
10.727.413 To deny the conditional use permit for a Residential Density
Incentive.
10.727.50 Conditions of Approval
10.727.51 The Planning Board may attach such conditions as it finds necessary to
further the purposes of this Ordinance, in addition to those conditions
required elsewhere in this Ordinance. Such conditions may include form
and recording of covenants or deed restrictions and, if applicable, longterm
monitoring of affordability restrictions.
10.727.52 Representations made at public hearings or in materials submitted to the
Planning Board by an applicant for a conditional use permit for a PUD
(including specifications for exterior building design and features;
dwelling types, e.g., garden style, townhouse, free standing; dwelling
unit sizes; number of buildings on lot; mix of market rate and affordable
units; and parking) shall be deemed conditions and shall be documented in
a development agreement entered into between the applicant and the City.
Said development agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Attorney prior to Planning Board approval of a conditional use permit.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-1
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
Section 10.810 Residential and Institutional Residence or Care Uses
Section 10.820 Educational, Religious, Charitable, Cultural, Public and Recreational Uses
Section 10.830 Business Uses
Section 10.840 Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Uses
Section 10.850 Industrial Uses
Section 10.860 Hours of Operation
Section 10.810 Residential and Institutional Residence or Care Uses
10.811 Accessory Uses to Permitted Residential Uses
10.811.10 The following uses are permitted as accessory uses to permitted
residential uses, in addition to those accessory uses listed in Section
10.440:
(a) The keeping of dogs and cats and other household pets, but not
including kennels.
(b) Yard sale.
(b) The outdoor storage of one travel trailer or camper that is not used
for occupancy or business purposes. The connection of any utility or
service such as electrical, water, gas or sewage to the travel trailer or
camper for any continuous period exceeding 48 hours shall be prima
facie evidence that it is being used for habitation or business
purposes.
(c) Roadside stand or display area in conjunction with a farm for the sale
of products raised on the premises by the owner or lessee thereof
provided that all the following conditions are met:
(1) Such stand or display area shall not cover more than 150 square
feet of gross floor area or ground area.
(2) Such stand or display area shall be located at least 30 feet from
the street right-of-way.
(3) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided and arranged in
such a way that vehicles will not back into the street.
10.811.20 The outdoor storage of lobster traps, lobster buoys and associated rope is
permitted as an accessory use to a permitted residential use, provided
that all the following conditions are met:
(a) All traps, buoys and rope shall be owned by a resident of the
property who holds a New Hampshire lobstering license.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-2
(b) No more than 800 traps may be stored outside at any one time.
(c) All traps, buoys and rope shall be located at least 10 feet from side
and rear property lines, except that on a lot abutting salt water
storage may extend to the property line abutting the shoreline in
compliance with all state regulations.
(d) Traps, buoys and rope shall not be stored within the required front
yard, nor extend closer to the street than the horizontal face of the
residence. In case of conflict, the greater distance shall apply.
(e) All traps, buoys and rope shall be screened from the public way in
accordance with Section 10.1130 and the Planning Board’s Site Plan
Review Regulations.
(f) Traps shall not be stacked higher than six traps high.
(g) Repair of traps is limited to only the traps that are being stored on the
property.
10.811.20 The accessory uses listed in Sections 10.811.10 and 10.811.20, when
incidental and subordinate to a permitted principal use, shall not require a
separate use permit but shall be subject to all other requirements of this
Ordinance.
10.811.30 All accessory storage of vehicles and boats shall comply with the yard
requirements of the zoning district.
10.811.40 Where an accessory use is specifically regulated by another provision of
this Ordinance, such other provisions shall prevail over this section 10.811.
10.811.50 Other accessory uses and accessory structures, may be permitted if
the Code Official determines that such uses or structures are customarily
associated with and subordinate to a principal permitted use.
10.812 Conversion of Existing Dwelling to Multifamily Dwelling
The conversion of a dwelling existing on January 1, 1980, to additional dwelling units
as a permitted use or by special exception with less than the minimum required lot area
per dwelling unit (per Section 10.440, use 1.50) shall comply with all the following
requirements:
10.812.11 The conversion shall not include any change to the exterior of the building
except for minimum egress components required for Building Code
compliance.
10.812.12 The lot shall comply with the applicable minimum open space and
maximum building coverage requirements in Article 5 and the off-street
parking requirements in Article 11.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-3
10.812.13 The lot shall comply with the following standards:
District Minimum lot area per dwelling unit
GRA 3,000 sq. ft.
GRB 3,000 sq. ft.
GRC 1,000 sq. ft.
MRO 1,500 sq. ft.
MRB 1,500 sq. ft.
10.813 Multifamily Dwellings in the Business (B) District
In the Business (B) district, multifamily dwellings are allowed as provided in Section
10.440 provided that at least one-third of the gross floor area of the building shall be
nonresidential uses.
10.814 Accessory Dwelling Units
10.814.10 One, and only one, accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on any lot
containing a single-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit shall
not be allowed under this Section 10.814 on a lot that contains more than
one dwelling unit.
10.814.20 Except as provided elsewhere in this Section 10.814, in order for a lot to
be eligible for an accessory dwelling unit, the lot and all proposed
structures and additions to existing structures shall conform to all
zoning regulations as follows:
10.814.21 Any municipal regulation applicable to single-family
dwellings shall also apply to the combination of a principal
dwelling unit and an accessory dwelling unit including,
but not limited to, lot area, yards, open space, off-street
parking, building coverage, and building height.
10.814.22 An attached accessory dwelling unit is permitted on
existing nonconforming lots and within existing
nonconforming buildings as long as there is no increase in
building height or building footprint for any portion of the
existing building and no increase to the nonconformity.
10.814.23 A detached accessory dwelling unit is not an accessory
building or structure for the purposes of this Ordinance,
and therefore shall be governed by the applicable minimum
yard dimensions in Section 10.521 for a principal building
or structure and not by the side yard and rear yard
standards applicable to an accessory building.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-4
10.814.30 All accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following standards:
10.814.31 The principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling
unit shall not be separated in ownership (including by
condominium ownership).
10.814.32 Either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory
dwelling unit shall be occupied by the owner of the
dwelling as his or her principal place of residence. The
owner shall provide documentation demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the City that one of the units is his or her
principal place of residence.
10.814.321 When the property is owned by one or more
trusts, one of the dwelling units shall be the
principal place of residence of the
beneficiary(ies) of the trust(s).
10.814.33 Neither the principal dwelling unit nor the accessory
dwelling unit shall be used for any business, except that the
property owner may have a home occupation use in the
unit that he or she occupies as allowed or permitted
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
10.814.34 Where municipal sewer service is not provided, the septic
system shall meet NH Water Supply and Pollution Control
Division requirements for the combined system demand for
total occupancy of the premises.
10.814.40 An attached accessory dwelling unit (AADU) shall comply with the
following additional standards:
10.814.41 An interior door shall be provided between the principal
dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit.
10.814.42 The accessory dwelling unit shall not have more than two
bedrooms and shall not be larger than 750 sq. ft. gross floor
area. For the purpose of this provision, gross floor area
shall not include existing storage space, shared entries, or
other spaces not exclusive to the accessory dwelling unit.
10.814.43 Any exterior changes to the single-family dwelling shall
maintain the appearance of a single-family dwelling. If
there are two or more doors in the front of the dwelling, one
door shall be designed as the principal entrance and the other
doors shall be designed to appear to be secondary.
10.814.44 No portion of the AADU shall be closer to the front lot line
than the existing front wall of the principal dwelling unit.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-5
10.814.45 An AADU that is attached to the single-family dwelling
(i.e., created by an expansion of the existing structure) shall
comply with the following:
10.814.451 An exterior wall of the AADU that faces a
street on which the lot has frontage shall
comprise no more than 40 percent of the total
visible façade area of the dwelling as seen
from that street.
10.814.452 The addition to or expansion of the existing
single-family dwelling may include an
increase in building height only as an upward
expansion of the existing principal building
with no increase in building footprint.
10.814.453 The building height of any addition or
expansion that includes an increase in
building footprint shall be less than the
building height of the existing principal
building.
10.814.454 The AADU shall be architecturally consistent
with the existing principal dwelling through
the use of similar materials, detailing, roof
pitch, and other building design elements.
10.814.50 A detached accessory dwelling unit (DADU) shall comply with the
following additional standards:
10.814.51 In a General Residence district, the combination of the
principal dwelling and the DADU shall comply with the
minimum lot area per dwelling unit specified for the
district. (For example, the required lot area for a singlefamily
dwelling with a DADU in the GRA district is 7,500
sq. ft. per dwelling unit multiplied by 2 dwelling units, or
15,000 sq. ft.) In a Single Residence or Rural district, a lot
with a DADU shall comply with the minimum lot area for
the district, but need not comply with the minimum lot area
per dwelling unit.
10.814.52 The DADU shall not have more than two bedrooms and shall
not be larger than 750 sq. ft. gross floor area; except that the
maximum gross floor area shall be 1,000 sq. ft. if the lot
area is 2 acres or more.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-6
10.814.53 The DADU shall be clearly subordinate to the principal
single-family dwelling in scale, height and appearance.
10.814.531 The façade area of the DADU that faces a
street on which the lot has frontage shall be
no more than 40 percent of the combined
visible façade areas of the principal singlefamily
dwelling and the DADU facing the
same street.
10.814.532 The building height of the DADU shall be
less than the building height of the principal
single-family dwelling.
10.814.533 The DADU shall be architecturally consistent
with the principal dwelling through the use
of similar materials, detailing, and other
building design elements.
10.814.54 The DADU shall be separated from the single-family
dwelling by at least 20 feet.
10.814.55 The front wall of the DADU shall be set back at least 10
feet further from the front lot line than the existing front
wall of the single-family dwelling.
10.814.56 No portion of the DADU shall be located in any required
front yard, regardless of the location of the single-family
dwelling.
10.814.60 Before granting a conditional use permit for an attached or detached
ADU, the Planning Board shall make the following findings:
10.814.61 Exterior design of the ADU is consistent with the existing
principal dwelling on the lot.
10.814.62 The site plan provides adequate and appropriate open
space, landscaping and off-street parking for both the
ADU and the primary dwelling.
10.814.63 The ADU will maintain a compatible relationship to
adjacent properties in terms of location, design, and offstreet
parking layout, and will not significantly reduce the
privacy of adjacent properties.
10.814.64 The ADU will not result in excessive noise, traffic or parking
congestion.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-7
10.814.70 In granting a conditional use permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the
Planning Board may modify a specific standard set forth in Sections
10.814.40 or 10.814.52 through 10.814.56, including requiring additional
or reconfigured off-street parking spaces, provided that the Board finds
such modification will be consistent with the required findings in Section
10.814.60.
10.814.80 Documentation of the conditional use permit approval shall be recorded at
the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
10.814.90 A certificate of use issued by the Planning Department is required to verify
compliance with the standards of this Section, including the owneroccupancy
and principal residency requirements. Said certificate shall be
issued by the Planning Department upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Inspection Department and shall be renewed annually
upon submission of such documentation as the Planning Department may
require to verify compliance. A certificate of use shall not be issued prior
to recording of documentation as required by this 10.814.80.
10.815 Garden Cottages
An accessory building existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be
converted to a garden cottage through a conditional use permit granted by the Planning
Board, subject to the following provisions and limitations.
10.815.10 One garden cottage, and only one, shall be allowed on any lot containing
a single-family dwelling.
10.815.20 Relationship to other provisions of this Ordinance:
10.815.21 No garden cottage shall be allowed on the same lot as an
accessory dwelling unit authorized under this Ordinance.
10.815.22 The establishment of a garden cottage results in two
dwelling units on the property and thus makes the property
ineligible to establish an accessory dwelling unit under
RSA 674:72-73 and this Ordinance. As a condition of
receiving a conditional use permit for a garden cottage, the
property owner shall waive all rights under RSA 674:72 and
RSA 674:73.
10.815.23 A garden cottage that complies with the standards of this
section is exempt from the residential density standards of
the Zoning Ordinance. A second dwelling unit on a lot that
does not comply with the standards of this section shall be
considered to be either a second primary dwelling or an
accessory dwelling unit and shall comply with the
applicable standards and provisions of the Ordinance.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-8
10.815.30 Garden cottages shall comply with the following standards:
10.815.31 The existing accessory building shall not be expanded
either vertically or horizontally, other than through the
addition of a front entry not to exceed 50 sq. ft., or a side or
rear deck not to exceed 300 sq. ft.
10.815.32 A garden cottage shall not be larger than 600 sq. ft. gross
floor area.
10.815.33 A garden cottage that is within a required yard for the
zoning district shall not have any windows or doors higher
than eight feet above grade facing the adjacent property.
10.815.34 The principal dwelling unit and the garden cottage shall
not be separated in ownership (including by condominium
ownership); and either the principal dwelling unit or the
garden cottage shall be occupied by the owner of the
property. The owner shall provide documentation
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the City that one of the
units is his or her principal place of residence.
10.815.341 When the property is owned by one or more
trusts, one of the dwelling units shall be the
principal place of residence of the
beneficiary(ies) of the trust(s).
10.815.35 Where municipal sewer service is not provided, the septic
system shall meet NH Water Supply and Pollution Control
Division requirements for the combined system demand for
total occupancy of the premises.
10.815.40 Before granting a conditional use permit for a garden cottage, the
Planning Board shall make the following findings:
10.815.41 Exterior design of the garden cottage is consistent with the
existing single-family dwelling on the lot.
10.815.42 The site plan provides adequate and appropriate open
space, landscaping, and off-street parking for both the
garden cottage and the primary dwelling.
10.815.43 The garden cottage will maintain a compatible relationship
to adjacent properties in terms of location and design, and
will not significantly reduce the privacy of adjacent
properties.
10.815.44 The garden cottage will not result in excessive noise,
traffic or parking congestion.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-9
10.815.50 In granting a conditional use permit for a garden cottage, the Planning
Board may modify a specific dimensional or parking standard set forth in
Section 10.815.30, including requiring additional or reconfigured offstreet
parking spaces, provided that the Board finds such modification
will be consistent with the required findings in Section 10.815.40.
10.815.60 Documentation of the conditional use permit approval shall be recorded at
the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
10.815.70 A certificate of use issued by the Planning Department is required to verify
compliance with the standards of this Section, including the owneroccupancy
and principal residency requirements. Said certificate shall be
issued by the Planning Department upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Inspection Department and shall be renewed annually
upon submission of such documentation as the Planning Department may
require to verify compliance. A certificate of use shall not be issued prior
to recording of documentation as required by 10.815.60.
10.816 Manufactured Housing Park Dimensional Standards
10.816.10 In addition to the minimum yard dimensions in Table 10.521, the
following standards shall apply:
10.816.11 The minimum separation between any two structures,
excluding sheds, shall be 20 feet.
10.816.12 Where the existing separation between any two structures,
excluding sheds, is less than 20 feet on an approved site
plan, the existing separation may be maintained or reduced
to 10 feet provided that the manufactured housing unit is
replaced in-kind or is no greater than 14 feet wide.
10.816.20 The maximum height of any structure shall be 18 feet with only one
story of living space.
10.816.30 Maximum building coverage shall comply with Table 10.521 and with
the following standards:
Maximum building coverage per dwelling unit including
any associated garage or carport……………………………..2,250 sf
Maximum building coverage by all other structures (decks,
sheds, porches, etc.) per dwelling unit……………………….225 sf
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-10
Section 10.820 Educational, Religious, Charitable, Cultural, Public and
Recreational Uses
10.821 Historic Preservation Buildings and Museums
The following shall be permitted as accessory uses to historic preservation
buildings or museums:
10.821.10 In any zoning district:
10.821.11 Caretaker residence.
10.821.12 Exhibitions, displays and similar events directly related to
the mission of the facility.
10.821.13 Accessory office space for activities related to the operation
of the facility.
10.821.20 In Mixed Residential or Business districts:
10.821.21 Periodic events not directly related to the mission of the
facility, including facility rental for private functions,
provided that in a Mixed Residential district such events
shall not constitute a business or commercial use.
10.822 Outdoor Performance Facility
10.822.10 Outdoor seating or use shall not be located in a required yard area.
10.823 Social Service Campus
10.823.10 Outdoor recreation areas and play spaces shall be located at least 50 feet
from any lot line.
10.823.20 Outdoor recreation areas and play spaces shall be located at least 25 feet
from any vehicular way, or shall be separated from such way by fencing.
10.823.30 The Board of Adjustment shall not approve a residential social service
use unless the City Manager has submitted a finding that the municipal
fiscal impact of the proposed use will not be more adverse than the fiscal
impact of any use permitted in the Industrial district. The fiscal impact
shall be determined by an analysis of the municipal costs likely to be
generated by the proposed use on such services as schools, public safety
and social services.
10.824 Group Day Care Facilities
10.824.10 Adequate parking shall be available to allow safe passage from the parking
area to the facility.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-11
10.824.20 Outdoor recreation areas shall be fenced.
10.825 Indoor Recreation and Amusement
10.825.10 Noise shall be confined to the inside of the building.
Section 10.830 Business Uses
10.831 Greenhouses and nurseries with retail sales
10.831.10 All outdoor displays shall be set back at least 30 feet from the street rightof-
way
10.832 Veterinary Clinics
10.832.10 All kennels shall be located within an enclosed building.
10.833 Offices in Mixed-Use Districts
An office use in a MRB or MRO district shall meet the following standards:
10.833.10 No exterior storage of equipment and/or machinery is allowed.
10.833.20 Overnight parking of business and/or office vehicles shall be limited to no
more than 5 vehicles, each having no more than two axles or six wheels.
The storage of tractor trailers or utility trailers is prohibited.
10.833.30 The maximum gross floor area for any individual use shall be 5,000
square feet.
10.834 Media Studios with Antenna Towers
10.834.10 Antenna towers shall comply with all FCC and FAA regulations, and
certificates from said Commissions shall be filed with the City.
10.834.20 Antenna towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance at least
equal to the combined height of the tower and antennae.
10.835 Accessory Drive-Through Uses
10.835.10 Applicability
10.835.11 This section applies to any lot, parcel, building or
structure that contains a drive-through facility.
10.835.12 All drive-through facilities shall be shall be subject to Site
Plan Review.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-12
10.835.20 Performance Standards
10.835.21 A drive-through canopy shall not project more than 26 feet
from the principal building and shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the building.
10.835.22 Illuminated menu boards or other signs associated with the
drive-through facility shall be shielded from public streets
and residential properties.
10.835.30 Setbacks
10.835.31 All outdoor service facilities (including transaction windows,
menu boards, speakers, etc.) shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from any residential zoning district, and 50 feet
from any lot line.
10.835.32 All drive-through lanes, bypass lanes, and stacking
lanes shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential zoning district, and 30 feet from any lot line.
10.835.40 Traffic Capacity and Safety
10.835.41 In addition to the standards and conditions for special
exceptions set forth in Section 10.233, the Planning Board
may grant a conditional use permit for a drive-through
facility under this section only if it determines that the level
of service and traffic safety conditions of all streets and
intersections to be impacted by the project will be the same
as, or better than, predevelopment conditions.
10.835.42 In making its determination, the Board shall consider the
traffic impact analysis and additional available information,
including review by independent consultants if deemed
necessary.
10.836 Lodging
10.836.10 Hotels and Motels in Office Research District
10.836.11 Access to and egress from the lot shall be on an arterial
street and located within one mile of either Interstate 95 or
NH Route 16.
10.837 Marine Related Uses
10.837.10 Fishing Boat Landings in Residential Districts
10.857.11 No fish processing or fish preparation or sales of searelated
products shall take place in a residential district.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-13
10.857.12 Landings, sheds, structures, holding tanks and such
equipment as lobster traps, associated with a use, shall be
located no less than 75 feet from a lot line.
Section 10.840 Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Uses
10.841 Construction Trailers
Construction trailers may be located on a site prior to and during construction pursuant
to a site plan approved by the Planning Board.
10.842 Unregistered Vehicles
10.842.10 No vehicle with two or more axles, designed for on-road use, which is
unregistered, uninspected, or inoperable shall be permitted to remain on a
lot within the City for more than 60 days in any 12-month period unless
such vehicle and its parts are enclosed within a conforming building,
except as permitted in 10.842.20. This requirement shall not apply to a
legally existing junk yard, motor vehicle service station or motor
vehicle repair facility.
10.842.20 A two-axle vehicle or motorcycle that is over 25 years old and is maintained
for use in exhibitions, club activities, parades and other functions of
public interest and which possesses one or more of the characteristics in
10.842.10 may be permitted provided that it is located at least 10 feet from
the side and rear lot lines, and meets the front yard for the district in
which it is located.
10.842.30 No more than one unregistered motorized vehicle for off-road or recreational
use, including but not limited to snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles,
recreational campers and ultralight aircraft, shall be permitted to remain on
any property within the City for more than 180 days in any 12-month
period unless such vehicle and its parts are enclosed within a conforming
building.
10.843 Motor Vehicle, Marine Craft and Equipment Sales, Service and
Related Uses
10.843.10 General
10.843.12 There shall be no more than two 40-foot wide curb cuts or
access or egress points on each abutting street.
10.843.13 All repair and service work shall take place within an
enclosed building or in a defined area approved by the
Board of Adjustment. Any such exterior area shall be no less
than 50 feet from a side or rear lot line, and shall not be
located in a required front yard.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-14
10.843.14 No vehicles in an inoperative condition shall remain on the
site for more than the period specified below, unless
enclosed in a building:
Motor vehicle service station 14 days
Otheruse 90 days
10.843.20 Sales, Rental, Leasing, Distribution and Repair of Vehicles,
Recreational Vehicles, Marine Craft, Manufactured Housing
and Related Equipment
10.843.21 All areas for parking, outdoor storage and outdoor display
of vehicles or equipment shall be set back from lot lines as
follows:
Business districts: at least 40 feet from the street
right-of-way
Industrial districts: at least 50 feet from the street
right-of-way and from all lot lines
10.843.22 All accessory uses shall be located within a building.
10.843.30 Motor Vehicle Service Stations
10.843.31 All repairs and service work shall take place within an
enclosed building.
10.843.32 Repaired or rebuilt vehicles shall not be sold upon the
premises.
10.843.33 All pump islands shall be set back at least 40 feet from all
lot lines.
10.843.35 Sale of convenience goods 1 and 2 as an accessory use
10.843.40 Truck Fueling Facility or Truck Terminal
10.843.41 All queuing areas, docking areas and outdoor vehicle
parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from all lot
lines.
10.843.42 All repair and service work shall be accessory to the
principal use.
Section 10.850 Industrial Uses
10.851 Food Processing Facilities
10.851.10 The use and its related products and waste products shall be contained
within a building.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-15
10.852 Industrial Occupancy
Industrial uses shall comply with the following standards:
10.852.10 An industrial occupancy that is classified as a high hazard use requires a
special exception (see Section 10.440, use 14.80).
10.852.20 Average daily use of less than 20,000 gallons per day of water from the
City water supply system.
10.852.30 Average daily output of less than 5,000 gallons per day of wastewater into
the City sewerage system.
10.853 Recycling Facilities and Recycling Plants
10.853.10 Applicable to Recycling Facilities and Recycling Plants
10.853.11 No liquid or solid hazardous waste material (as classified by
federal or state law) shall be recycled, processed or
transferred.
10.853.20 Applicable to Recycling Facilities
10.853.21 The facility shall be located no less than 100 feet from the
street and from all property lines.
10.853.22 Transfer facilities shall comply with New Hampshire
Statutes regarding such operation.
Article 8 Supplemental Use Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 8-16
Section 10.860 Hours of Operation
10.861 The following uses are limited to operation during the times specified:
Use No.* Use District with
time limitations From To
3.51 Performance facility,
indoor
CD5, CD4, CD4-
W, GB, G1, G2, B 8 AM 11
PM
3.52 Performance facility,
outdoor
CD5, CD4, CD4-
W, GB, G1, G2, B 4 PM 11
PM
4.50 Outdoor recreation use GB, G1, G2 9 AM 11
PM
7.12 Group day care facility
(non-accessory)
R, SRA, SRB,
GRA, GRB, GRC 7 AM 7 PM
8.111
8.121
Convenience goods 1 &
Convenience goods 2
MRB, CD5, CD4,
CD4-W, GB, G1,
G2, B
6 AM 11
PM
8.60 Fish market WB 8 AM 9 PM
12.30
Repair of marine craft and
marine-related
structures
WB, I, WI 7 AM 7 PM
19.22 Home occupation 2 R, SRA, SRB,
GRA, GRB, GRC 8 AM 5 PM
* Refer to Section 10.440, Table of Uses.
10.862 The above time limitations apply unless different time limitations are
established under a special exception or conditional use permit.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-1
Article 9 Special Uses
Section 10.910 Small Wind Energy Systems
Section 10.920 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
Section 10.930 Sexually Oriented Businesses
Section 10.910 Small Wind Energy Systems
10.911 Purpose
The purposes of this Section are:
(1) To accommodate small wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while
protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare; and
(2) To provide a permitting process for small wind energy systems to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established herein.
10.912 Definitions
Meteorological tower (met tower)
A temporary structure for monitoring or transmitting environmental data
needed to assess the potential of a small wind energy system. A met tower
includes a tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers
(wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for anemometers
and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices
that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics
over a period of time either for instantaneous wind information or to characterize
the wind resource at a given location.
Modification
Any change to the small wind energy system that materially alters the size,
type or location of the small wind energy system. A like-kind replacement
shall not be construed to be a modification.
Net metering
The difference between the electricity supplied to a customer over the electric
distribution system and the electricity generated by the customer’s small wind
energy system that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a
billing period.
Power grid
The transmission system, managed by ISO New England, created to balance the
supply and demand of electricity for consumers in New England.
Shadow flicker
The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind generator cast
shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of
light and shadow.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-2
Small wind energy system (SWES)
A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100
kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption.
System height
The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade
when it is at its highest point.
Tower
The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports a wind
generator.
Tower height
The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind
generator.
Wind generator
The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components
mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the
wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity.
10.913 Development Standards
10.913.10 Setbacks:
10.913.11 The small wind energy system shall be set back from all
lot lines, utility lines, streets and buildings in proportion to
the system height, as follows:
Setback from: Setback Multiplier
Building on same lot 0.0
Building on abutting lot 1.5
Lot line 1.1
Utility line 1.1
Street 1.5
10.913.12 The required setbacks shall be calculated by multiplying
the setback multiplier by the system height, measuring
from the center of the tower base to the nearest point on a
lot line, street, or building foundation.
10.913.13 The small wind energy system must meet all setbacks
for principal structures for the zoning district in which the
system is located.
10.913.14 Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the
small wind energy system setback requirements.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-3
10.913.20 The maximum tower height shall be the lesser of (a) 35 feet above the
tree canopy within 300 feet of the small wind energy system, or
(b) 150 feet.
10.913.30 All signs, including flags, streamers and decorative items, both temporary
and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy system, except
for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning signs.
10.913.40 Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary
for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy
system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances.
10.913.50 The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or
a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 8 feet
above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment
shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
10.913.60 The manufacturer and model of the wind generator to be used in the
proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the
California Energy Commission or the New York State Energy Research
and Development Authority, or a similar list approved by the state of New
Hampshire, if available.
10.913.70 Compliance with other laws:
10.913.71 The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the Building Code.
10.913.72 The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable federal and state regulations regarding
installations close to airports.
10.913.73 If the proposed small wind energy system is to be
connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall
adhere to RSA 362-A:9.
10.914 Performance Standards
10.914.10 A small wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels using the
A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line, except during shortterm
events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
10.914.20 A small wind energy system shall be sited in a manner that does not
result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow flicker
is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting occupied buildings.
The applicant has the burden of proving that the shadow flicker will not
have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses.
Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or
mitigation measures.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-4
10.914.30 A small wind energy system may create some visual impacts due to the
tower height needed to access wind resources. The purpose of this section
is to reduce such visual impacts without restricting the owner’s access to
the optimal wind resources on the property.
10.914.31 The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning
and proposed mitigation that the small wind energy
system’s visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding
neighbors and the community. This may include, but not be
limited to, information regarding site selection, wind
generator design or appearance, buffering, and screening of
ground mounted electrical and control equipment. All
electrical conduits shall be underground, except when the
financial costs are prohibitive.
10.914.32 The color of the small wind energy system shall either be
the stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends in with the
surrounding environment. Approved colors include but are
not limited to white, off-white or gray.
10.914.33 A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit
unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant
shall provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish
the required markings and/or lights for the small wind
energy system.
10.915 Procedure for Review
10.915.10 Small wind energy systems and met towers are permitted accessory
uses in all zoning districts.
10.915.20 The erection, construction, installation or physical modification of a small
wind energy system or met tower shall require a building permit from
the building inspector. Any such facility that is not accessory to a
residential use shall also require site plan review and approval by the
Planning Board.
10.915.30 A building permit for a met tower shall be for a temporary basis not to
exceed 3 years from the date the permit was issued.
10.915.40 An application for a building permit for a small wind energy system or
met tower shall include the following information:
(a) Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations,
guy anchors and associated equipment.
(b) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-5
(c) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(d) Tower setback requirements.
(e) Location of buildings and utility lines within 300 feet of the
proposed small wind energy system or met tower.
(f) Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate
generation capacity.
(g) Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
Building Code.
(h) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer
or qualified engineer.
(i) Copy of the application for interconnection with the electric utility
provider for a small wind energy system that will be connected to
the power grid.
10.915.50 The building inspector shall notify all abutters and the local governing
body by certified mail upon application for a building permit to construct
a SWES. The public will be afforded 30 days to submit comments to the
building inspector prior to the issuance of the building permit.
10.915.60 The building inspector shall review the application for regional impacts as
set forth in state law. If the proposal is determined to have potential
regional impacts, the building inspector shall follow the notification and
public hearing procedures for a development of regional impact as set
forth in state law.
10.916 Abandonment
10.916.10 At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be
abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the building inspector
by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations.
10.916.20 The property owner shall physically remove the small wind energy
system within 90 days after the date of abandonment or discontinuation of
use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the
discretion of the building inspector. “Physically remove” shall include, but
not be limited to, removal of the wind generator and tower and related
above-grade structures; and restoration of the location of the small wind
energy system to its natural condition, except that any landscaping,
grading or below-grade foundation may remain in its same condition at
initiation of abandonment.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-6
10.916.30 In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system shall be
considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out of service for a
continuous 12-month period. After the 12 months of non-use, the building
inspector may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the small
wind energy system. The owner shall have the right to respond to the
Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from Notice receipt date. After
review of the information provided by the owner, the code official shall
determine if the small wind energy system has been abandoned. If it is
determined that the small wind energy system has not been abandoned,
the building inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and
notify the owner of the withdrawal.
10.916.40 If the owner fails to respond to the Notice of Abandonment or if, after
review by the building inspector, it is determined that the small wind
energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the
small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and tower
at the owner’s sole expense within 3 months of receipt of the Notice of
Abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small wind
energy system after the Notice of Abandonment procedure, the building
inspector may pursue legal action to have the small wind energy system
removed at the owner’s expense.
10.917 Violation
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind energy
system that is not in compliance with this Ordinance. Small wind energy systems
installed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance are exempt from this Ordinance except
when modifications are proposed to the small wind energy system.
Section 10.920 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
10.921 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the siting, construction and removal of wireless
telecommunications facilities so as to promote the safety, welfare and aesthetic interests
of the City of Portsmouth. It is the intent of this Section to:
(a) encourage the concealment of wireless telecommunications facilities within preexisting
structures, other than dwellings or accessory structures thereto;
(b) encourage the camouflaging of wireless telecommunications facilities attached to
pre-existing structures;
(c) encourage, where location on pre-existing structures is not feasible, the colocation
of wireless telecommunications facilities on free-standing towers
currently in existence or for which special exceptions have been issued as of the
effective date of this Ordinance;
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-7
(d) encourage the use of wireless communications facilities which employ the least
visually intrusive technology available in the industry;
(e) discourage the construction or location of free-standing towers;
(f) maintain and preserve the residential character of the City by eliminating or
minimizing the adverse visual and aesthetic impact of all wireless telecommunications
facilities; and
(g) encourage competition among the providers of wireless telecommunication
services to develop creative solutions to the particular and unique problems
associated with the providing of wireless telecommunications services within the
City that do not detract from the aesthetic qualities of the City generally and the
neighborhoods in particular where such facilities are proposed to be located.
10.922 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to wireless communications facilities under this
Section 10.920, in addition to the general definitions in Article 15.
Antenna
Any apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications
through the sending or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
Co-location
The use of a single free-standing wireless telecommunications facility by more
than one carrier.
Provider or carrier
Any person, corporation or other entity engaged in the business of providing
wireless telecommunication services.
Wireless telecommunications facility
A facility consisting of the structures, including towers and antennas mounted
on towers and buildings, equipment and equipment shelters, accessory
buildings and structures, and site improvements, involved in sending and
receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile communications
source and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which
connects the mobile unit with land based or other telephone lines.
Wireless telecommunications facility, camouflaged
A wireless telecommunications facility that is disguised, shielded,
hidden, or made to appear as an architectural component of an existing or
proposed structure the use of which is otherwise permitted under this
Ordinance. No wireless telecommunications facility attached to an
existing structure shall be deemed camouflaged for the purpose of this
Ordinance where it extends vertically more than 10 feet above the height
of the structure nor horizontally more than 10 feet beyond the face of
any exterior side wall or the exterior of any surface of a structure with
no side walls.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-8
Wireless telecommunications facility, concealed
A wireless telecommunications facility that is entirely contained
within the architectural features of an existing or proposed structure the
use of which is otherwise permitted under this Ordinance such that no
part of the facility is visible from the exterior of the structure. Antennas
and other components of a wireless telecommunications facility
situated within a free-standing wireless telecommunications
facility shall not be deemed concealed or camouflaged for the purpose of
this Ordinance.
Wireless telecommunications facility, free-standing
Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily to support one
or more antennas including without limitation self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers, radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular and
personal communication service towers.
10.923 Use Regulations
10.923.10 Facilities Permitted in All Zoning Districts
10.923.11 Wireless telecommunications facility providing safety or
emergency services for any federal, state or municipal body.
10.923.12 Amateur radio antenna licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission, provided that such antenna is not used for
any commercial purpose and does not exceed 35 feet in
height.
10.923.13 Home television or internet access antennae.
10.923.14 Medical facilities for transmittal of clinical medical
information.
10.923.20 Facilities Permitted in All Business and Industrial Districts
10.923.21 Concealed wireless telecommunications facility.
10.923.22 Camouflaged wireless telecommunications facility.
10.923.30 Facilities Allowed by Special Exception
10.923.31 Free-standing wireless telecommunications facility.
10.923.32 Any other wireless telecommunications facility the use of
which is not permitted under Section 923.10 or 923.20 and
which is not prohibited under Section 923.40.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-9
10.923.40 Prohibited Facilities
10.924.41 Free-standing wireless telecommunications facility
within the Historic District or any area listed in the National
Registry of Historic Places.
10.924.42 Concealed wireless telecommunications facility or
camouflaged wireless telecommunications facility
within any residential structure or any accessory
structure to a residential use.
10.924 Indemnification
Any building permit or special exception issued for a facility pursuant to Section 10.923
shall require the holder of such building permit or special exception to indemnify and
hold harmless the City of Portsmouth and its boards, commissioners, committees,
officers, employees, agents and representatives from and against all claims, causes of
action, suits, damages, costs and liability of any kind which arise out of the construction,
location, operation or use of the subject wireless telecommunications facility in the
City.
10.925 Standards for Facilities
10.925.10 Standards for Towers
[Reserved]
10.925.20 Standards for Building-Mounted Facilities
[Reserved]
10.926 Special Exception Procedures
10.926.10 Contents of application
Each applicant for a special exception under Section 10.923.30 shall include in the
application the following information:
(1) Evidence of the applicant’s ownership of the lot where a proposed facility is to be
located; or evidence of the applicant’s right to possession and/or control of the
premises where the applicant is not the owner of record;
(2) A narrative description of the proposed facility including the location and identification
of all components together with a statement describing the purpose of each
component and its intended function plus photographs or other graphic illustrations
fairly depicting the physical appearance of the proposed components;
(3) A locus plan prepared and certified by a professional engineer depicting all lot lines,
the exact location and dimension of all components of the proposed facility including
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-10
all structures, streets, landscape features including contours, dwellings and all
buildings within 500 feet of the proposed facility;
(4) An itemized description of other wireless telecommunications facilities owned
or operated by the applicant or for which the applicant is currently seeking approval,
and which are located in the City of Portsmouth or within a two-mile radius of the
City or are capable of providing service to customers operating within the City;
(5) A description of all federal, state and local licenses, permits, or other approvals
obtained by the applicant to date or to be obtained by the applicant prior to
construction of the proposed facility;
(6) A statement as to whether an Environmental Assessment (EA), a Draft Environmental
Impact Statement (DEIS) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is or will
be required under the National Environmental Protection Act or the National Historic
Preservation Act, and if so, a copy of the said EA, DEIS, or EIS;
(7) A description in both geographical and radio frequency terms of the scope and
quality of the service currently being provided to the City of Portsmouth by the
applicant’s existing facilities, if any;
(8) A description in both geographical and radio frequency terms as to the need to be
addressed by the proposed facility;
(9) A description in both geographical and radio frequency terms as to precisely the
manner in which the proposed facility addresses the needs identified in item (8)
above;
(10) A statement describing the current state of technology available to provide wireless
telecommunications services, and whether any such technology is available and
feasible for the purpose of addressing the proposed need described in item (8) above.
(11) A statement as to whether the applicant considered any alternatives to a freestanding
facility including but not limited to co-locating on an existing facility and, if
so, the reason(s) such alternatives are not being proposed;
(12) A statement as to why there exists no feasible alternative to a free-standing facility
to address the need identified by the applicant in item (8) above;
(13) A statement as to whether the need identified in item (8) above may be adequately
met by siting a facility on other property;
(14) A description of the radio frequency testing procedures conducted by the applicant
in connection with the proposed facility, if any, and the results thereof;
(15) A statement as to whether the proposed facility will have any impact on an
environmentally, historically or archaeologically significant area in the vicinity of the
proposed facility;
(16) A statement setting forth the applicant’s projected future needs for wireless
telecommunication facilities within the City of Portsmouth;
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-11
(17) A description of the terms of any co-location agreements between the applicant and
any other provider of wireless telecommunication services to the City of Portsmouth;
and
(18) Whether the applicant is seeking approval of co-location facilities on the proposed
free standing facility, and if so, a detailed description in compliance with the
preceding items of all components of the co-location facility for which the applicant
is seeking approval.
10.926.20 Pre-hearing Procedures
After notice of the public hearing has been published but prior to the hearing for which
notice has been given thereunder, the applicant shall conduct a balloon or crane test, or
such other reasonable equivalent, of the height of the proposed free standing facility. The
applicant shall provide at least 48 hours written notice of said test to the Board and to all
abutters and persons required by state law to be notified of a public hearing; and shall
submit to the Board prior to the hearing a photographic representation from a suitable
number of locations so as to depict the visual impact of the proposed facility on the
neighborhood and the abutters to the site.
10.926.30 Independent Consultants
The Board may at any time assess fees against the applicant for the purpose of
employing an independent consultant to evaluate any aspect of the proposed facility,
including current service coverage. The applicant shall cooperate fully with the
independent consultant selected by the Board and shall provide all information
reasonably requested by the consultant including but not limited to radiological testing.
10.926.40 Standard for Issuance of Special Exception
The Board shall issue a special exception for the construction of a free-standing
wireless telecommunications facility only where it finds that:
(1) Existing facilities do not adequately address the need for service,
(2) There exists no feasible alternative to the proposal that would adequately address the
need in a less intrusive manner, and
(3) The proposed use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance.
10.926.50 Conditions of Issuance of Special Exception
The Board may attach such terms and conditions to any special exception issued
hereunder in order to protect the safety and welfare of the City and to mitigate the visual
impact of any free-standing facility to be constructed pursuant to a special exception
issued hereunder. Such terms and conditions may relate to, but shall not be limited to,
(1) Appearance including color, style and materials;
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-12
(2) The type and dimensions of any fencing surrounding all or part of the facility;
(3) Landscaping requirements at and around the facility;
(4) Contents and dimensions of any signs if any are to be permitted by the Board;
(5) Establishing noise limitations so as not to unreasonably disturb residents surrounding
the facility during construction, operation or maintenance of the facility;
(6) Hours of access to the facility for the purpose of conducting routine maintenance and
inspections;
(7) Limits as to the permissible height of any component of the facility;
(8) Provisions to assure adequate lighting and lighting that is not intrusive to neighbors;
(9) Safety provisions to guard against damage to persons or property in the event of a
collapse or structure failure of any component of the facility;
(10) Provisions for the removal of the facility upon abandonment or expiration of the
special exception, including without limitation a bond or other surety. Such bond or
other surety shall be maintained throughout the period of construction, location,
operation and use of the subject wireless telecommunications facility; the
Building Inspector shall receive 30 days prior written notice of any cancellation, nonrenewal
or material amendment of such bond or other surety; and
(11) Whether co-locations will be pre-approved, and if so, the terms and conditions of
any such co-location pre-approval.
10.926.60 Duration of Special Exception
Unless and earlier expiration date is specified by the Board in a special exception, all
special exceptions issued under this Section 920 shall expire automatically upon the
expiration of 5 years from the date of issuance. Prior to expiration the applicant may
apply for renewal of the special exception for another 5-year period, said application to
comply with all of the provisions of Section 10.926.10 of this Ordinance. In determining
whether the special exception shall be renewed, the Board shall take into consideration
whether there now exist any structures and/or technology available to the applicant
which would enable the applicant to provide functionally equivalent services in a less
intrusive manner. Upon expiration of a special exception which has not been renewed,
the applicant shall disassemble and remove the entire facility forthwith at its expense, and
any such facility not removed in its entirety within 30 days of the expiration of the special
exception shall be deemed abandoned within the meeting of Section 10.927 below.
10.926.70 Modification of Approved Facility
[Reserved]
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-13
10.927 Non Use
10.927.10 Any wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated or that is
not in compliance with this Section for a continuous period of 30 days shall
be considered to be abandoned, and the Code Official may, by written
notice sent by certified mail, order that such facility be removed within 30
days. At the time of removal the facility and all associated debris shall be
removed from the premises.
10.927.20 Any building permit or special exception issued for a wireless
telecommunications facility shall require the holder of such building
permit or special exception to post a bond or other surety, specifically
approved by City Attorney, in an amount and for a term both sufficient to
guarantee the removal of the facility in accordance with this section and the
lawful disposal of any components thereof. Such bond or other surety shall
be maintained throughout the period of construction, location, operation
and use of the subject wireless telecommunications facility; the code
official shall receive 30 days prior written notice of any cancellation, nonrenewal
or material amendment of such bond or other surety. In the event
that the posted amount does not cover the cost of such removal and
disposal, the City may place a lien upon the premises covering the
difference in costs.
Section 10.930 Sexually Oriented Businesses
10.931 Findings
10.931.10 Sexually oriented businesses present special concerns related to public
health and the safety and welfare of the citizenry:
(a) Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful
sexual activities, including prostitution, and for sexual liaisons of a
casual nature.
(b) Such activities are contributing factors in the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases, which is a significant public health concern.
(c) Sexually oriented businesses have been documented to have a
deleterious effect on the existing businesses around them, causing
increased crime and the downgrading of property values.
(d) Sexually oriented businesses have serious objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when they are located in
proximity to each other, thereby contributing to urban blight and
downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area.
10.931.20 Because of the above impacts, sexually oriented businesses require
special supervision in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and
welfare of both the patrons of such businesses and the residents of the
communities where they locate; protect the citizens from increased crime;
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-14
preserve the quality of life; preserve property values and character of
surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of urban blight.
10.931.30 Permitting and/or licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of
accountability to ensure that operators of sexually oriented businesses
comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not
knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal
sexual activity or solicitation.
10.932 Purpose and Intent
10.932.10 The purpose of this Section is to regulate sexually oriented business
and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the City.
10.932.20 It is not the intent of this Ordinance to suppress any speech activities
protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral Ordinance
which addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
as well as the health problems associated with such businesses.
10.932.30 It is neither the intent nor the effect of this Section to limit or restrict the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials; nor to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment; nor to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
10.932.40 It is neither the intent nor the effect of this Section to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene materials. This Ordinance does not supplant or
override any State or Federal laws prohibiting the distribution of obscene
materials, which are enforced by the City under its police powers.
10.933 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to sexually oriented businesses under this
Section 10.930. Where a term is defined both in this Section 10.930 and in Article 15, the
definition in this Section shall apply for purposes of regulation under this section, and the
definition in Article 15 shall apply for other provisions of this Ordinance.
Adult arcade
Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or
slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-15
Adult bookstore or Adult video store
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
2. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with “specified sexual activities.” A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and
still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the
offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which
depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
Adult cabaret
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which
regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a State of nudity or Semi-Nudity; or
2. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified
anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
3. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
Adult theater
A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual
anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.
Establishment
Any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
2. The conversion of an existing business whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
3. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-16
Nudity or state of nudity
The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
full female breast.
Permittee or Licensee
A person in whose name a permit or license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the
application for a permit or license.
Semi-nude
A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region,
and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
1. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
2. Activities between two or more people when one or more of the persons
is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business
An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret,
adult theater, or sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas
The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal or the vulva or more intimate parts
of the female genitals.
Specified sexual activities
Any of the following:
1. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in 1 through 3 above.
Substantial enlargement (of a sexually oriented business)
The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the
floor areas exist on the date of the adoption of this Article.
10.934 Procedure
For a use to be established under this Section, the applicant must demonstrate to the
Code Official that the proposed site satisfies all the site requirements of Section 10.935
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-17
and secure a special exception from the Board of Adjustment subject to the requirements
and procedures of Sections 10.233 and 10.936.
10.935 Site Requirements
A sexually oriented business, in addition to all other requirements of this Ordinance,
shall, prior to a request for a special exception, demonstrate compliance with the
following requirements:
10.935.10 No sexually oriented business shall be located within 500 feet from any
property line of the following uses:
(a) A public, religious or private nursery school, kindergarten school,
elementary school, middle school, junior high school, high school or
similar education facility.
(b) Licensed group day care facility (no age restriction).
(c) A public park, public recreational field or similar publicly owned
facility.
(d) A religious institution or place of worship.
(e) Any residential district or use.
(f) A Mixed Residential Office District.
(g) A Mixed Residential Business District.
10.935.20 The proposed site shall be screened by a stockade fence that is no less than
6 feet in height which is to be erected in a manner that limits pedestrian
and vehicular access to adjacent properties, but which does not restrict
adequate lines of sight or create unsafe site conditions. This visual barrier
shall be placed no closer than 3 feet to any adjacent lot line and shall be
maintained by the party to whom the Certificate of Occupancy has been
issued.
10.935.30 There shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between any two sexually
oriented businesses.
10.936 Special Exceptions
In addition to the conditions for special exceptions contained in Section 10.233 the
following conditions shall also apply:
10.936.10 The hours of operation shall only be between 10 AM and 11 PM Monday
through Saturday and 12 noon to 9 PM on Sundays.
Article 9 Special Uses
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 9-18
10.936.20 Parking shall be one space per patron based on the occupancy load as
established by local and state fire, building, or health codes, whichever is
greater, plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
10.936.30 The site shall be maintained daily in a condition that is free and clear of
any sexual paraphernalia or packaging.
10.936.40 Signs shall not visually depict any person in a “state of nudity” or
“semi-nude.”
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-1
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
Section 10.1010 Wetlands Protection
Section 10.1020 Earth Products Removal and Placement
Section 10.1010 Wetlands Protection
10.1011 Purpose
The purposes of this Section are:
(1) To maintain, and where possible improve, the quality of surface waters and ground
water by controlling the rate and volume of stormwater runoff and preserving the
ability of wetlands to filter pollution, trap sediment, retain and absorb chemicals and
nutrients, and produce oxygen.
(2) To prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, wetlands, related water
bodies and adjoining land which provide flood protection, and to protect persons
and property against the hazards of flood inundation by assuring the continuation of
the natural or existing flow patterns of streams and other water courses within the
City.
(3) To protect, and where possible improve, potential water supplies and aquifers and
aquifer recharge areas.
(4) To protect, and where possible improve, wildlife habitats and maintain ecological
balance.
(5) To protect, and where possible improve, unique or unusual natural areas and rare and
endangered plant and animal species.
(6) To protect, and where possible improve, shellfish and fisheries.
(7) To prevent the expenditure of municipal funds for the purpose of providing and/or
maintaining essential services and utilities which might be required as a result of
misuse or abuse of wetlands.
(8) To require the use of best management practices and low impact development
in and adjacent to wetland areas.
10.1012 Relationship to Other Regulations
10.1012.10 The provisions and criteria set forth in this Section are in addition to the
provisions of applicable state and federal laws and regulations, other
sections of this Zoning Ordinance, and other local ordinances and
regulations.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-2
10.1012.20 Where any provision of this Section conflicts with a state or federal law or
regulation, another section of this Zoning Ordinance, or another local
ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
10.1012.30 Nothing in this Section shall permit a use or activity which is contrary to
any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance.
10.1012.40 Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the City of
Portsmouth and its administrative and operating agencies and
instrumentalities shall comply with the provisions of this Section.
10.1013 Jurisdictional Areas
The provisions of this Section 10.1010 apply to the following jurisdictional areas:
10.1013.10 Any inland wetland, other than a vernal pool, that is 10,000 square feet
or more in area;
10.1013.20 Any vernal pool regardless of area.
10.1013.30 Any non-tidal perennial river or stream.
10.1013.40 The tidal wetlands of Sagamore Creek, Little Harbour, North Mill Pond,
South Mill Pond and part of the Piscataqua River, defined as follows:
(a) Sagamore Creek: Bounded by the easterly side of Peverly Hill Road
and the southerly side of Greenleaf Avenue as these cross Sagamore
Creek, and extending along the Creek to Little Harbour.
(b) Little Harbour: Extending along the Little Harbour shoreline from
the municipal line with the Town of Rye to the southerly side of New
Castle Avenue, and including Goose Island, Belle Island, Pest Island
and that portion of Shapleigh Island lying south of New Castle
Avenue.
(c) North Mill Pond: Extending along the entire shoreline of North Mill
Pond between Bartlett Street and Market Street.
(d) South Mill Pond: Extending along the entire shoreline of South Mill
Pond west of the tide gate at Pleasant Street.
(e) Piscataqua River: Extending along the shoreline of the Piscataqua
River from the northwest side of the I-95 bridge up to and including
the waterfront parcel fronting on Porpoise Way.
10.1014 Identification and Delineation of Wetlands and Wetland Buffers
10.1014.10 Wetlands
10.1014.11 Wetlands shall be identified by use of the Federal Manual and/or Field
Indicators, and shall be delineated by on-site inspection of soil types,
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-3
vegetation, and hydrology by a certified wetland scientist at a time
when conditions are favorable for such determination.
10.1014.12 A created wetland shall be considered a wetland for the purposes of this
section.
10.1014.13 Any area which may have been a wetland but was filled prior to January
1, 1970 or pursuant to properly issued federal, state and local permits
granted prior to the adoption of this Ordinance shall be judged according to
the conditions existing at the time an application for a building permit or
subdivision is filed or submitted.
10.1014.20 Wetland Buffers
10.1014.21 The purpose of a wetland buffer is to reduce erosion and sedimentation
into the adjacent wetland, vernal pool or water body, to aid in the
control of nonpoint source pollution, to provide a vegetative cover for
filtration of runoff, to protect wildlife habitat, and to help preserve
ecological balance.
10.1014.22 The required wetland buffer for a jurisdictional wetland or water body
shall be defined as all land within 100 feet of the jurisdictional area.
10.1014.23 Wetland buffers, including vegetated buffer strips and limited cut
areas, shall be parallel to and measured from the reference line for the
applicable jurisdictional area on a horizontal plane.
(1) Inland wetland buffers shall be measured from the edges of inland
wetlands and surface water bodies.
(2) Tidal wetland buffers shall be measured from the edges of tidal
wetlands and highest observable tide lines.
10.1015 Notification to Planning Director
Notice shall be provided to the Planning Director prior to any construction, demolition,
tree cutting, vegetation removal, or other alteration in a wetland or wetland buffer.
10.1016 Permitted Uses
10.1016.10 The following uses, activities and alterations are permitted in wetlands
and wetland buffers:
(1) Any use that does not involve the erection or construction of any
structure or impervious surface, will not alter the natural surface
configuration by the addition of fill or by dredging, will not result in
site alterations, and is otherwise permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance. Examples of such uses include forestry and tree farming,
wildlife refuges, parks and recreational uses, conservation and
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-4
nature trails, and open spaces as permitted or required by the
Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Regulations.
(2) Improvements to existing public rights-of-way and sidewalks.
(3) The construction of piers or docks, provided that all required local,
state and federal approvals have been granted.
(4) The construction of an addition or extension to a one-family or twofamily
dwelling that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance or was constructed subject to a validly issued
conditional use permit, provided that:
(a) The footprint area of the addition or extension, together with the
area of all prior such additions and extensions, shall not exceed
25 percent of the area of the footprint of the principal heated
structure existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
or constructed pursuant to a validly issued conditional use permit
(this 25 percent limit shall not be based on pre-existing attached
or detached garages, sheds, decks, porches, breezeways, or
similar buildings or structures);
(b) The addition or extension shall be no closer to a wetland or
water body than the existing principal structure; and
(c) The addition or extension shall conform with all other provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance and with all other applicable ordinances
and regulations of the City of Portsmouth.
(5) The use of motor vehicles, except for all-terrain vehicles, when
necessary for any purpose permitted by this Ordinance.
(6) Emergency power generator outside the wetland and vegetated
buffer strip, provided that the total coverage by equipment and any
mounting pad shall not exceed 10 square feet.
(7) Uses, activities and alterations that are consistent with a Wetland
Protection Plan that has been approved by the Planning Board
through the grant of a conditional use permit.
(8) Construction of fences outside the vegetated buffer strip, provided
that any posts are no wider than 3” in any dimension, and that there
are no footings and no ground disturbance beyond the installation of
the posts.
10.1016.20 Any use, activity or alteration not specifically permitted by Section
10.1016.10 above is prohibited unless authorized by the Planning Board
through the grant of a conditional use permit.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-5
10.1016.30 When the Planning Director reasonably believes that an existing or
proposed use, activity or alteration that is not specifically permitted by
Section 10.1016.10 is located in a wetland or wetland buffer, and a
conditional use permit has not been granted for such use, activity or
alteration, the Planning Director may require a wetland delineation
complying with Section 10.1014 in order to verify the location or absence
of wetlands and determine whether the use, activity or alteration
requires a conditional use permit.
10.1017 Conditional Uses
10.1017.10 General
The Planning Board is authorized to grant a conditional use permit for any use not
specifically permitted in Section 10.1016.10, subject to the procedures and findings set
forth herein.
10.1017.20 Application Requirements
10.1017.21 The application shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Board, and
shall include the following information:
(1) Location and area of lot and proposed activities and uses;
(2) Location and area of all jurisdictional areas (vernal pool, inland
wetland, tidal wetland, river or stream) on the lot and within 250
feet of the lot;
(3) Location and area of wetland buffers on the lot;
(4) Description of proposed construction, demolition, fill, excavation,
or any other alteration of the wetland or wetland buffer;
(5) Setbacks of proposed alterations from property lines,
jurisdictional areas and wetland buffers;
(6) Location and area of wetland impact, new impervious surface,
previously disturbed upland;
(7) Location and description of existing trees to be removed, other
landscaping, grade changes, fill extensions, rip rap, culverts,
utilities;
(8) Dimensions and uses of existing and proposed buildings and
structures.
(9) Any other information necessary to describe the proposed
construction or alteration.
10.1017.22 Where the proposed project will involve the temporary or permanent
alteration of more than 250 sq. ft. of wetland and/or wetland buffer, the
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-6
application shall provide information about the affected wetland and
wetland buffer as follows:
(1) Up to 1,000 sq. ft. of alteration to the wetland: a wetland
characterization that describes the type of wetland (e.g., emergent,
scrub-shrub, forested), the percent of invasive species, and whether
the wetland is seasonally flooded.
(2) More than 1,000 sq. ft. of alteration to the wetland: a functions and
values assessment equivalent to the model set forth in Appendix A of
The Highway Methodology Workbook Supplement – Wetland
Functions and Values: A Descriptive Approach, NAEEP-360-1-30a,
US Army Corps of Engineers, New England Division, September
1999, as amended.
(3) More than 250 sq. ft. of alteration to the wetland buffer (regardless
of the amount of alteration to the wetland): a description of the
100-foot buffer including vegetation type, the percent of the buffer
with invasive species, and the percent of the buffer that is paved or
developed.
10.1017.23 The application shall describe the impact of the proposed project with
specific reference to the criteria for approval set forth in Section
10.1017.50 (or Section 10.1017.60 in the case of utility installation in a
right-of-way), and shall demonstrate that the proposed site alteration is
the alternative with the least adverse impact to areas and environments
under the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
10.1017.24 Where feasible, the application shall include removal of impervious
surfaces at least equal in area to the area of impervious surface impact.
The intent of this provision is that the project will not result in a net loss of
pervious surface within a jurisdictional wetland buffer. If it is not feasible
to remove impervious surfaces from the wetland buffer at least equal in
area to the area of new impervious surface impact, the application shall
include a wetland buffer enhancement plan that describes how the
wetland functions and values will be enhanced to offset the proposed
impact.
10.1017.25 A wetland buffer enhancement plan shall be designed to enhance the
functions of the jurisdictional wetland and/or wetland buffer on the lot,
and to offset the impact of the proposed project.
(1) The wetland buffer enhancement plan shall include a combination
of new plantings, invasive species removal, habitat creation areas,
improved site hydrology, or protective easements provided offsite.
(2) Where the vegetated buffer strip contains grass or non-native
plantings, or is otherwise not intact, the first priority of the wetland
buffer enhancement plan shall be to include revegetation of the
vegetated buffer strip with native, low-maintenance shrubs and other
woody vegetation.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-7
10.1017.26 Where the proposed project involves a use, activity or alteration in a tidal
wetland or tidal wetland buffer, the application shall include a living
shoreline strategy to preserve the existing natural shoreline and/or
encourage establishment of a living shoreline through restoration, as
applicable. Said living shoreline strategy shall be implemented unless the
Planning Board determines that it is not feasible.
10.1017.30 Application Review Procedure
10.1017.31 The application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the
Planning Director.
10.1017.32 The Planning Director shall refer the application to the Conservation
Commission for review and comment.
10.1017.33 The Planning Board or the Planning Director may require the findings of
an independent New Hampshire certified wetland scientist or other
additional special investigative studies, and may assess the owner
reasonable fees to cover the costs of such studies and for the review of
documents required by application.
10.1017.34 The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application within
90 days of the initial submittal to the Planning Board, and shall issue a
letter of decision within 10 days of the public hearing. The time
requirements stated herein may be waived by the applicant.
10.1017.35 Public notice for public hearings shall be made in accordance with State
law.
10.1017.36 The application process pursuant to this section may proceed prior to
and/or run concurrent with the State and Federal permit processes, but the
conditional use permit shall not become effective until the State and
Federal permits are received.
10.1017.40 Conditional Use Approval
10.1017.41 The Planning Board shall grant a conditional use permit provided that it
finds that all other restrictions of this Ordinance are met and that proposed
development meets all the criteria set forth in section 10.1017.50 or
10.1017.60, as applicable.
10.1017.42 The Planning Board shall evaluate an application for a conditional use
permit in accordance with The Highway Methodology Workbook
Supplement – Wetland Functions and Values: A Descriptive Approach,
NAEEP-360-1-30a, US Army Corps of Engineers, New England Division,
September 1999, as amended.
10.1017.43 The burden of proof that the criteria required for approval of the
conditional use permit exist or are met shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-8
10.1017.44 Economic considerations alone are not sufficient reason for granting a
conditional use permit.
10.1017.45 Where new impervious surface is proposed in a wetland or wetland
buffer, the submission of a plan to compensate for such new impervious
surface does not guarantee that a conditional use permit will be granted.
10.1017.50 Criteria for Approval
Any proposed development, other than installation of utilities within a right-of-way,
shall comply with all of the following criteria:
(1) The land is reasonably suited to the use, activity or alteration.
(2) There is no alternative location outside the wetland buffer that is feasible and
reasonable for the proposed use, activity or alteration.
(3) There will be no adverse impact on the wetland functional values of the site or
surrounding properties;
(4) Alteration of the natural vegetative state or managed woodland will occur only
to the extent necessary to achieve construction goals; and
(5) The proposal is the alternative with the least adverse impact to areas and
environments under the jurisdiction of this Section.
(6) Any area within the vegetated buffer strip will be returned to a natural state to
the extent feasible.
10.1017.60 Public and Private Utilities within Rights-of-Way in Wetlands
and Wetland Buffers
The installation of utilities (including power lines and pipelines) within a right-of-way in
an inland wetland or wetland buffer shall comply with all of the following criteria
instead of the criteria set forth in section 10.1017.50:
(1) The proposed construction is in the public interest;
(2) Design, construction, and maintenance methods will utilize best management
practices to minimize any detrimental impact of such use upon the wetland
and will include restoration of the site as nearly as possible to its original grade,
condition and vegetated state;
(3) No alternative feasible route exists which does not cross or alter a wetland or
have a less detrimental impact on a wetland; and
(4) Alterations of natural vegetation or managed woodland will occur only to the
extent necessary to achieve construction goals.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-9
10.1017.70 Expiration and Extension
10.1017.71 A conditional use permit shall expire one year after the date of approval by
the Planning Board unless a building permit is issued prior to that date.
10.1017.72 The Planning Board may grant a one-year extension of a conditional use
permit if the applicant submits a written request to the Planning Board
prior to the expiration date. Any other extension may be granted only after
a new public hearing on the reconsideration of the application.
10.1017.80 Wetland Protection Plan
10.1017.81 General
10.1017.811 The owner of a parcel that contains more than 5 acres and
more than 5 residential structures may apply for a
conditional use permit for pre-approval of multiple
individual projects over a multi-year time frame by
submitting a Wetland Protection Plan conforming to the
requirements of this section.
10.1017.82 Submission Requirements and Procedures
10.1017.821 Plan Contents: A Wetland Protection Plan shall include the
following information:
(1) Wetland delineation, wetland buffers (100 feet),
limited cut areas (50 feet) and vegetated buffer strips
(25 feet).
(2) Existing buildings, structures, streets, driveways and
other site improvements.
(3) Calculations of existing impervious surface areas
(total and within the wetland buffer). For a
manufactured housing park these calculations shall
be provided for each dwelling site and for the park as a
whole.
(4) Proposed protective measures (e.g., rain gardens, tree
plantings, shrub plantings).
(5) Calculations of areas of protective measures and
proposed or potential future impervious surfaces.
10.1017.822 Initial Submission, Review and Approval Procedures: The
initial Wetland Protection Plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Department and shall be processed following the
procedures for an application for a conditional use permit
under Section 10.1017.30 and 10.1017.40.
10.1017.823 Effect of Plan Approval: The grant of a conditional use
permit for a Wetland Protection Plan represents an overall
pre-approval of impacts within the wetland buffer as
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-10
described on the Plan, subject to the submission of
individual site plans in connection with application for a
building permit that represents a change or increase in
impervious surface within the wetland buffer.
10.1017.824 Permit Site Plans:
(1) Following the approval of a Wetland Protection Plan,
each application for a building permit that proposes a
relocation of or increase in impervious surface within
the wetland buffer shall be accompanied by a permit
site plan showing the specific impervious surface
changes and the specific protective measures proposed
as compensation. Said protective measures shall be
completed prior to or concurrently with the proposed
impervious surface impact for which they provide
compensation.
(2) The Planning Director may approve a permit site plan
that is consistent with an approved Wetland Protection
Plan.
(3) If the Planning Director determines that a permit site
plan proposes a significant change from the approved
Wetland Protection Plan, the owner shall submit an
application to the Conservation Commission and
Planning Board for an amendment to the conditional use
permit.
10.1017.825 Plan Updates: After every 10 building permits have been
issued under an approved Wetland Protection Plan, whether
authorized administratively or by conditional use permit, the
owner shall submit an updated Wetland Protection Plan
showing the new existing site conditions and including
updated calculations. The updated Plan shall also serve as an
application for administrative site plan approval for all site
changes that have been made since the previously approved
Plan or Plan amendment.
10.1017.83 Wetland Protection Plan Standards
10.1017.831 No net increase in impervious surface within the wetland
buffer: Buildings, structures or other impervious
surfaces may be constructed, expanded or relocated within
the wetland buffer provided that (1) no new impervious
surface shall be within 25 feet of the wetland boundary,
and (2) any new area converted to impervious surface shall
be compensated for at a 1:1 ratio by the conversion of
existing impervious surface within the wetland buffer to
vegetated open space (lawn or planted areas). Such
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-11
compensatory open space does not need to be shown on
the approved Wetland Protection Plan, but shall be shown on
the permit site plan submitted with the building permit
application.
10.1017.832 Net increase in impervious surface within the wetland
buffer with compensation: Buildings, structures or other
impervious surfaces may be constructed, expanded or
relocated within the wetland buffer provided that (1) no
new impervious surface shall be within 25 feet of the
wetland boundary, and (2) the net increase in impervious
surface shall be compensated for by protective measures
that are shown on the approved Wetland Protection Plan at
the following ratios:
Protective
Measure
Ratio of protective measure area to
net impervious surface area
25’-50’
from wetland
50’-100’
from wetland
Rain garden 3.0:1 2.0:1
Tree plantings 3.0:1 2.0:1
Shrub plantings 3.0:1 2.0:1
10.1017.833 Any increase in permanent impervious surface permitted
through the provision of compensating protective measures
shall also permit a temporary impact within the wetland
buffer equal to two times the area of the permanent impact.
10.1018 Performance Standards
10.1018.10 Stormwater Management
All construction activities and uses of buildings, structures, and land within wetlands
and wetland buffers shall be carried out so as to minimize the volume and rate of
stormwater runoff, the amount of erosion, and the export of sediment from the site. All
such activities shall be conducted in accordance with Best Management Practices for
stormwater management including but not limited to:
1. New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, NHDES, current version.
2. Best Management Practices to Control Non-point Source Pollution: A Guide for
Citizens and City Officials, NHDES, January 2004.
10.1018.20 Vegetation Management
10.1018.21 The required wetland buffer includes two smaller areas where additional
standards and criteria apply: a vegetated buffer strip and a limited cut
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-12
area. The width of these areas shall be based on the type of jurisdictional
area, as follows:
Jurisdictional Area Vegetated
Buffer Strip
Limited Cut
Area
Vernal pool 0’ - 50’ 50’ - 75’
Inland wetland, other than vernal
pool 0’ - 25’ 25’ - 50’
Non-tidal perennial stream or river 0’ - 25’ 25’ - 75’
Inter-tidal area or tidal wetland as
specified in section 10.1013.40 0’ - 25’ 25’ - 50’
10.1018.22 If the vegetated buffer strip specified in Section 10.1018.21 contains an
area that has a slope of 10% or more for at least 10 feet in a direction
perpendicular to the edge of the jurisdictional area, the required width of
the vegetated buffer strip shall be increased to 55 feet from the edge of a
vernal pool and to 40 feet from the edge of any other wetland.
10.1018.23 Removal or cutting of vegetation:
(1) Chemical control of vegetation is prohibited in all areas of a
wetland or wetland buffer.
(2) The removal or cutting of vegetation is prohibited in a wetland or
vegetated buffer strip, except that non-chemical control of plants
designated by the State of New Hampshire as “New Hampshire
Prohibited Invasive Species” is permitted.
(3) The removal of more than 50% of trees greater than 6" diameter at
breast height (dbh) is prohibited in the limited cut area.
10.1018.24 Fertilizers:
(1) The use of any fertilizer is prohibited in a wetland, vegetated
buffer strip or limited cut area.
(2) The use of fertilizers other than low phosphate and slow release
nitrogen fertilizers is prohibited in any part of a wetland buffer.
10.1018.25 Pesticides and herbicides:
The use of pesticides or herbicides is prohibited in a wetland or wetland
buffer, except that application of pesticides by a public agency for public
health purposes is permitted.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-13
Section 10.1018.30 Porous Pavement in Wetland Buffer
10.1018.31 All new pavement installed in a wetland buffer shall be porous pavement.
The Planning Board may allow exceptions to this requirement where it can
be demonstrated that the height of ground water, condition of soil, or other
factors as described in the application are not appropriate for porous
pavement.
10.1018.32 An application that proposes porous pavement in a wetland buffer shall
include a pavement maintenance plan addressing erosion control, periodic
removal of sediment and debris from the porous surfaces, snow
management, and repairs.
10.1018.40 Wetland Boundary Markers
Permanent wetland boundary markers shall be shown on the plan submitted with an
application for a conditional use permit and shall be installed during project construction.
Section 10.1020 Earth Products Removal and Placement
10.1021 Applicability and Permit Requirements
10.1021.10 The removal or placement of more than 100 cubic yards of sod, loam, sand,
gravel or quarried stone at any premises in any 1 year shall require a permit
from the Planning Board except when incidental to and in connection with
the construction of a building, street or other activity authorized by this
Ordinance.
10.1021.20 Any removal or placement of earth products shall comply with State law
regardless of whether a permit from the Planning Board is required.
10.1022 Application Requirements
10.1022.10 An application for a permit for earth products removal or placement shall
be submitted to the Planning Board in a form specified by the Board.
10.1022.20 The application shall be accompanied by a plan of land, prepared and
stamped by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, showing the
following information for the property where the proposed removal or
placement of materials is to take place and for all land located within 100
feet of the property:
(a) property lines;
(b) vegetative cover;
(c) all man-made features;
(d) existing topography by 4-foot contour intervals;
(e) proposed temporary and permanent drainage;
(f) proposed topography at 2-foot contours upon completion of the
excavation project.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-14
10.1022.30 The estimated quantity of material to be removed or placed and topsoil to
be stripped, stockpiled and replaced shall be determined by average end
area methods or as approved by the Department of Public Works.
10.1023 Criteria for Approval
The Planning Board shall grant a permit for earth products removal or placement only if a
majority of the Board finds that the application complies with all of the following criteria:
10.1023.10 The application is complete and provides sufficient information upon
which to base an action; and
10.1023.20 The proposed earth products removal or placement activity will not result
in any hazard to the public or to adjacent properties; and
10.1023.30 The proposed earth products removal or placement activity will not create
a safety hazard due to traffic or other cause; and
10.1023.40 The proposed earth products removal or placement activity will not result
in a reduction in property values or a change in the character of a
residential neighborhood.
10.1024 Conditions of Approval
10.1024.10 A permit for earth products removal or placement shall specify conditions
pertaining to:
(a) Control of drainage so as to prevent any adverse impact on adjoining
parcels during and after work;
(b) Disposition of boulders, vegetation, stumps and other debris
including unused material and any structures used in connection
with the operations;
(c) The construction of necessary fencing to protect against hazards;
(d) Vegetation to remain as a visual barrier;
(e) Hours of operation;
(f) Routes for transportation of materials and method of transportation
so as to minimize impact on surrounding parcels;
(g) Setbacks of the proposed removal from public rights of way and
property lines shall be specified;
(h) The finished level and grading; and
(i) The placing of topsoil for purposes of seeding and planting to
prevent erosion or dust.
Article 10 Environmental Protection Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 10-15
10.1024.20 A permit for earth products removal, except in a stone quarry, shall specify
the following additional conditions for restoring the site upon completion
of excavation:
(a) The finished slope shall not exceed a grade of 1 foot vertical distance
for each 2 feet of horizontal distance unless stabilized in a manner
approved by the Planning Board, which may include the use of riprap
or retaining walls.
(b) Topsoil shall be placed on finished slopes to a depth of at least 6
inches and shall be seeded and planted with materials approved by
the Planning Board and the Conservation Commission.
10.1024.30 A permit for earth products removal or placement shall require the
provision of a security in a form and amount approved by the Planning
Board, sufficient to guarantee completion of the work in accordance with
the conditions in 10.1024.10 and 10.1024.20.
10.1025 Performance Standards
10.1025.10 Earth products removal and placement activities shall respect the existing
elevations at all lot lines with abutting properties, and shall not raise or
lower the finished grades at a side or rear lot line in such a way as to
create any condition that may be detrimental or depreciating to abutting
lots or uses.
10.1025.20 Any raising or lowering of finished grades or construction of drainage
facilities, swales or retaining walls at a property line shall be subject to
review and approval by the Code Official.
10.1025.30 Earth products removal and placement activities shall be designed and
carried out so that stormwater either will be infiltrated on site or will flow
to a public surface drainage system or existing natural drainage course,
both during the activity and upon completion and final grading. Such
activities shall utilize stormwater Best Management Practices as set
forth in the Planning Board’s Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.1025.40 No material used in the filling or raising of land within residential lots
shall include any garbage, ash or organic material, or any material
detrimental to the stability of the structure, as determined by the Code
Official.
10.1026 Expansion of Pre-Existing Earth Products Removal Activities
Where an earth products removal operation legally existed on a lot prior to December 18,
1995, the extension of such activity beyond the required yards of the lot, or onto an
adjacent lot in the same ownership, shall require a permit under this section and shall
not be considered an extension of a nonconforming use.

Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-1
Article 11 Site Development Standards
Section 10.1110 Off-Street Parking
Section 10.1120 Off-Street Loading
Section 10.1130 Landscaping and Screening
Section 10.1140 Outdoor Lighting
Section 10.1110 Off-Street Parking
10.1111 General
10.1111.10 The purposes of Section 10.1110 are to manage parking supply to serve
development needs without compromising community character or
contributing to increased housing development costs. These purposes will
be achieved by calibrating off-street parking requirements to demands,
promoting shared parking arrangements for complementary uses, and
providing for flexibility in the administration of off-street parking
standards.
10.1111.20 All new buildings and structures, as well as additions to or changes in
use or intensification of use in existing buildings and structures, shall be
provided with off-street parking spaces in accordance with this Section.
10.1111.30 A use that is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street
parking shall not be enlarged or altered unless off-street parking is
provided for the original building, structure or uses and all expansions,
intensifications or additions sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this
Section.
10.1112 Number of Required Parking Spaces
10.1112.10 General Requirements and Interpretation
10.1112.11 The number of required off-street parking spaces shall be
based on the uses on the lot, as specified in Section
10.1112.30.
10.1112.12 For any permitted use not covered by Section 10.1112.30,
the Code Official shall determine the closest similar use
listed in that table and require off-street parking
accordingly.
10.1112.13 Specially designated parking spaces for the physically
disabled shall be provided in compliance with the Building
Code (see International Building Code, Section 1106).
10.1112.14 The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to
allow a building or use to provide less than the minimum
number of off-street parking spaces required by Section
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-2
10.1112.30, Section 10.1112.61 or Section 10.1115.20, as
applicable, or to exceed the maximum number of off-street
parking spaces allowed by Section 10.1112.51.
10.1112.141 An application for a conditional use permit
under this section shall include a parking
demand analysis, which shall be reviewed by
the City’s Technical Advisory Committee
prior to submission to the Planning Board,
demonstrating that the proposed number of
off-street parking spaces is sufficient for
the proposed use.
10.1112.142 An application for a conditional use permit
under this section shall identify permanent
evidence-based measures to reduce parking
demand, including but not limited to provision
of rideshare/microtransit services or bikeshare
station(s) servicing the property, proximity to
public transit, car/van-pool incentives,
alternative transit subsidies, provisions for
teleworking, and shared parking on a separate
lot subject to the requirements of 10.1112.62.
10.1112.143 The Planning Board may grant a conditional
use permit only if it finds that the number of
off-street parking spaces required or allowed
by the permit will be adequate and appropriate
for the proposed use of the property. In
making this determination, the Board may
accept, modify or reject the findings of the
applicant’s parking demand analysis.
10.1112.144 At its discretion, the Planning Board may
require more off-street parking spaces than
the minimum number requested by the
applicant, or may allow fewer spaces than the
maximum number requested by the applicant.
10.1112.20 Calculation of Number of Required Spaces
10.1112.21 The number of required off-street parking spaces shall be
the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses
on a lot computed separately.
10.1112.22 Where the computation of required off-street parking
spaces results in a fractional number, the computation shall
be rounded up to the next whole number.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-3
10.1112.30 Off-Street Parking Requirements
10.1112.31 Parking Requirements for Residential Uses
10.1112.311 The required minimum number of off-street parking spaces for uses 1.10
through 1.90, including dwelling units in mixed-use developments, shall
be based on the gross floor area of each dwelling unit, as follows:
Dwelling Unit Floor Area Required Parking Spaces
Less than 500 sq. ft. 0.5 spaces per unit
500-750 sq. ft. 1.0 space per unit
Over 750 sq. ft. 1.3 spaces per unit
10.1112.312 In addition to the off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with
Sec. 10.1112.311, any dwelling or group of dwellings on a lot containing
more than 4 dwelling units shall provide one visitor parking space for
every 5 dwelling units or portion thereof.
10.1112.32 Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
10.1112.321 The required minimum number of off-street parking spaces for uses
other than 1.10 through 1.90 shall be based on the following table.
Table of Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements for Nonresidential Uses
Use No. Use Requirement
2. Institutional Residence or Care Facilities
2.10-2.20 Assisted living facility or
Residential care facility 0.5 per bed or resident
3. Educational, Religious, Charitable, Cultural and Public Uses
3.10 Place of assembly
0.4 per seat (fixed seating),
or
1 per 4 persons maximum
occupancy of assembly
area, or
Parking demand analysis
3.20 School Parking demand analysis
3.30 Historic preservation building No requirement
3.40 Museum Parking demand analysis
3.50 Performance facility
0.4 per seat (fixed seating),
or
Parking demand analysis
3.60 Cemetery No requirement
3.70 Club, fraternal or service
organization
Greater of:
- 1 per 4 persons maximum
occupancy
- 1 per 200 sf GFA
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-4
Use No. Use Requirement
3.80 Municipally operated park and related
activities No requirement
4. Recreational Uses
4.10 Religious, sectarian or private non-profit
recreational use Parking demand analysis
4.20 Cinema or similar indoor amusement
use with no live performance
0.4 per seat, or
Parking demand analysis
4.30 Indoor recreation use, such as bowling
alley or arcade
1 per 4 persons maximum
occupancy
4.40 Health club, yoga studio, martial arts
school, or similar use 1 per 250 sf GFA
4.50 Outdoor recreation use Parking demand analysis
4.60 Amusement park, water park or
theme park NA – Prohibited Use
5. Office Uses, Non-Medical
5.10-5.30 Professional, business and financial
services 1 per 350 sf GFA
5.40 Social service campus Apply standards for
component uses
5.50 Media studio 1 per 1,000 sf GFA
5.60 Publishing facility or similar electronic
production operation 1 per 1,000 sf GFA
5.70 Call Center 1 per 250 sf GFA
6. Medical Services and Health Care
6.10 Hospital Parking demand analysis
6.20 Medical offices and clinics (outpatient
only) 1 per 250 sf GFA
6.30 Clinics with inpatient care
Greater of:
- 2 per bed
- 1 per 250 sf GFA
6.40 Ambulatory surgical center 1 per 250 sf GFA
6.50 Substance abuse treatment facility Parking demand analysis
6.60 Psychiatric hospital for the criminally
insane NA – Prohibited Use
7. Services, Other Than Health Care
7.11 Family day care facility 4 spaces (including 2 for the
single-family dwelling)
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-5
Use No. Use Requirement
7.12 Group day care facility including
private preschool and kindergarten
0.5 per client or student
based on licensed
enrollment capacity
7.20-7.40 Personal services, Consumer services,
and Trade, craft and general services 1 per 400 sf GFA
7.50-7.60 Veterinary care and Laundry and dry
cleaning establishments 1 per 500 sf GFA
7.70
Undertaking establishment, funeral
parlor or mortuary chapel, excluding
crematorium
1 per 25 sf of floor area for
public occupancy
8. Retail Trade
8.10-8.90 All retail trade uses 1 per 300 sf GFA
9. Eating and Drinking Places
9.10-9.50 All eating and drinking places 1 per 100 sf GFA
10. Lodging Establishments
10.10-10.20 Boarding house or Bed and breakfast 2 + 1 per room for rent
10.30-10.40 Inn, hotel or motel
1.25 per guest room +
1 per 100 sf of lounge or
restaurant area +
1 per 25 sf of conference or
banquet facilities
10.50-10.60 Conference hotel or Conference center Parking demand analysis
11. Motor Vehicle-Related Uses
11.10,
11.30
Sales, renting or leasing of vehicles,
marine craft, power equipment, etc.
1 per 600 sf GFA +
1 per 2000 sf outside
display or storage area
11.20
Motor vehicle service station, motor
vehicle repair or washing facility for
passenger cars and light trucks
2 + 1 per 400 sf GFA
11.40 Impound lot (principal or accessory
use) No requirement
11.50 Truck fueling facility 4 spaces
11.60 Truck terminal 1 per 2000 sf GFA +
3 per loading dock
12. Marine Craft Related Uses
12.11 Non-commercial boat landings, boat
docks, boathouses, etc. No requirement
12.12 Fishing boat landing 1 4 spaces
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-6
Use No. Use Requirement
12.13 Fishing boat landing 2 Parking demand analysis
12.20-12.40
Marina, repair of commercial marine
craft and marine-related structures, or
landside support facility for
commercial passenger vessel
Parking demand analysis
13. Wholesale Trade, Warehousing and Distribution
13.10 Wholesale use 1 per 2000 sf GFA
13.20
Wholesale sales devoted to, and in the
same establishment as, a permitted
retail use
1 per 2000 sf area devoted
to wholesale
13.30 Wholesale lumber yards, lumber and
contractor sales No requirement
13.40
Warehousing or distribution of nonflammable,
non-hazardous materials, not
classified as a high hazard use
1 per 2000 sf GFA
14. Industrial Uses
14.10-14.20 Light industry or Research and
development 1 per 500 sf GFA
14.30-14.50
Food processing, Electronics
manufacturing, General
manufacturing
1 per 1000 sf GFA
14.60 Biological or chemical laboratory 1 per 500 sf GFA
14.70 Recycling facility or recycling plant No requirement
14.80
High hazard use, including other uses
listed in this section but not including
uses described in 14.90
Parking demand analysis
14.90
Storage (other than normal accessory
use), processing, disposal, or transfer of
petroleum, petrochemicals, natural gas
and liquid petroleum products, coal,
alcohol, wood pulp, solid or liquid waste,
junk or hazardous waste as classified by
Federal or State law
NA – Prohibited Use
15. Transportation and Utilities
15.10
Public or private transformer station,
substation, pumping station or automatic
telephone exchange, not including any
business office, storage yard or storage
building
No requirement
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-7
Use No. Use Requirement
15.20 Heliport or helipad No requirement
16. Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
16.10-16.40 All wireless telecommunications
facilities No requirement
17. Agricultural Uses
17.10-17.20 All agricultural use No requirement
18. Temporary Uses
18.10 Construction trailer No requirement
18.20 Temporary structure No requirement
18.30
Manufactured housing not on a
foundation, as temporary replacement
housing for a dwelling on the same lot
destroyed by natural causes
2 spaces
(single-family dwelling)
18.40
Carts or trailers, including outdoor
display area, used for the seasonal sale of
dry goods, Christmas trees, flowers,
fruits, vegetables, seasonal products and
prepared food
No requirement
19. Accessory Uses
19.10
Accessory use to a permitted principal
use (not otherwise specified in this
section), but not including any outdoor
storage
No requirement
19.20 Home occupation
No minimum requirement
(maximum 1 space for
the home occupation)
19.30 Concessions and services located within
the principal building No requirement
19.40 Drive-through facility, as accessory
use to a permitted principal use No requirement
20. Accessory Storage
20.10 –
20.60 All accessory storage uses No requirement
10.1112.322 Where the table lists a general use category without the subcategories, the
parking ratio shall apply to all subcategories within that category (for
example, the parking ratio shown for use number 2.10 applies to uses 2.11
and 2.22).
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-8
10.1112.323 Where the table indicates that the minimum required number of off-street
parking spaces shall be based on a parking demand analysis, the applicant
shall submit such analysis for review by the Planning Board. Where the
table indicates that a parking demand analysis is an alternative to a
specified ratio, the applicant may submit such analysis to justify a ratio
different from that listed in the table. In either case, the Planning Board
may approve the number of parking spaces proposed by the analysis, or
may approve a greater or lesser minimum number of parking spaces based
on its review.
10.1112.324 Where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is based on
maximum occupancy, the applicant shall submit a code analysis showing
the occupant load for the proposed use determined in accordance with the
Building Code.
10.1112.40 Reserve Parking Area
When Section 10.1112.30 requires the provision of 20 or more off-street parking
spaces, the Planning Board may approve the construction of fewer off-street parking
spaces than required, subject to the following:
10.1112.41 A “Reserve Parking Area” shall be designated that is sufficient to
accommodate the difference between the number of spaces required and
the lesser number actually provided.
10.1112.42 The site plan shall clearly delineate the Reserve Parking Area and shall
demonstrate that it is sufficient to accommodate the additional parking
spaces in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
10.1112.43 The Reserve Parking Area shall be landscaped with grass, ground covers
and/or other plant materials, but shall not be counted toward any minimum
open space requirement.
10.1112.44 The Reserve Parking Area shall not be used as snow storage area and shall
not contain any structure or mechanical equipment.
10.1112.50 Maximum and Minimum Number of Parking Spaces
10.1112.51 The number of off-street parking spaces for any building or use shall
not exceed the following amounts:
Minimum Number of Spaces
Required by Section 10.1112.30
Maximum Number of
Spaces Allowed
0-20 No maximum
21 or more 120 percent of minimum
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-9
10.1112.60 Shared Parking
10.1112.61 Methodology
Developments that contain a mix of uses on the same parcel shall reduce the number of
off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following methodology:
(1) Determine the minimum number of off-street parking spaces for each land use
within the development in accordance with Sections 10.1112.10 through 10.1112.50.
(2) Multiply the minimum parking requirement for each land use by the corresponding
parking occupancy rates for each of the five time periods set forth in Columns (B)
through (F) of the Parking Occupancy Rates table below.
Parking Occupancy Rates
(A)
Land Use
Weekday Weekend
(F)
Nighttime
(Midnight–
6:00 AM)
(B)
Daytime
(8:00 AM–
5:00 PM)
(C)
Evening
(6:00 PM–
Midnight)
(D)
Daytime
(8:00 AM–
5:00 PM)
(E)
Evening
(6:00 PM–
Midnight)
Residential 60% 100% 80% 100% 100%
Office/
Industrial 100% 20% 10% 5% 5%
Retail/Service 60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
Hotel/Motel 70% 100% 75% 100% 100%
Restaurant 70% 100% 80% 100% 10%
Entertainment 40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
Conference/
Convention 100% 100% 100% 100% 5%
Place of
Worship* 10% 5% 100% 50% 5%
Other
Institutional 100% 20% 10% 10% 5%
* For a religious use that holds its principal services on a weekday, the weekday and
weekend ratios shall be reversed.
(3) Add the resulting shared parking requirements for each time period to determine the
minimum parking requirement for that period.
The required minimum number of parking spaces for the development shall be the
highest of the five time-period totals.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-10
10.1112.62 Shared Parking on Separate Lots
The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to allow a reduction in the
number of required off-street parking spaces for uses on separate lots, whether in
common or separate ownership, subject to the following:
(1) The shared parking requirement may be determined using the methodology in
Section 10.1112.61, or by another method approved or required by the Planning
Board.
(2) The shared parking arrangement shall be secured by a covenant acceptable to the City
and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
10.1113 Location of Vehicular Use Facilities
10.1113.10 Proximity to Principal Use
10.1113.11 All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on
the same lot as the principal use they are required to serve
except as follows:
10.1113.111 Required parking spaces may be located on a
separate lot from the principal use which
they serve where a municipally owned or
operated covered parking facility is
constructed as part of the overall
development.
10.1113.112 The Board of Adjustment may authorize a
special exception for the provision of required
parking on another lot in the same ownership
as the lot in question and within 300 feet of
the property line of the lot in question.
10.1113.12 In no case shall parking be permitted within any Residential
or Mixed Residential District other than that which is
accessory to a principal use allowed within the district.
.
10.1113.20 Location of Parking Facilities on a Lot
Required off-street parking spaces shall not be located in any required
front yard, or between a principal building and a street (including on a
corner lot). This restriction shall not apply to required off-street parking
for a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.
10.1113.30 Minimum Distance from Residential and Mixed Residential
Zoning Districts
10.1113.31 Off-street parking areas, accessways, maneuvering areas
and traffic aisles serving uses in a Business or Industrial
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-11
district shall be set back from all Residential and Mixed
Residential districts as follows:
District
Minimum Distance from Residential or
Mixed Residential District
B 50 feet
GB, GW 100 feet
I, OR, WI 100 feet
10.1113.32 Off-street parking areas, accessways, maneuvering areas
and traffic aisles serving a nonresidential use on a lot in a
Mixed Residential district that abuts a Residential district
shall be set back at least 10 feet from the Residential district
boundary and shall be screened in accordance with the
screening standards of the Planning Board’s Site Plan
Review Regulations.
10.1113.40 Setback from Lot Lines
10.1113.41 Off-street parking areas, accessways, maneuvering areas
and traffic aisles serving uses in a Business or Industrial
district shall be set back from front lot lines as follows:
District Minimum Setback from Front Lot Line
B 20 feet
GB, GW 40 feet
I, OR, WI 50 feet
10.1113.42 In a Residential zoning district, off-street parking spaces
for a home occupation use, including family day care
and group day care, shall be set back at least 10 feet from
side and rear property lines and shall be screened in
accordance with the screening standards of the Planning
Board’s Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.1113.43 All required setbacks of off-street parking areas from
front property lines shall be landscaped in accordance with
the landscaping and screening standards of the Planning
Board’s Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.1114 Design of Off-Street Parking Facilities
10.1114.10 Applicability
The provisions of this Section 10.1114 shall apply to all off-street parking facilities,
whether in parking structures or surface lots, and whether or not the parking spaces are
required or in excess of the requirements for a use, except as specifically exempted
herein.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-12
10.1114.20 Stall Layout
10.1114.21 Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be laid out in compliance
with the minimum dimensions set forth in the Table of Off-Street Parking
Dimensions.
Table of Off-Street Parking Dimensions
A
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
B
Width of
Parking
Space
C
Depth of
Parking
Space
D
Width of
Maneuvering Aisle *
1-way
traffic
2-way
traffic
0° 8.5’ 20’ 14’ 24’
45° 8.5’ 19’ 16’ 24’
60° 8.5’ 19’ 18’ 24’
90° 8.5’ 19’ 24’ 24’
* The minimum width of a maneuvering aisle shall be 22 feet for
(a) an aisle for 2-way traffic providing access to fewer than 7 parking
spaces, or (b) an aisle in a parking structure for 2-way traffic, or
(c) an aisle in a parking structure for 1-way traffic with 90-degree
parking.
Key to Table of Off-Street Parking Dimensions
10.1114.22 Parking areas shall include parking spaces for the physically disabled in
compliance with the Building Code and Accessible and Usable Buildings
and Facilities (ICC/ANSI A117.1 latest edition).
10.1114.23 Parking spaces located within four feet of an abutting structure,
sidewalk, or public street shall be designed with suitable bumper stops.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-13
10.1114.24 Parking areas and access drives shall be surfaced with a durable surface
that meets the load bearing maximum occupancy of the project;
minimizes dust, material tracking and erosion; and facilitates snow
removal. Examples of such materials include, but are not limited to,
bituminous binder, concrete, asphalt, compacted gravel and crushed stone.
Pervious surfaces may be used provided that they meet the above
objectives and provide equivalent protection of surface and groundwater
resources.
10.1114.25 Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, all off-street parking
spaces shall be marked and maintained to provide delineation between
parking stalls and aisles.
10.1114.30 Vehicular Circulation
10.1114.31 Access to and egress from all parking areas shall be only via driveways
which meet the standards for “General Accessway and Driveway Design”
in the Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.1114.32 Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, all off-street parking
areas shall be designed so that:
(a) Vehicles can enter and leave each parking space without passing
over any other parking space or requiring the moving of any other
vehicle, and
(b) Vehicles can enter and leave the parking area without backing into or
from a public street or way.
10.1114.33 Notwithstanding the previous provision, tandem parking spaces may be
provided for required off-street parking spaces serving dwelling units in
residential and mixed-use developments, subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Tandem spaces shall be assigned to the same dwelling unit.
(b) Tandem parking shall not be used to provide guest parking.
(c) Two parking spaces in tandem shall have a combined minimum
dimension of 9 feet in width by 38 feet in length.
10.1114.40 Pedestrian Circulation
Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, all off-street parking areas shall
incorporate the following provisions for pedestrian circulation:
10.1114.41 A minimum 5-foot wide pedestrian path shall be provided throughout the
site, connecting adjacent streets, accessways, sidewalks and parking
areas to the entrances of all structures.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-14
10.1114.42 Pedestrian areas shall be clearly distinguished from vehicular and bicycle
traffic areas through the use of paving materials, landscaping buffers, or
other means.
10.1114.43 Continuous off-street vehicle routes shall be no more than 200 feet in
length before interruption by pedestrian crosswalks over speed tables,
T-intersections or other design elements to calm vehicle movement on site.
10.1115 Off-Street Parking Provisions in the Downtown Overlay District
10.1115.10 Purpose
10.1115.11 This Section 10.1115 establishes modified off-street
parking standards for lots in the Downtown Overlay District
in recognition of the availability of municipal on-street and
off-street parking facilities, private shared parking
facilities, and public transit, and the pedestrian-oriented
pattern of lots and uses.
10.1115.12 Except as specifically modified by this Section 10.1115, lots
in the Downtown Overlay District shall comply with all
other provisions of Section 10.1110.
10.1115.20 Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
10.1115.21 The following requirements shall apply in the Downtown
Overlay District in lieu of the requirements in Section
10.1112.30:
Use Required Parking Spaces
Residential use (dwelling) Same as Section 10.1112.30
Hotel or motel 0.75 space per guest room, plus 1
space per 25 sf of conference or
banquet facilities
Other nonresidential use No requirement
10.1115.22 The requirements in Section 10.1115.21 shall be applied to
all uses on a lot, and not to individual uses.
10.1115.23 For any lot, the number of off-street parking spaces that
would be required by applying the ratios in Section
10.1115.21 shall be reduced by 4 spaces. (Therefore, any lot
that would be required to provide 4 or fewer off-street
parking spaces shall not be required to provide any spaces.)
10.1115.24 The provisions of Section 10.1112.50, Maximum Number of
Parking Facilities, shall not apply to buildings and uses
within the Downtown Overlay District.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-15
10.1116 Bicycle Parking
10.1116.10 Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required
10.1116.11 Off-street parking of bicycles shall be provided as follows, up to a
maximum of 30 bicycle spaces:
Multifamily dwellings 1 bicycle space for each 5 dwelling units
or portion thereof
Elementary, middle and high
schools
1 bicycle space for each 4 students
All other uses, except as
exempted in Section
10.1116.14
1 bicycle space for each 10 automobile
parking spaces or fraction thereof
required by Section 10.1112.30 or
Section 10.1115.21, as applicable
10.1116.12 When the Planning Board approves the construction of fewer off-street
parking spaces than would normally be required under Section 10.1112.30
or Section 10.1115.21 (for example, when a Reserve Parking Area is
provided under Section 10.1112.40), or when Board of Adjustment grants a
variance from the required number of off-street parking spaces, the
required number of bicycle parking spaces shall be based on the number of
such spaces that would be required without such reduction or variance.
10.1116.13 In addition to the number of bicycle parking spaces required under Section
10.1116.11 and 10.1116.12, any nonresidential use may substitute bicycle
parking spaces for up to 5 percent of the required automobile parking
spaces at the following ratios: 1 required automobile space may be
replaced by 6 bicycle spaces or by 2 bicycle lockers.
10.1116.14 The following uses are exempt from providing bicycle parking spaces:
Use No. Use
1.10 Single-family dwelling
1.20 Accessory dwelling unit
1.25 Garden cottage
1.30 Two-family dwelling
2.10 Assisted living facility
2.20 Residential care facility
7.10 Day care
7.70 Undertaking establishment
11.10-11.60 Motor vehicle related uses
12.10-12.40 Marine craft related uses
13.10-13.40 Wholesale trade, warehousing and distribution
14.70 Recycling facility or recycling plant
14.80 High hazard use
17.10-17.20 Agricultural uses
19.10-19.40 Accessory uses
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-16
10.1116.15 Bicycle parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with standards set
forth in the Site Plan Review Regulations.
Section 10.1120 Off-Street Loading
10.1121 General Requirements
10.1121.10 All new structures, additions to existing structures, and changes and
intensification of use in existing structures shall be provided with offstreet
loading areas in accordance with this Section, except in Character
Districts 4 W, 4 and 5 (CD4-W, CD4 and CD5) and the Downtown
Overlay District.
10.1121.20 No loading areas shall be required in Character Districts 4-W, 4 and 5
(CD4-W, CD4 and CD5) and the Downtown Overlay District.
10.1122 Number of Loading Areas
10.1122.10 Off-street loading spaces shall be provided according to the following
ratios:
Use Gross Floor Area (sf) Required
Spaces
Industrial Up to 10,000 sq. ft. 0
10,001 - 40,000 sq. ft. 1
40,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. 2
100,001 - 200,000 sq. ft. 3
Each additional 200,000 sq. ft. 1
Office /
Professional Service
Up to 10,000 sq. ft. 0
10,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. 1
100,001 - 350,000 sq. ft. 2
Each additional 350,000 sq. ft. 1
Retail Up to 10,000 sq. ft. 0
10,001 - 25,000 sq. ft. 1
25,001 - 60,000 sq. ft. 2
60,001 - 120,000 sq. ft. 3
Each additional 100,000 sq. ft. 1
Other Non-Residential Up to 10,000 sq. ft. 0
10,001 - 40,000 sq. ft. 1
Each additional 60,000 sq. ft. 1
10.1122.20 In case of mixed uses, the loading areas required shall be the sum of all
requirements computed on the basis of the above table.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-17
10.1123 Loading Area Dimensions
All required loading areas shall conform to the following dimensional standards:
Minimum vertical clearance: 14 feet
Minimum width of loading area: 12 feet
Minimum length of loading area:
First required loading area: 20 feet
Additional required loading areas: 45 feet
10.1124 Location of Loading Areas
10.1124.10 Loading areas shall not be located between the front property line and any
building or structure nor in a required side yard or rear yard.
10.1124.20 No off-street loading or maneuvering areas shall be nearer than 100 feet to
any adjoining Residential or Mixed Residential Districts and shall be
screened in accord with Section 10.1130 and the Planning Board’s Site
Plan Regulations.
10.1124.30 No off-street loading areas shall be a part of an area used to satisfy the offstreet
parking requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 10.1130 Landscaping and Screening
10.1131 General
All multifamily residential and nonresidential development of land shall provide
landscaping and screening as required by the Site Plan Review Regulations.
10.1132 Screening of Dumpsters
All dumpsters shall be screened as follows:
10.1132.10 Natural screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs/trees planted in a line to
form a continuous screen and growing to a height of 6 feet within 3 years.
The remaining portion of the screening area shall consist of large and small
trees, grass, flower beds, or other vegetative groundcover planted to fully
cover the ground surface of the area within 3 years.
10.1132.20 A 6-foot high fence or masonry wall may be substituted for natural
screening if approved by the Planning Board. The wall or fence shall be
placed on the exterior side of any landscaping.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-18
Section 10.1140 Outdoor Lighting
10.1141 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to enhance public safety and welfare by providing for
adequate and appropriate outdoor lighting, providing for lighting that will complement
the character of the City, reduce glare, minimize light trespass, reduce the cost and
waste of unnecessary energy consumption, and prevent the degradation of the night sky.
10.1142 General Requirement and Applicability
10.1142.10 All public and private new or replacement outdoor lighting installed in
the City of Portsmouth shall be in conformance with the requirements
established by this Ordinance.
10.1142.20 Any luminaire that does not conform to the standards of this Ordinance
but was lawfully in place prior to the adoption of these standards shall be
permitted to remain. However, any luminaire that replaces a nonconforming
luminaire, or any nonconforming luminaire that is moved, must
meet the standards of this Ordinance.
10.1142.30 The following types of lighting are exempt from the requirements of this
section:
10.1142.31 All temporary lighting required for construction projects
related to road construction and repair, installation of sewer
and water facilities, and other public infrastructure.
10.1142.32 All temporary emergency lighting needed by the police or
fire departments or other emergency services, as well as all
vehicular luminaires.
10.1142.33 State or Federal regulated lighting such as airports, towers
requiring lighting, highway signage and traffic signals, etc.
10.1142.34 Low wattage or low voltage temporary decorative lighting
used for holidays, festivals and special events, provided they
do not pose a safety or nuisance problem due to light
trespass or glare.
10.1143 Total Outdoor Light Output Allowance
10.1143.10 Total outdoor light output for a parcel shall not exceed the lumen limits
given in the following table. Values in this table are upper limits and not
design goals; design goals should be the lowest levels that meet
requirements of the task.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-19
Zoning Districts
Maximum
Mean Lumens
Per Net Acre
Airport District (AIR) Exempt
All Business Districts, except within the
Historic District
All Industrial Districts
Airport Industrial, Pease Industrial, Airport
Business Commercial
300,000
All Residential Districts
All Mixed Residential Districts
All Conservation Districts
Historic District
55,000
10.1143.20 The total lumens shall be 100 percent of the lumens from outdoor light
fixtures installed on grade, on poles, and on the top or sides of buildings or
other structures.
10.1143.30 “Net acres” shall mean the total parcel area excluding the area of
(a) proposed and existing streets within the parcel, and (b) sports playing
fields exempted from the lumens per acre cap under Section 10.1143.50.
10.1143.40 Outdoor lighting fixtures meeting one of the following conditions shall
not be counted in determining the total light output:
(a) Full cut-off fixtures installed under canopies, building overhangs, or
roof eaves.
(b) Light fixtures shielded by the canopy, building overhang, or roof
eaves in such a manner that no lamp or vertical element of a lens or
diffuser is visible from off-site.
10.1143.50 Sports venue lighting is exempt from any lumens per acre standard for the
playing field only.
10.1144 Luminaire Design and Height
10.1144.10 Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1,800
lumens (and any flood or spot luminaires of more than 900 lumens) shall
be a full-cutoff fixture and shall not emit any direct light above a
horizontal plane passing through the lowest part of the light-emitting
luminaire.
10.1144.20 Any luminaire, regardless of lumen rating, shall be equipped with
whatever additional shielding, lenses, or cutoff devices are required to
prevent light trespass onto any residential property that adjoins or is
directly across a street, highway or stream from the lot on which the
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-20
luminaire is located, and to prevent glare perceptible to persons on such
residential property.
10.1144.30 Building façades may be illuminated with low intensity lighting as
follows:
10.1144.21 The light source for the building façade illumination shall
be concealed.
10.1144.22 Building entrances may be illuminated using recessed
lighting in overhangs and soffits, or by use of spotlighting
focused on the building entrances with the light source
concealed (e.g., in landscaped areas).
10.1144.23 Direct lighting of limited exterior building areas is permitted
when necessary for security purposes.
10.1144.40 Increased lighting interrupts or changes the natural duration of night light
and can prevent some trees from going into dormancy, thereby making
them more susceptible to winter weather and can decrease their
effectiveness in tolerating pollution.
10.1144.41 Wherever possible, placement of lighting should be done in
such a way as to direct light away from trees.
10.1144.42 When lighting will be directed at trees, high pressure sodium
lamps and any incandescent lamps are not allowed.
10.1144.43 When planting trees where supplemental lighting already
exists, trees shall be selected that have low sensitivity to
light.
10.1144.50 A flood or spot luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens or
less may be used without restriction to light distribution, provided that it is
aimed, directed, or focused so as not to cause direct light from the
luminaire to be directed toward any residential property that adjoins or is
directly across a street, highway or stream from the lot on which the
luminaire is located, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating
motor vehicles on public ways.
10.1144.60 The maximum mounting height of a luminaire shall be 20 feet above
grade except as follows:
10.1144.61 Flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at 900
lumens or less, and other luminaires with a lamp or lamps
rated at a total of 1800 lumens or less, may be used without
restriction to mounting height.
10.1144.62 Luminaires used for public-roadway illumination may be
installed at a maximum height of 25 feet and may be
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-21
positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering
property.
10.1144.63 Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be
mounted at any height to a maximum of 25 feet, regardless
of lumen rating.
10.1144.64 Luminaires used for athletic fields are exempt from the
height limitations.
10.1145 Hours of Operation
10.1145.10 Outdoor lighting shall not be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. with the following exceptions:
10.1145.11 If the use is being operated, such as a business open to
customers, or where employees are working or where an
institution or place of public assembly is conducting an
activity, normal illumination shall be allowed during the
activity and for not more than one hour after the activity
ceases.
10.1145.12 Low level lighting sufficient for the security of persons or
property on the lot may be in operation between 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 am, provided the average illumination on the
ground or on any vertical surface is not greater than 0.5 footcandles.
10.1146 Recreational Facilities
10.1146.10 Any light source permitted by this Ordinance may be used for lighting of
outdoor recreational facilities (public or private), such as, but not limited
to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, tennis
courts, or show areas, provided all of the following conditions are met:
10.1146.11 All fixtures used for lighting recreational fields and facilities
shall be full-cutoff fixtures.
10.1146.12 All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve no
greater than the minimal illuminance levels for the activity
as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IESNA).
10.1146.13 All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity
before or as near to 11:00 pm as practical, but under no
circumstances shall any illumination of the playing field,
court, or track be permitted after 11:00 pm except to
conclude a scheduled event that was in progress before 11:00
pm and circumstances prevented concluding before 11:00
pm.
Article 11 Site Development Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 11-22
10.1147 Outdoor Display Lots
10.1147.10 Any light source permitted by this Ordinance may be used for lighting of
outdoor display lots as defined by this Ordinance, provided that both of the
following conditions are met:
10.1147.11 All fixtures used for lighting the display lots shall be fullcutoff
fixtures.
10.1147.12 All lighting installations shall be designed to achieve no
greater than the minimal illuminance levels for the activity
as recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America (IESNA).
10.1148 Temporary Outdoor Lighting
10.1148.10 Any temporary outdoor lighting that conforms to the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary outdoor lighting
may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment after considering:
(a) the public and/or private benefits that will result from the temporary
lighting;
(b) any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the
temporary lighting; and
(c) the duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting.
10.1148.20 The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed temporary
nonconforming lighting to the Board of Adjustment and shall comply
with all procedures for special exceptions as stated in Article 2.
10.1149 Prohibitions
The following uses and types of lighting are prohibited:
10.1149.10 The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor
advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal.
10.1149.20 The operation of searchlights except by civil authorities for public safety.
10.1149.30 The nighttime use of white or white strobe lighting on communication
towers unless written proof of FAA requirement is provided.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-1
Article 12 Signs
Section 10.1210 Purpose and Intent
Section 10.1220 General Sign Regulations
Section 10.1230 Sign Districts
Section 10.1240 Permitted Sign Types
Section 10.1250 Sign Dimensional Standards
Section 10.1260 Sign Illumination
Section 10.1270 Additional Sign Regulations
Section 10.1280 Nonconforming Signs
Section 10.1290 Sign Definitions
Section 10.1210 Purpose and Intent
10.1211 The purpose of this Article is to regulate the type, number, location, size
and illumination of signs on private property in order to maintain and
enhance the character of the city’s commercial districts and residential
neighborhoods and to protect the public from hazardous and distracting
displays.
10.1212 This Article is intended to permit signs only as accessory uses to a
permitted use on the same lot and not as principal uses on a lot. When a
principal commercial use or activity is not open to the public or has been
abandoned, all allowed accessory signs shall be removed regardless of
their content.
10.1213 This Article is not intended to regulate the content of signs except as
follows:
10.1213.10 When a sign is allowed because it is necessary to identify a
building address or for safe access to or egress from the lot,
only that relevant message may be presented.
10.1213.20 A sign that advertises a product or service not available on
the lot (an “off-premise sign”) is not permitted. However,
when a sign is permitted as accessory to a commercial use,
the sign may contain a noncommercial message instead of a
commercial message.
Section 10.1220 General Sign Regulations
10.1221 Sign Permits
10.1221.10 No sign shall be erected without a sign permit issued by the Code
Official except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance or a
decision by the Board of Adjustment.
10.1221.20 No sign permit will be issued for any premises on which there is an
outstanding violation of any part of this Ordinance.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-2
10.1221.30 In the Historic District, a sign that violates any requirement of this Article,
including the design standards set forth in Section 10.1274, shall require a
Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic District Commission
(HDC) under Section 10.630, in addition to the sign permit issued by the
Code Official.
10.1221.40 Any sign located within a public right of way, including a projecting sign
that extends over the public right of way, requires City Council approval
and license in accordance with Chapter 8 of the municipal code.
10.1222 Signs Not Requiring A Permit
The following signs are permitted without a sign permit and shall not be included in the
calculation for aggregate signage on a lot:
10.1222.10 Signs required, or deemed necessary for the public welfare and safety, by a
municipal, state or federal agency, such as traffic control devices.
10.1222.20 Signs with a sign area up to 4 square feet containing only content of a
general directive or informational nature such as the following:
(a) Identifying a building address or unit number;
(b) Directing or guiding to entrances, exits or parking areas;
(c) Identifying handicapped parking, no parking, or loading areas;
(d) Identifying or directing to a public service facility or accommodation;
(e) Identifying an official inspection station;
(f) Notices concerning restrictions on access to private property (e.g., no
trespassing, no hunting, etc.).
12.1222.21 All such signs shall be located so as not to create a traffic
safety hazard or to block line of sight from a motor vehicle.
12.1222.22 A freestanding sign under this provision shall comply with
the height standards for freestanding signs in Section
10.1223.33.
12.1222.23 A sign pertaining to public parking in a private parking lot
that has been authorized under a permit from the Department
of Public Works is exempt regardless of sign area.
10.1222.30 One building identification sign per lot, composed of either (a) unpainted
letters carved into, embedded in or embossed on the material of the
building wall above the first story with a sign area up to 12 square feet;
or (b) a metal plaque affixed to the building wall no more than 5 feet
above ground level, with a sign area up to 4 square feet. Such signs are
typically used to provide historical information about the building such as
the name of the building or the date of its construction.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-3
10.1222.40 Miscellaneous signs mounted on a wall, window or door at a building
entrance, provided that (a) there shall be only one group of such signs per
entrance; (b) each group of such signs shall not exceed 4 square feet in
area (measured as a single sign in accordance with Section 10.1252) and
shall be placed within 3 feet of the entrance; (c) no individual sign in the
sign group shall exceed one square foot in area; and (d) no letter, character,
image or graphic shall be more than 2 inches in height. The intent of this
provision is to allow for the provision of information that is not intended to
be read from more than 3 feet from the sign, including but not limited to
restaurant menus, credit card stickers, hours of operation, owner and
contact information, etc.
10.1222.50 Internal signs.
10.1222.60 Illuminated signs more than 3 feet behind any window or opening through
which they might be visible from private or public right of way.
10.1222.70 Flags that are either (a) attached to a building or to a pole projecting no
more than 6 feet from a building or (b) mounted on a flagpole. These shall
be limited in number and size as follows:
10.1222.71 Each lot may have up to 3 flags (free-standing or attached to
a building) that are up to 12 sq. ft. in area (per flag) in Sign
District 1, up to 24 sq. ft. in Sign Districts 2 and 3, and up to
60 sq. ft. in Sign Districts 4, 5 and 6.
10.1222.72 In addition to the above, each dwelling unit or
condominium unit on a lot may have up to one flag not
exceeding 6 sq. ft. in area attached to the dwelling unit or
condominium unit.
10.1222.80 Signs on registered motor vehicles that are used in the ordinary conduct of
a business, but not including signs on vehicles that are parked on, or in
view of, a street when the vehicle is not actively being used in the conduct
of business.
10.1222.90 Low wattage or low voltage temporary decorative lighting and displays
used for holidays, festivals and special events, provided they do not pose a
safety or nuisance problem due to light trespass or glare.
10.1223 Temporary Signs
10.1223.10 The following temporary signs are allowed without a sign permit and
shall not be included in the calculation for aggregate signage on a lot:
10.1223.11 One temporary sign placed on a lot while the lot (or a
dwelling unit or commercial unit on the lot) is being
offered for sale or lease by a real estate agent or through
advertising in a local newspaper of general circulation, and
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-4
for a period of 14 days following the date on which a
contract of sale or lease has been executed.
10.1223.12 Temporary signs placed on a lot that is under active
development, to be removed within 14 days after issuance of
the first certificate of occupancy.
10.1223.13 Temporary signs placed on a lot for a period of 120 days
prior to, and 14 days after, an election.
10.1223.14 Temporary signs with the following square footage or less:
Sign District 1 or 2 6 sq. ft.
Sign District 3 16 sq. ft.
Sign District 4, 5 or 6 32 sq. ft.
10.1223.20 The following temporary signs are allowed with the issuance of a sign
permit:
10.1223.21 One temporary sign placed on a lot for more than 90 days
while the lot (or a dwelling unit or commercial unit on the
lot) is being offered for sale or lease.
10.1223.22 Temporary signs placed on a lot that is under active
development for more than 14 days after issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy, but not to exceed 60 days after the
issuance of said certificate.
10.1223.30 The following provisions apply to all temporary signs whether requiring
a sign permit or allowed without a permit:
10.1223.31 The maximum sign area of a temporary sign allowed by
this section shall be as follows:
Sign District 1 or 2 16 sq. ft.
Sign District 3 32 sq. ft.
Sign District 4, 5 or 6 64 sq. ft.
10.1223.32 The maximum height of a temporary freestanding sign
shall be as follows:
Sign District 1, 2 or 3 4 ft.
Sign District 4, 5 or 6 12 ft.
10.1223.33 A temporary freestanding sign shall comply with the
required setback for the applicable sign district as set forth
in Section 10.1253.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-5
10.1223.34 A property owner may not accept a fee for posting or
maintaining a temporary sign allowed by this Section
10.1223, and any sign that is posted or maintained in
violation of this provision is not authorized.
10.1223.40 Special Event Signs
In addition to other permanent and temporary signs allowed by this
Article, one sign may be placed on a lot immediately preceding and during
a special event on that lot, subject to the following conditions:
10.1223.41 A sign permit for the special event sign shall be obtained
from the Code Official. Only one permit for a special event
sign shall be issued for a lot in any 3-month period.
10.1223.42 A lot may have one special event sign for one consecutive
7-day period every 3 months, for a maximum of 4 special
event signs per year. If a special event sign permit is not
used in one quarter it shall not be carried over to the next
quarter.
10.1223.43 The special event sign shall not be limited to size or
location, but shall not be placed in such a manner as to create
a traffic safety problem.
10.1223.44 The special event sign shall be removed at the end of the
event.
10.1224 Signs Prohibited in All Districts
The following signs are prohibited in all sign districts:
10.1224.10 Animated signs.
10.1224.20 Signs that move or flash, or give the appearance of such motion (for
example, by means of traveling lights). Beacons, rotating and flashing
lights are prohibited except where such lighting devices are deemed
necessary for the public safety and welfare by federal, state or municipal
authorities.
10.1224.30 Banners, pennants or flags (except as permitted by Section 10.1222.70)
which are signs under the definition of “sign” herein.
10.1224.40 Balloons or other inflated devices displayed more than one day per month.
10.1224.50 Mobile signs.
10.1224.60 Signs mounted, attached or painted on vehicles, trailers or boats, except as
permitted by Section 10.1222.90.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-6
10.1224.70 Any sign emitting sound.
10.1224.80 Any sign projected via illumination on the exterior of any structure, or
on or above a surface such as a driveway, sidewalk or street, regardless
of the technology used to project the sign. This prohibition shall not apply
where the structure or surface on which the sign is projected is within the
same lot as the principal use to which the sign is accessory.
10.1224.90 Any sign advertising a product or service not provided on the lot on which
the sign is located (“off-premise sign”).
10.1225 Maintenance of Signs
10.1225.10 All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a
neat and proper state of maintenance and appearance.
10.1225.20 Any sign of any type and located within any district which is found by the
Code Official to be in a state of disrepair, illegible or dangerous, shall be
repaired or removed.
10.1225.30 Upon failure to comply with an order to repair or remove a sign within
thirty days, the Code Official is authorized to cause removal of the sign at
the expense of the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
Section 10.1230 Sign Districts
10.1231 The City is hereby divided into sign districts for the purpose of establishing
standards for the number, type, size, location and illumination of signs.
These sign districts are overlay districts. A property shall be subject to
the regulations of both the sign district and the underlying zoning district.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-7
10.1232 Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, the sign districts shall correspond
to underlying zoning districts as follows:
Sign Districts Underlying Zoning Districts
Sign District 1 All Rural and Residential Districts
Natural Resource Protection
Sign District 2 Mixed Residential Office
Mixed Residential Business
Waterfront Business
Character District 4-L1
Character District 4-L2
Sign District 3 Character District 4-W
Character District 4
Character District 5
Sign District 4 Business
Office Research
Sign District 5 General Business
Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use
Corridor
Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use
Center
Sign District 6 Industrial
Waterfront Industrial
Airport Districts
10.1233 In order to address the characteristics of a specific area or its surroundings,
an area may be changed to a different sign district than specified in Section
10.1232 following the same procedures as for a change in the underlying
zoning district. (For example, a portion of the General Business district
may be changed from Sign District 5 to Sign District 2 in order to protect
an adjacent neighborhood from excessive light.)
10.1234 Any sign not specifically allowed in a sign district is not permitted.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-8
Section 10.1240 Permitted Sign Types
10.1241 The types of signs permitted in each sign district shall be as set forth in
the following table, except as otherwise provided herein.
Table of Permitted Sign Types
Sign District
1 2 3 4 5 6
Freestanding sign N P P P P P
Wall sign P P P P P P
Projecting sign P P P P P P
Parapet sign N N N N P P
Roof sign N N N N P P
Awning sign N P P P P P
Marquee sign N P P P P P
Canopy sign N N N P P P
Changeable or animated signs
Animated sign N N N N N N
Changeable sign N P P P P P
P = Permitted N = Prohibited
10.1242 Each side of a building facing a street may have one parapet sign (if
permitted by Section 10.1241) or one wall sign above the ground floor.
10.1243 Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted per lot, except that a lot
with more than one driveway may have one freestanding sign at the
site’s primary driveway and one smaller freestanding sign at each
additional driveway complying with the area and height standards in
Section 10.1251.30.
Section 10.1250 Sign Dimensional Standards
10.1251 Sign Area
10.1251.10 The maximum aggregate sign area shall be as follows:
Sign District
1 2 3 4 5 6
Per linear foot of building frontage
per establishment 0.5 1.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 2.0
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-9
10.1251.20 The maximum sign area for individual signs shall be as follows:
Sign District
1 2 3 4 5 6
Freestanding sign n/a 20 20 100 100 150
Wall sign 4 16 40 200 200 100
Projecting sign
Ground floor use 2 16 12 16 16 16
Upper-floor use n/a 0 8 8 8 8
Parapet sign n/a n/a n/a n/a 100 150
Roof sign n/a n/a n/a n/a 200 100
Awning sign n/a 16 20 20 20 20
Marquee sign n/a 16 20 20 20 20
Canopy sign n/a n/a n/a 20 20 20
All dimensions in square feet n/a = not applicable (sign type not permitted)
n.r = no requirement
10.1251.30 When a lot has more than one freestanding sign, the freestanding sign
at the site’s primary driveway shall comply with the maximum sign area
specified in Section 10.1251.20 and the maximum sign height specified in
Section 10.1253.10; and the freestanding signs at other driveways shall
comply with the following standards:
Sign
District
On same street as
primary driveway
On different street from
primary driveway
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Sign Height
Maximum
Sign Area
Maximum
Sign Height
2 10 sq. ft. 5 ft. 10 sq. ft. 5 ft.
3 10 sq. ft. 5 ft. 20 sq. ft. 5 ft.
4 20 sq. ft. 12 ft. 40 sq. ft. 12 ft.
5 40 sq. ft. 12 ft. 75 sq. ft. 15 ft.
6 40 sq. ft. 12 ft. 75 sq. ft. 15 ft.
10.1251.40 A sign projected via illumination on the exterior of a structure, or on or
above a surface such as a driveway, sidewalk or street, shall comply
with the sign area requirements for a wall sign.
10.1252 Measurement of Sign Area
10.1252.10 Sign area shall be measured in one of the following ways, at the
applicant’s discretion:
(a) the area that can be enclosed by one polygon with no more than eight
sides; or
(b) the area that can be enclosed by a circle, oval, triangle or rectangle,
or any two such shapes.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-10
10.1252.20 The sign area of a freestanding sign shall include all structural supports
whether or not they contribute through shape, color or otherwise to the
sign’s message, except as follows:
10.1252.21 The base of a monument sign, up to one foot above the
ground, shall not be included in the computation of sign
area provided that such base is not illuminated in any way.
Height of base is
less than one foot –
Not included in sign area
Height of base is one foot –
Not included in sign area
Height of base is
greater than one foot –
Included in sign area
10.1252.22 The vertical supports of a pole sign shall not be included in
the computation of sign area, provided that (1) the total
width of all such supports is less than one-third of the width
of the sign, and (2) the supports are not illuminated in any
way.
Total width of supports is
less than 1/3 of the width of
the sign –
Not included in sign area
Total width of supports is
greater than 1/3 of the width
of the sign –
Included in sign area
Width of support is greater
than 1/3 of the width of the
sign –
Included in sign area
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-11
Width of support is
approximately 1/3 of the
width of the sign
10.1252.30 For a sign that is painted or engraved on, or otherwise applied directly to, a
building or other structure, the sign area shall include any background
of a different color, material or appearance from the remainder of the wall
or structure, and shall include all related text, images and graphics.
10.1252.40 The sign area of a canopy sign shall include all text and symbols,
whether or not illuminated, and all illuminated areas; but shall not include
non-illuminated areas that are distinguished from the background only by
color stripes.
10.1252.50 The sign area of a projecting sign shall not include the area of
supporting brackets with no text, images or graphics.
10.1252.60 Where a sign has two faces that are parallel or where the interior angle
formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, only one display space shall be
measured in computing total sign area.
10.1252.70 The sign area of a spherical, free-form, sculptural or otherwise non-planar
sign shall be equal to 75 percent of the areas of the 4 vertical sides of the
smallest rectangular box that will encompass the sign.
10.1252.80 Decorative lighting on a building or structure, including neon and other
accent lighting, and any illuminated building panel, shall be considered a
wall sign for the purposes of this section, and shall be counted as part of
the aggregate sign area allowed.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-12
10.1253 Sign Height and Setback
10.1253.10 The maximum and minimum heights and minimum setbacks for signs in
each sign district shall be as set forth in the following table, except as
otherwise provided herein.
Table of Sign Height and Setback Requirements
Sign District
1 2 3 4 5 6
Projecting sign
Minimum clearance
(ground to bottom of sign)
7 7 7 7 7 7
Freestanding sign
Minimum setback from lot
line
n/a 5 5 20 10 20
Maximum height
(ground to top of sign)
n/a 7 12 20 20 20
All dimensions in feet n/a = not applicable
10.1253.20 Where a driveway intersects with a street, no sign shall be erected or
maintained between the heights of 2.5 feet and 10 feet above the edge of
pavement grades within the area bounded by (a) the side lines of the
driveway and street and (b) lines joining points along said side lines 20
feet from the point of intersection.
10.1253.30 The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured with respect to the
elevation of the centerline of the adjacent public right-of-way.
10.1253.40 The setback of a sign from a lot line shall be measured as the shortest
horizontal distance from the lot line to the any part of the sign, whether or
not such part of the sign is at ground level.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-13
10.1253.50 A projecting sign shall project no closer than 1 foot to the edge of the
vehicular travel way, if any.
Section 10.1260 Sign Illumination
10.1261 Types of Illumination
10.1261.10 Signs may only be illuminated as set forth in the following table, except as
otherwise provided herein.
Table of Sign Illumination Requirements
Sign District
1 2 3 4 5 6
External illumination N P P P P P
Halo lettering N P P P P P
Internal illumination
Freestanding sign N P N P P P
Wall sign N P P P P P
Projecting sign N N N N N N
Parapet sign n/a N N N P P
Roof sign n/a N N N P P
Awning sign n/a N P N P P
Marquee sign n/a N P N P N
Canopy sign n/a n/a n/a P P P
Direct illumination N N P P P P
P = Permitted N = Prohibited n/a = not applicable (sign type not permitted)
10.1261.20 Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
10.1261.30 Signs in the Historic District shall be illuminated only by external
illumination, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 10.1261.
10.1262 Hours of Illumination
Signs shall not be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except that signs may
be illuminated during the operation of a use or activity that is open to customers or the
public, and for not more than one hour after the activity ceases.
10.1263 Illumination Standards
10.1263.10 A light source for external illumination of a sign shall be mounted and
shielded so that said light source is not visible three feet above grade at the
lot line and so that the lighting is confined to the area of the sign.
10.1263.20 A light source for internal illumination of a sign constructed of translucent
materials and wholly illuminated from within shall not require
shielding.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-14
10.1263.30 A sign or its illuminator shall not by reason of its location, shape or color
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or be confused with or obstruct
the view or effectiveness of any official traffic signal or traffic marking.
10.1263.40 Illuminance of the sign face shall not exceed the following standards:
10.1263.41 External illumination: 50 foot-candles as measured on the
sign face.
10.1263.42 Internal illumination: 5,000 nits (candelas per square
meter) during daylight hours, and 500 nits between dusk and
dawn, as measured at the sign’s face.
10.1263.43 Direct illumination: 5,000 nits during daylight hours, and
500 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured at the sign’s
face.
10.1263.50 Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent
practicable. Light fixtures including bulbs or tubes used for sign
illumination shall be selected and positioned to achieve the desired
brightness of the sign with the minimum possible wattage, while ensuring
compliance with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
10.1263.60 A sign using direct illumination shall consist only of letters, numbers
and other common typographical characters, all of which shall be in no
more than three colors against a dark background, and the total illuminated
area shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the sign.
Section 10.1270 Additional Sign Regulations
10.1271 Signs on More Than One Façade of a Building
10.1271.10 A use in a building with more than one exterior wall facing a street may
have signs on each such wall.
10.1271.20 An establishment with a public entrance on a side of the building not
facing a street may have signs on that side as well as on the street-facing
wall(s).
10.1271.30 Regardless of the location of signs, the maximum sign area per
establishment shall be based only on the building frontage as defined in
Section 10.1290.
10.1272 Roof Signs
10.1272.10 A roof sign shall be parallel to the main façade of the building on which
it is mounted,
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-15
10.1272.20 A roof sign on a pitched, hip, gambrel or mansard roof shall not extend
above the elevation midway between the level of the eaves and the highest
point of the roof. A roof sign is not permitted on a flat roof.
10.1272.30 The maximum height of a roof sign shall not exceed the lesser of 36
inches or 25% of the vertical height of the roof.
10.1273 Marquee Signs
10.1273.10 All text, images and other graphics on a marquee sign shall be displayed
on the outside vertical faces of the marquee, and shall be no more than 1.5
feet tall.
10.1273.20 The sign area of a marquee sign shall be included in the maximum
aggregate sign area allowed for the lot.
10.1274 Relation of Sign to Building Façade in the Historic District
In the Historic District, a wall sign or projecting sign should align with some
horizontal element on the façade. For example, the top of the sign may align with the
top of the window, the bottom of the sign may align with the bottom of the window, the
bottom of sign may align with the top of the lintel, etc.
10.1275 Interim Signs
An interim sign may be erected while awaiting arrival of a permanent sign for which a
sign permit has been issued. -The interim sign shall conform to the same dimensional
and other requirements as the approved permanent sign and shall be allowed only until
the permanent sign is installed or for 60 days, whichever is the shorter period of time. A
sign permit for an interim sign must be obtained from the Code Official.
Section 10.1280 Nonconforming Signs
10.1281 A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be brought into
conformity with this Ordinance if it is altered, reconstructed, replaced, or
relocated. For the purpose of this provision, the alteration of a sign or sign
structure includes any change in size, shape, materials or technology. A
change in text or graphics is not an alteration or replacement for purposes
of this subsection.
10.1282 Nonconforming signs must be maintained in good condition.
Maintenance required by this Subsection shall include replacing or
repairing of worn or damaged parts of a sign or sign structure in order to
return it to its original state, and is not a change or modification prohibited
by Subsection 10.1281.
10.1283 A nonconforming sign shall be removed, made conforming, or replaced
with a conforming sign if 50 percent or more of the nonconforming sign
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-16
is blown down, destroyed, or for any reason or by any means taken down,
altered, or removed.
10.1284 A nonconforming sign shall be removed if the use of the
nonconforming sign, or the property on which it is located, has ceased,
become vacant, or been unoccupied for a continuous period of 8 months or
more. An intent to abandon is not required as the basis for removal under
this section.
Section 10.1290 Sign Definitions
Aggregate sign area
See under sign area.
Animated sign
A sign that uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or create a
special effect or scene. See also changeable sign.
Awning
A cloth, plastic or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently
attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the
building when not in use.
Awning sign
A sign that is painted on or otherwise applied or attached to an awning. An
internally illuminated awning shall be considered an awning sign whether or
not it contains any text or graphics.
Banner sign or banner
A sign that consists of text or other graphic elements on a non-rigid material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to allow
motion caused by the atmosphere. See also temporary sign.
Building frontage
The maximum horizontal width of the ground floor of a building that
approximately parallels and faces a public street or right of way.
(a) Where an individual occupant’s main entrance faces a driveway or parking
lot, the width of the occupant’s ground floor space facing the occupant’s
entrance shall be considered that occupant’s separate and distinct building
frontage.
(b) Where two or more uses occupy the ground floor of a building, the portion
of the building frontage occupied by each use will be that use’s separate
and distinct building frontage for the purpose of calculating allowed sign
area.
(c) A corner lot or through lot shall be considered to have a separate and
distinct building frontage on each street.
(d) When a building is not parallel to the street, or has a front wall that is
angled or curved, the building frontage shall include any portion of the
front wall that is oriented at an angle of 30 degrees or less from the front lot
line.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-17
Canopy
A freestanding structure constructed of rigid materials, providing protective
cover over an outside service area.
Canopy sign
A sign attached to, affixed to or otherwise mounted on a canopy.
Changeable sign
A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or symbols that can be changed,
whether electronically or manually without altering the face or surface of the
sign. A sign on which the message changes more than once per day shall be
regulated as an animated sign. A sign on which the only changes are
mechanical or electronic indication of time or temperature is not considered a
changeable or animated sign.
Direct illumination
Illumination of a sign by light emitted directly from a lamp, luminary or
reflector, and not diffused through translucent materials or reflected or projected
from an external source. Examples include, but are not limited to, signs using
luminous gas-filled tubes (e.g., neon) or light-emitting diodes (LED). (See also
external illumination, externally illuminated sign, internal illumination,
internally illuminated sign.)
External illumination
Illumination of a sign by a source of light not contained within, or on the surface
of, the sign itself. (See also direct illumination, externally illuminated sign,
internal illumination, internally illuminated sign.)
Externally illuminated sign
A sign that is illuminated by a light source that is not contained within, or on the
surface of, the sign itself
Flag
A piece of durable fabric or other flexible material containing distinctive colors,
patterns, standards, words, or emblems which hangs loose from a staff or pole or
is attached directly to a building.
Flagpole
A permanent, free-standing structure or a structure attached to a building and
used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. A free-standing flagpole shall not
exceed the maximum building height allowed in the zoning district in which it
is located.
Freestanding sign
A sign that is permanently erected in a fixed location and supported by 1 or more
columns, upright poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on
the ground, or that is erected on the ground, where no part of the sign is attached
to any part of a building, structure, or other sign. Examples include, but are not
limited to, monument signs and pole signs.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-18
Halo lettering.
An externally illuminated sign in which light sources are placed out of direct
view behind opaque sign elements (letters or graphics), creating a glow around
the sign elements.
Halo Lettering
Internal sign
A sign that is not intended to be viewed from outside the property, and that is
located so as not to be visible from any street or from any adjacent lot.
Examples include, but are not limited to, signs in the interior areas of shopping
centers, non-illuminated signs inside a building and more than 3 feet inside any
window or door, and signs located completely within a building and not visible
from outside the building.
Internal illumination
Illumination of a sign by light that is diffused through a translucent material
from a source within the sign. (See also direct illumination, external
illumination, externally illuminated sign, internally illuminated sign.)
Internally illuminated sign
A sign that is illuminated by light from a source within the sign through a
translucent material. (See also direct illumination, external illumination,
externally illuminated sign, internal illumination, halo lettering.)
Examples of internally illuminated signs include:
(a) Internally illuminated translucent sign, which may have opaque surfaces
with translucent letters or translucent surfaces with opaque letters. An opaque
surface with translucent letters is preferred to a translucent surface with
opaque lettering.
(b) Internally illuminated awning signs.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-19
(c) Internally illuminated channel letters.
Marquee
A structure other than a roof that is attached to, supported by and projecting
from a building, and that provides shelter for pedestrians.
Marquee sign
A wall sign that is mounted on or attached to a marquee.
Mobile sign
A sign on a trailer or other wheeled apparatus, whether or not self-propelled, that
is not permanently affixed to the ground. (See also: temporary sign.)
Monument sign
A freestanding sign constructed of a solid material and mounted on a solid base
that is placed directly on the ground.
Nit
A unit of luminance, equal to one candela per square meter.
Parapet
An extension of a vertical building wall above the line of the structural roof.
Parapet sign
A wall sign attached to the face of a parapet.
Pennant sign or pennant
See banner sign.
Parapet sign
A sign attached to a parapet wall, with its face parallel to the plane of the
parapet wall and extending no more than 18 inches from such wall.
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-20
Pole sign
A freestanding sign that is permanently supported in a fixed location by a
structure of poles, uprights or braces from the ground and not supported by a
building or base structure.
Projecting sign
A sign attached to and projecting from the wall of a building with the face of the
sign at an interior angle of more than 45 degrees to the building wall to which it
is attached.
Roof sign
A sign that is located:
(a) above the level of the eaves on pitched or gambrel roofs;
(b) above the roof deck of a building with a flat roof; or
(c) above the top of the vertical wall of a building with a mansard roof.
Sign
Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place, business,
product, activity, service, person, idea or statement. Any representation that is
illuminated and consisting wholly or in part, of text, images or graphics shall be
considered a sign. Signs need not include text, and may consist of stripes, spots,
or other recognizable designs, shapes or colors. Displays comprising of
merchandise, figurines, mannequins, decorations and other similar articles,
arranged inside a building and visible outside of a window, shall not be
considered a sign.
Sign area
The total surface area of a sign display, including all text, images and graphics,
and any distinctive surface, board, frame or shape on or within which the text,
images and graphics are displayed. For a double-sided sign, the area shall be
calculated to be the total surface area of one side of the sign.
Aggregate sign area
The total sign area of all signs on a lot or building, as indicated by the
context, excluding the area of freestanding signs allowed by Article
12.
Sign band
A painted stripe or otherwise distinct scheme which indicates the
establishment’s logo by use of certain colors or patterns.
Temporary sign
A sign, other than a mobile sign, that is not permanently affixed to a building
or structure or permanently mounted in the ground. (See also mobile sign.)
Article 12 Signs
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 12-21
Wall sign
A sign attached to, erected against or hanging from the wall of a building, with
the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall, and extending no
more than 18 inches from such wall. A wall sign may also be inside of a
building if it is illuminated and visible through the window from a private of
public right of way.

Article 13 Performance Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 13-1
Article 13 Performance Standards
Section 10.1310 Applicability
Section 10.1320 Drainage
Section 10.1330 Noise and Vibration
Section 10.1310 Applicability
10.1311 All uses hereafter established in all districts, with the exception of the
Municipal district, shall comply with the performance standards of this
Article. Violations of these standards in such manner or quantity as to be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be unlawful.
10.1312 No use already established on the date this Article is adopted or amended
shall be altered or modified so as to violate these performance standards.
10.1313 A lawful nonconforming use that complies with applicable performance
standards shall continue to so comply. A lawful nonconforming use that
does not comply with an applicable performance standard shall not be
varied or changed in such a way as to increase the degree of such violation.
Section 10.1320 Drainage
No person shall perform any act or use of land in a manner which would cause
substantial or avoidable erosion, create a nuisance, or alter existing patterns of natural
water flow onto any adjacent property.
Section 10.1330 Noise and Vibration
10.1331 General
10.1331.10 Excessive noise at unreasonable hours shall be controlled so as not to be
objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness, vibration, or
volume.
10.1331.20 No inherent and recurrently generated vibration shall be allowed to create a
nuisance or hazard that is perceptible, without the use of instruments, at the
property line.
10.1332 Noise Limits
10.1332.10 The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any activity regulated
by this Ordinance shall be established by the time period and type of
zoning district listed below. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at all
major lot lines, at a height of at least 4 feet above the ground surface, but
not greater than 4 feet above the floor surface of the upper most level of the
building.
Article 13 Performance Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 13-2
10.1332.20 Sound from any source controlled by this Ordinance shall not exceed the
following sound pressure levels at the lot line of the “sender” premises.
Districts 7 AM to
9 PM
9 PM to
7 AM
Industrial and Waterfront Industrial
Districts
65 dBA* 60 dBA
All Airport Districts, except civil aviation
uses (Section 10.450, use A3)
65 dBA* 60 dBA
All Business and Office Research
Districts
60 dBA* 50 dBA
All Mixed Residential Districts 55 dBA 45 dBA
All Residential Districts 55 dBA 45 dBA
All other Districts 55 dBA 45 dBA
* 55 dBA on Saturday and Sunday.
10.1332.30 For civil aviation uses (Section 10.450, use A3) in the Airport districts
only, the following standards shall replace those in 10.1332.20:
6 AM to
11 PM
11 PM to
6 AM
Civil aviation (Section 10.450, use A3) 65 dBA* 60 dBA
* 55 dBA on Saturday and Sunday.
10.1332.40 Where the emitting and receiving premises are in different districts, the
limits in 10.1332.20 governing the stricter district shall apply to any
regulated noise entering that district.
10.1332.50 Construction activities pursuant to an active building permit shall be
subject to the maximum permissible sound level specified for Industrial
districts in place of any lower level specified in Section 10.1332.20. For
construction activities on a lot in a Residential district or adjacent to a
residential use this provision shall only apply between 7 AM and 6 PM on
weekdays (i.e., in such locations the standards in Section 10.1332.20 shall
govern on weekends and between 6 PM and 7 AM on weekdays).
10.1332.60 Noise shall be measured with a sound meter meeting the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1983 American
Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters). The
instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and the meter to
the slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in accordance with
Article 13 Performance Standards
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 13-3
ANSI S 12.31 and S 12.32 American Standard Meter for the Physical
Measurement of Sound.
10.1333 Exemptions
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the sound pressure level
regulations:
1. Home maintenance activities (i.e., mowing lawns, cutting one’s own firewood,
etc.) between the hours of 7:00 AM and 9:00 PM;
2. Timber harvesting (felling trees and removing logs from the woods);
3. Noises created by construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 AM and
9:00 PM Monday through Friday in all Business, Industrial, and Airport districts
(including all subdistricts).
4. Noises created by construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 AM and
9:00 PM in all other districts;
5. The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves and any other public emergency activity;
6. Traffic noise on existing public streets, railways or river traffic;
7. Legal preexisting uses between the hours of 7:00 AM and 9:00 PM;
8. Occasional outdoor gatherings, street sales, public dances, shows, sporting
events and entertainment events, provided that these are regulated pursuant to
this Ordinance or by permit or by license by the City; and
9. Public events as authorized by the City Council, School Board, Police
Commission, Fire Commission, Prescott Park Trustees and other such Boards
who in the conduct of their activities represent the City.
10. Emergency power generating equipment that is used in situations where the usual
power source is no longer available due to some unanticipated situation and
whose unavailability is temporary (supplemental power sources are not
considered to be an emergency power source).
10.1334 Enforcement
These noise regulations are enforceable by law enforcement officers and by the Code
Official (who may measure noise levels, and who shall report documented violations to
the police). For the purposes of enforcement, sound exceeding the above limits shall be
deemed to constitute “Unreasonable Noise” under the City Noise Ordinance.

Article 14 Impact Fees
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 14-1
Article 14 Impact Fees
Section 10.1410 Purpose
Section 10.1420 General
Section 10.1430 Amount of Impact Fee
Section 10.1440 Accounting
Section 10.1450 Assessment and Payment
Section 10.1460 Refund
Section 10.1470 Appeals
Section 10.1480 Relationship to Other Regulations
Section 10.1410 Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to authorize the assessment of impact fees as a condition
of subdivision or site plan approval, in order to help meet the needs occasioned by a
development for the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated
by the City.
Section 10.1420 General
The Planning Board may, as a condition of approval of any Site Plan or Subdivision, and
when consistent with regulations adopted by the Board, require an applicant to pay an
impact fee for the applicant’s fair share of off-site improvements to public facilities
affected by the development, in accordance with state law.
Section 10.1430 Amount of Impact Fee
The amount of any impact fee shall be calculated by the Planning Board to be a
proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs which is reasonably related to
the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the
development from the capital improvements financed by the fee. Upgrading of existing
facilities and infrastructure, the need for which is not created by new development, shall
not be paid for by impact fees.
Section 10.1440 Accounting
Any impact fee shall be held in a separate, non-lapsing account, shall be segregated
from the City’s general fund, and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for
which it was collected, or to recoup the cost of capital improvements made in anticipation
of the needs which the fee was collected to meet. Such fees shall be paid out only upon
order of the Planning Board or its designated agent.
Section 10.1450 Assessment and Payment
An impact fee imposed under this section shall be assessed prior to, or as a condition
for, final subdivision or site plan approval, and shall be collected prior to the issuance of
any building permit, or at such other time as specified by the Planning Board in its
decision. In the interim between assessment and collection, the Planning Board may
Article 14 Impact Fees
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 14-2
require a developer to provide a bond, letter of credit or other suitable security so as to
guarantee future payment of assessed impact fee.
Section 10.1460 Refund
Any portion of an impact fee which has not become encumbered, or otherwise legally
bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected, shall be refunded, with
accrued interest:
(a) When the subdivision or site plan approval expires under the respective rules of
the Planning Board, or under the terms of a decision, without having become
vested under state law, and without any extension being granted by the Planning
Board; or
(b) When such approval is revoked in accordance with state law; or
(c) Six years after its collection, or if any extension of approval is granted by the
Planning Board, six years after such extension is granted.
Section 10.1470 Appeals
The assessment of any impact fee by the Planning Board under the authority of this
section may be appealed to the superior court as provided by State law. Notwithstanding
Section 10.230 of this Ordinance, the Board of Adjustment shall not have authority to
hear appeals of, or grant variances from, such an assessment.
Section 10.1480 Relationship to Other Regulations
10.1481 The provisions of this Article 14 shall not be construed to limit the
authority of the Planning Board to require the developer to pay an exaction
for the cost of off-site improvements determined by the Planning Board to
be necessary for the occupation of any portion of the development; or, as
an alternative to paying such an exaction, to construct the necessary
improvements subject to bonding and timing conditions as required by the
Planning Board.
10.1482 The provisions of this Article 14 shall not be construed to limit the
authority of the Planning Board to impose other conditions of approval.
10.1483 The provisions of this Article 14 shall not be construed to limit the
authority of the Planning Board to disapprove a proposed development
which is scattered and premature, or which would require an excessive
expenditure of public funds, or which would otherwise violate applicable
ordinances and regulations.
10.1484 The provisions of this Article 14 shall not be construed to affect types of
fees governed by other statutes, City ordinances or regulations.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-1
Article 15 Definitions
Section 10.1510 Rules of Construction
Section 10.1520 Terms With Specialized Applications
Section 10.1530 Terms of General Applicability
Section 10.1510 Rules of Construction
10.1511 Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings shown in this Article.
10.1512 When a term is defined both in this Article 15 and in another Article of this
Ordinance, the definition in the other Article shall supersede the definition
in Article 15. Examples include the definitions relating to Sexually-
Oriented Businesses and Telecommunications Facilities in Article 5, and to
the Flood Plain District and Airport Approach Overlay District in Article 6.
10.1513 Where terms are not defined in this Ordinance and are defined in the
Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
therein.
10.1514 Where terms are not defined in this Ordinance or in the Building Code,
such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.
Section 10.1520 Terms With Specialized Applications
10.1521 Terms that are used primarily in Section 10.620, Flood Plain District, are
defined in Section 10.622, including:
Area of special flood hazard
area
Base flood
Base flood elevation (BFE)
Basement
Building *
Development
Extended flood hazard area
FEMA
FIRM
Flood insurance rate map
Flood insurance study
Flood or flooding
Flood plain
Flood-prone area
Flood proofing
Floodway
Highest adjacent grade
Historic structure
Lowest floor
Manufactured home
Manufactured home park or
subdivision
Mean sea level
New construction
Regulatory floodway
Recreational vehicle
Special flood hazard area
Start of construction
Structure *
Substantial damage
Substantial improvement *
Violation
Water surface elevation
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-2
* These terms are defined differently for Section 10.622 than for other
sections of this Ordinance.
10.1522 Terms that are used primarily in Section 10.920, Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities, are defined in Section 10.922, including:
Antenna
Co-location
Provider or carrier
Wireless telecommunications facility
Wireless telecommunications facility, camouflaged
Wireless telecommunications facility, concealed
Wireless telecommunications facility, free-standing
10.1523 Terms that are used primarily in Section 10.930, Sexually-Oriented
Businesses, are defined in Section 10.933, including:
Adult arcade
Adult bookstore
or Adult video store
Adult cabaret
Adult theater
Establishment
Nudity or state of nudity
Permittee or Licensee
Semi-nude
Sexual encounter center
Sexually oriented business
Specified anatomical areas
Specified sexual activities
Substantial enlargement
10.1524 Terms that are used primarily in Article 12, Signs, are defined in Section
10.1290, including:
Animated sign
Awning sign
Banner sign or banner
Canopy sign
Changeable sign
Direct illumination
Directional sign
Directory sign
External illumination
Externally illuminated sign
Freestanding sign
Halo sign
Hanging sign
Informational sign
Internal illumination
Internally illuminated sign
Marquee
Marquee sign
Monument sign
New business sign
Pennant sign or pennant
Pole sign
Projecting sign
Roof sign
Sign
Sign area
Sign band
Special event sign
Temporary mobile sign
Temporary sign
Window sign
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-3
10.1525 Terms that are used primarily in Article 5A, Character Districts, are
defined in Sections 10.5A43.10, 10.5A43.70, 10.5A45.10 and 10.5A60,
including:
Section 10.5A43.10 – Façade Types
Forecourt
Officefront
Porch
Recessed entry
Shopfront
Step
Stoop
Dooryard
Terrace
Gallery
Arcade
Section 10.5A43.70 – Building Types
House
Duplex
Rowhouse
Apartment building
Live/work building
Small commercial building
Large commercial building
Cottage
Paired House
Gateway Townhouse
Mixed Use Building
Small Flex Space/Fabrication
Building
Community Building
Section 10.5A46.10 – Community Spaces
Greenway
Park
Pedestrian Alley
Playground
Plaza
Pocket Park
Square
Recreation Field or Court
Common or Green
Community Garden
Outdoor Dining Café
Courtyard
Section 10.5A60 – Definitions
Backbuilding
Block
Community space
Entrance spacing
Façade
Façade glazing
Front lot line buildout
Liner building
Outbuilding
Path
Regulating Plan
Streetscreen
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-4
Section 10.1530 Terms of General Applicability
A
Accessory building or structure
A subordinate building located on the same lot with the principal building,
occupied by or devoted to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such
accessory building shall be considered part of the main building. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, a detached accessory dwelling unit is not an
accessory building or structure.
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)
A dwelling unit that is constructed on the same lot as a single-family dwelling
and complies with the standards for accessory dwelling units set forth in this
Ordinance.
Attached accessory dwelling unit (AADU)
An accessory dwelling unit that is constructed within or attached to a
single-family dwelling. For the purpose of this definition, “attached”
means:
(a) located within the dwelling and separated from the principal
dwelling unit either horizontally or vertically, or
(b) sharing a common wall for at least 25 percent of the length of the
side of the single-family dwelling.
“Attached” does not include connection to the single-family dwelling
solely by an unenclosed structure (such as a breezeway) or by an
enclosed but unconditioned space.
Detached accessory dwelling unit (DADU)
An accessory dwelling unit that is constructed within an accessory
building on a lot containing one single-family dwelling. A detached
accessory dwelling unit may be connected to the single-family dwelling
by an unenclosed structure (such as a breezeway) or by an
unconditioned space.
Accessory use
A use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use and located on the
same lot with such principal use or building.
Accessway
A privately owned roadway, sidewalk or passageway, whether improved or
unimproved, utilized as a principal or accessory means of ingress or egress in
connection with any use. An accessway shall be classified in the same manner
as the use it serves. If an accessway serves more than one use, the
accessway shall be deemed to serve the more intensive use and shall be
classified accordingly.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-5
Active Use Area
The land area within 35 feet of a dwelling unit, or other principal use, on the
sides closest to the highway where patios, children’s play areas, and outdoor
activities are common.
Adjacent
Touching or sharing a common lot line, or separated from a lot line by a street,
right-of-way, alley or easement.
Affordable
Housing with combined rental and utility costs or combined mortgage loan debt
service, property taxes, and required insurance that do not exceed 30% of a
household’s gross annual income.
Affordable unit
A dwelling unit that is restricted for sale, lease or rental to households within
specific income ranges and available at prices affordable to households within
such income ranges.
Age-restricted housing
A residential development consisting of independent dwelling units restricted
to occupancy by persons at least 55 years old, which may contain limited social
or recreational facilities or services for the residents but which do not include
centralized dining and on-site medical services. (See also: assisted living
facility; congregate care facility; continuing care retirement community.)
Airport
An airstrip/landing strip where aircraft can land and take off and which is usually
equipped with hangers, facilities for refueling and repair, accommodations for
passengers, freight, etc.
Alteration
Any change, addition or modification in construction, use or occupancy of an
existing structure.
Amusement Park
A commercially operated enterprise that offers rides, games, and other forms of
amusement. (See also: water park, theme park.)
Area median family income
The median family income for the Portsmouth-Rochester NH HUD Metro Fair
Market Rent Area (HMFA) published by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, as updated yearly and adjusted for family size.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-6
Assisted living facility
A building or group of buildings providing housing and supportive services and
care for persons who require assistance with daily living activities but do not
require the skilled nursing and medical care provided in a nursing home or other
residential care facility. Such supportive services include the provision of
meals, housekeeping, laundry, transportation, daily personal care, dispensing of
medications and 24 hours per day staffing. An assisted living facility includes
one or more community dining rooms in which meals are provided to all
residents, and each individual assisted living unit may also have a kitchenette.
Other than any accommodations provided for use by the facility’s staff, only
assisted living units are permitted as part of an assisted living facility.
(See also: age-restricted housing, congregate care facility, continuing
care retirement community, residential care facility.)
Assisted living center
An assisted living facility that provides resident rooms or residential units to
six or more residents.
Assisted living home
An assisted living facility that provides resident rooms to five or fewer
residents
Assisted living unit
A unit in an assisted living facility or continuing care retirement community
(CCRC) that provides housing and support services for one or more persons
who may require assistance with daily living activities but do not require 24-hour
skilled nursing and medical care. Such supportive services may include the
provision of meals, housekeeping, laundry, transportation, daily personal care,
programmed social activities, dispensing of medications and around the clock
staffing. (See also: independent living unit.)
Attic
The interior part of a building contained within a gable, gambrel, or hip-roof
mansard roof, or within a penthouse on a flat roof.
B
Bank
See financial institution.
Bar
See drinking establishment.
Base residential density
The number of dwelling units which could be constructed on a parcel by means
of a conventional development plan, calculated as set forth in Section 10.723.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-7
Bed and breakfast
The provision of short-term lodging and breakfast within an owner-occupied
dwelling. The capacity of the dining facilities shall accommodate no more than
25 persons. (See also: hotel, motel, inn.)
Bed and Breakfast 1
A bed and breakfast with between 1 and 5 guest rooms.
Bed and Breakfast 2
A bed and breakfast with between 6 and 10 guest rooms.
Best management practice (BMP)
A practice or combination of practices that is determined to be the most
technologically and economically feasible means of preventing or minimizing
potential adverse impacts to natural and cultural resources. BMPs include
structural and nonstructural controls and operation and maintenance procedures.
With respect to wetlands management, BMPs are practices to minimize
disturbances and impact to the wetland resulting from activities that alter the
natural character of the wetland.
Board
The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of
Portsmouth, New Hampshire. If not clear based on the context, the term shall
refer to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Boarding house
A residential structure, other than a bed and breakfast, in which rooms are
rented, leased or otherwise made available for compensation to more than two
but not more than 10 individuals, and where such rooms do not contain separate
cooking or bathroom facilities.
Building
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. Each portion of a
building separated either horizontally or vertically from other portions by a fire
wall shall be considered as a separate structure. (See also: structure.)
Building block length
Measured along a street, public way, or public greenway, the building block
length shall be the total length of a continuous building façade regardless of fire
separation, common walls, or property lines. Individual building blocks shall be
separated by open space or community space areas of at least 15 feet in
width.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-8
Building Code
The International Building Code and/or the International Residential Code,
as applicable to the particular structure type.
International Building Code (IBC)
The International Building Code, published by the International Code
Council, Inc., as adopted with amendments, additions and deletions as
Chapter 12, Part I, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, and as
amended from time to time by the City.
International Residential Code (IRC)
The International Residential Code, published by the International
Code Council, Inc., as adopted with amendments, additions and deletions
as Chapter 12, Part II, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, and
as amended from time to time by the City.
Building coverage
The aggregate horizontal area or percentage (depending on context) of a lot or
development site covered by all buildings and structures on the lot,
excluding
(a) gutters, cornices and eaves projecting not more than 30 inches from a
vertical wall, and
(b) structures less than 18 inches above ground level (such as decks and
patios);
(c) balconies, bay windows or awnings projecting not more than 2 feet from
a vertical wall, not exceeding 4 feet in width, and cumulatively not
exceeding 50% of the width of the building face;
(d) fences; and
(e) mechanical system (i.e. HVAC, power generator, etc.) that is less than 36
inches above the ground level with a mounting pad not exceeding 10
square feet.
Building footprint
The total area at or above 18 inches in elevation as measured from the outside
walls at the grade plane of a detached building, or of two or more buildings
separated only by fire walls, common walls or property lines.
Building height
The greatest vertical measurement between two reference points defined as
follows:
(a) The lower reference point shall be the grade plane as defined herein.
(b) The upper reference point shall be any of the following:
(1) For a flat or mansard roof, the highest point of the roof surface;
(2) For a pitched, hip, or gambrel roof, the elevation midway between
the level of the eaves and highest point of the roof. For this purpose,
the “level of the eaves” shall mean the highest level where the plane
of the roof intersects the plane of the outside wall on a side
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-9
containing the eaves, but at no time shall this level be lower than the
floor level of the uppermost story or attic
(c) A parapet wall, fence, railing or similar structure that extends more
than two feet above the roof surface shall be included in the determination
of building height, but shall not be included if it does not extend
more than two feet above the roof surface.
(d) To determine building height, measurements shall be taken at least
every 5 feet around the entire perimeter of a building. An average is
calculated from these figures and that figure shall be the building’s
height for purposes of this Ordinance.
(See also: grade plane, parapet wall.)
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-10
Building length
The longest horizontal dimension of a building, as
measured in a single straight direction parallel to an
elevation of the building, except as follows:
(a) Where buildings on the same site are
separated by a distance of less than 10 feet,
the building length shall be the total of the
building lengths of each individual
building, including the distance between
them.
(b) Where the interior angle between two
elevations of a building, or between the
elevations of two buildings separated by less
than 10 feet, is 135 degrees or more, the
building length shall be the total of the
building lengths measured individually.
Building permit
A permit issued by a code official indicating that a proposed construction,
alteration or reconstruction of a structure complies with the Building Code,
and that a proposed use, building or structure is accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance; and authorizing an applicant to proceed with said use, building or
structure.
Bypass lane
A circulation lane to permit vehicles to circulate around a drive-through facility
without conflicting with access to transaction windows or devices.
C
Call center
A centralized office used for the purpose of receiving and transmitting a large
volume of telephone calls, such as incoming product support or information
inquiries from consumers, or outgoing calls for telemarketing or debt collection.
A call center does not include use of a facility for less than 6 months in a twoyear
period for a political campaign.
Car wash
An establishment for washing and waxing private automobiles, light trucks
and vans including auto detailing services.
Caretaker residence
A dwelling unit that is accessory to and on the same lot as a nonprofit use, and
that is provided for and limited to occupancy by a person employed to provide
maintenance and security 24 hours per day for the principal use.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-11
Certified wetland scientist
A person qualified to perform wetland delineation and certified by the New
Hampshire Board of Natural Scientist pursuant to State law.
Clinic
A facility providing care and treatment for sick or injured human patients, not
including a medical office, hospital or substance abuse treatment facility.
Outpatient clinic
A clinic providing care and treatment on an outpatient basis, including
ambulatory care or similar medical services that generally require a stay
of less than 24 hours, that does not include overnight care facilities.
Inpatient clinic
A clinic that may include overnight care facilities.
Club, fraternal or service organization
A building for gathering and entertainment by members of a non-profit
membership organization, not to include rooms for overnight lodging or rooming.
Code official
Any employee of the City of Portsmouth authorized to administer or enforce the
Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the Planning Director and the
Chief Building Inspector.
Commercial fishing craft
Any marine craft used for commercial fishing.
Commercial vehicle
Any vehicle having a commercial license plate or used commercially.
Commercial passenger vessel
Any vessel carrying passengers for hire, such as a cruise ship, ferry, water taxi,
excursion boat, party boat, charter boat or sport fishing boat (provided that the
fish caught are not sold commercially); but not including a vessel used primarily
for commercial carrying cargo, towing, dredging or salvage, or a vessel used for
commercial fishing.
Congregate care facility
A residential development consisting of individual dwelling units with
centralized amenities such as dining, housekeeping, transportation and organized
social and recreational activities, and which may include limited medical services
on site. (See also: assisted living facility; continuing care retirement
community; age-restricted housing.)
Construction trailer
A structure used in conjunction with construction activities. Such structure
shall include tractor trailers and similar structures which are used or are
constructed in a manner as to permit daily occupancy and/or the storage of
equipment and materials.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-12
Contiguous
Adjoining or touching at a point or along a boundary.
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC)
A residential development that provides multiple elements of senior adult living
including independent living units, assisted living units and skilled nursing
care, enabling residents to live at a single location as their medical needs change
over time. A CCRC includes common dining, recreation and health facilities and
other common areas; provides services such as medical, programmed social
activities; and may include limited accessory retail and personal services. A
CCRC is intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older
and thereby qualifies as “housing for older persons” under state law. (See also:
assisted living facility, congregate care facility, age-restricted housing.)
Contributing structure
A structure identified as a contributing structure in “An Architectural Survey
of the Historic District of Portsmouth, NH”, dated June–September, 1982,
prepared by the Portsmouth Advocates Inc., Woodard D. Openo, Survey
Director.
Convenience goods
A retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household
items and other goods and having a gross floor area of less than 2,500 square
feet.
Convenience goods 1
A convenience goods establishment that does not sell food prepared
on the premises for consumption off the premises.
Convenience goods 2
A convenience goods establishment that sells food prepared on the
premises (excluding fried food) for consumption off the premises.
Cornice
A crowning projected molded horizontal top of a building or some part of a
building. A trimmed eave on the gable end of a gable-roofed building creates a
cornice, consisting of two raking or sloping cornices with connected horizontal
cornice.
Coverage
See building and open space coverage.
D
Day care facility
A facility operated daily where care, protection, and supervision are provided for
persons regardless of age but excluding any psychiatric care.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-13
Family day care facility
A day care facility, as an accessory use in a single residence, for up
to 6 persons.
Group day care facility
A day care facility for more than 6 persons.
dBA
The sound pressure level in decibels that is frequency weighted to the A-scale
according to a frequency response established by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1971) and that approximates the frequency
response of the human ear.
Demolition
Razing or destruction, entirely or in part, of any exterior surface of a building or
structure (including a monument, statue or memorial), whether or not reconstruction
is planned after demolition. Demolition shall also include the removal
of any building or structure in whole or in part from its present location.
Developable area
The total area of a single development site, which may include one or more
lots, excluding all open water bodies, wetlands subject to this Ordinance, 100-
year flood plains, slopes exceeding 15 percent, and areas subject to existing
valid open space restrictions.
Development
Any man-made alteration of land, a lot, a building or other structure whether
horizontal, vertical, surface or subsurface.
Depth of lot
See lot depth.
Drinking establishment
An establishment, other than a restaurant, serving alcoholic or non-alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises. For purposes of this Ordinance, a
drinking establishment may be a principal use or an accessory use, and a
portion of the premises may be devoted to entertainment, which may include a
dance floor, with either live or recorded music.
Bar or Tavern
A drinking establishment with an occupancy of less than 250
persons.
Nightclub
A drinking establishment with an occupancy of 250 or more persons.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-14
Drive-through facility
A building, attached structure or portion thereof that provides products or
services directly to a customer in a motor vehicle by means of a window or
mechanical device.
Drive-through lane
A lane in which vehicles obtain service from transaction windows or devices at a
drive-through facility.
Driveway
The area between the travelled portion of a street or road and a parking area
used by motor vehicles for access to and from the parking area. A driveway does
not include any maneuvering aisle or other circulation area within the interior
of a parking area. Except for parking lots containing fewer than 7 off-street
parking spaces, a driveway has no abutting parking spaces.
Dwelling
A building or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units.
Single-family dwelling
A building consisting of a single dwelling unit.
Two-family dwelling
A building consisting of two dwelling units.
Multifamily dwelling
A building consisting of three or more dwelling units.
See also: townhouse, manufactured housing.
Dwelling, principal
A single-family dwelling on a lot on which an accessory dwelling unit or a
garden cottage is allowed.
Dwelling unit
A building or portion thereof providing complete independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation. This use shall not be deemed to include such transient
occupancies as hotels, motels, rooming or boarding houses.
Dwelling unit, accessory
See accessory dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit, principal
A dwelling unit in a single-family dwelling that is not an attached
accessory dwelling unit or a garden cottage.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-15
E
Electronics manufacturing
See under Manufacturing.
Establishment
A single physical location where business is conducted or where services or
industrial operations are performed. A company may have one or many
establishments, and a building may contain one or many establishments.
F
Family
An individual living alone, or any of the following groups living together as a
single housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and
eating facilities:
(a) Two or more individuals related by blood, marriage, civil union,
adoption or guardianship;
(b) Two or three individuals not related by blood, marriage, civil union,
adoption or guardianship, along with one or more dependents related to
any of them by blood, marriage, civil union, adoption or guardianship.
Family day care facility
See under day care facility.
Farm animal
Any animal other than a household pet as defined in this Ordinance.
Federal Manual
Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, Wetlands Research Program
Technical Report Y-87-1, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Field Indicators
Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England, New England
Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission (current edition).
Financial institution
An establishment where the principal business is the provision of financial,
banking or lending services to consumers or clients including the receipt,
disbursement or exchange of funds and currencies. May include all or one of the
following uses:
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-16
Financial services office
An office associated with the operation of a financial institution that
provides banking, lending, or investment services, but does not include
teller services, automated teller machines, or similar high-volume
customer functions.
Retail bank
An office associated with the operation of a financial institution that
provides walk-in and/or drive-in teller services to customers primarily
for depository banking and related services.
Automated teller machine (ATM)
An unattended electronic device that is activated by customers to conduct
financial transactions. An ATM may be located on the outside of a
building, or in an access-controlled entrance to a building, or within a
principal use in a building, and may serve pedestrians or patrons in
motor vehicles. An ATM servicing patrons in motor vehicles must meet
the standards for drive-through establishments provided in this
Ordinance. An ATM is permitted only as an accessory use to a related
principal use, and is not permitted as a principal use or in a freestanding
structure not attached to a principal use.
Fish market
Retail sales of (a) fresh or frozen fish, shellfish or lobster; or (b) baked, boiled
or steamed fish, shellfish or lobster, or fish or seafood chowder, which may be
prepared on the premises but shall not be consumed on the premises.
Fish preparation
The secondary preparation of fin fish by filleting, skinning and/or cutting. (See
also: fish processing.)
Fish processing
The primary preparation of fin fish by gutting and/or heading in preparation for
the secondary preparation of filleting, skinning and cutting. (See also: fish
preparation, food processing.)
Fishing boat landing
Landing of commercial fishing craft.
Fishing boat landing 1
Landing of no more than two commercial fishing craft used by no
more than two persons per boat, with no fish preparation, fish
processing, or sales of fish or sea-related products.
Fishing boat landing 2
Landing of commercial fishing craft, without limitation on either the
number of boats or the number of persons per boat, which may include
fish preparation in an enclosed building by no more than five persons.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-17
Flat roof
A roof with a slope of less than 1:4 for more than 50% of the roof area.
Floodlight or spotlight
Any lighting fixture or lamp that is that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to
concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a certain direction.
Floor area ratio (FAR)
The ratio of the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the lot area.
Food processing
The preparation or processing of food or beverage products, but not including
consumption on the premises. Examples include bakeries, dairies, canneries,
bottling plants and similar businesses. (See also: fish processing.)
Foot-candle
A measure of light falling on a given surface. One foot-candle is equal to the
amount of light generated by one candle shining on a square foot surface one foot
away. One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot.
Foreign trade zone
An area established wherein component parts for electric products, watches,
automobiles, etc. may be imported initially duty free, such duty being postponed
until the finished product enters the larger American market.
Frontage
The horizontal distance measured along a lot line dividing a lot from a street.
Such measurement shall refer to a continuous line except where otherwise
specified.
Full-cutoff
A lighting fixture with a shield such that all of its light output is aimed below
horizontal to the ground. Full-cutoff fixtures cut off all upward transmission of
light.
Furniture and home furnishing store
An establishment for retail sales of home or office furniture, carpets,
mattresses, or similar items that require extensive floor area for the display of
merchandise.
G
Garage
An area within a principal building or outbuilding that provides space for
parking vehicles as an accessory use. Not synonymous with parking
structure. (See also: parking lot, parking structure, underground parking
level.)
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-18
Garden cottage
A dwelling unit that is constructed through conversion of an accessory
building on the same lot as a single-family dwelling and complies with the
standards for garden cottages set forth in the Ordinance.
Glare
Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently greater than the
brightness to which the eyes are adapted, to cause annoyance or loss in visual
performance and visibility, so as to jeopardize health, safety or welfare.
Grade plane
A reference plane representing the average of finished ground levels adjoining
the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away
from exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points
within the area between the building and the lot line or, when the lot line is
more than 6 feet from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet from
the building. (See also building height.)
Gross floor area (GFA)
The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building or buildings as measured
by the exterior faces of the walls, but excluding the areas of fire escapes,
unroofed porches or terraces, and areas such as basements and attics exclusively
devoted to uses accessory to the operation of the building. If the exterior walls
are greater than 6 inches thick, then the gross floor area shall be adjusted to a
maximum of a 6-inch thick wall.
Ground floor or story
Any floor or story of a building in which the floor is less than six feet above or
below the finished grade at any street entrance of the building. Under this
definition a building may have more than one ground floor or story.
Group day care facility
See under day care facility.
H
Helipad
An area of land, water, or a structure designated for the occasional landing and
takeoff of helicopters but not used solely for that purpose, and not including
facilities for helicopter fuel, service, maintenance or overhaul, or sale of
products.
Heliport
An area of land, water, or a structure used or intended to be used for the landing
and takeoff of helicopters, together with appurtenant buildings and facilities.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-19
High hazard use
Any use which is defined by the Building Code as H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 or H-5.
High hazard use A
A high hazard use which presents a detonation hazard (Use Group H-1)
or which presents a deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated
burning (Use Group H-2).
High hazard use B
A high hazard use which contains materials that readily support
combustion or present a physical hazard (Use Group H-3), or which
contain materials that are a health hazard (Use Group H-4).
High hazard use C
A semiconductor fabrication facility or comparable research and
development area in which hazardous process materials are used (Use
Group H-5).
Highest observable tide line
A line defining the furthest landward limit of tidal flow, not including storm
events, which can be recognized by indicators such as the presence of a strand
line of flotsam and debris, the landward margin of salt tolerant vegetation, or a
physical barrier that blocks further flow of the tide.
Historic preservation building or structure
A building or structure that has historic significance and is owned or
maintained by a non-profit agency for the purposes of preservation.
Home occupation
An office or other use customarily conducted as an accessory use to a
dwelling, complying with all the following standards:
(a) Conducted entirely within a dwelling or an existing accessory
building, and with no change to the character of the dwelling or
accessory building;
(b) Maximum floor area of 300 square feet;
(c) No outdoor storage of materials or products;
(d) Outdoor parking of no more than one vehicle related to the home
occupation;
(e) No deliveries by vehicles with more than two axles.
Home occupation 1
A home occupation with no nonresident employees; no sign related to
the business; no client, vendor or general public visitation; and no
deliveries other than by regular postal service and no more than one
package delivery service truck (e.g., FedEx, UPS, etc.) per day.
Home occupation 2
A home occupation with not more than one nonresident employee.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-20
Hospice
See residential care facility.
Hospital
A facility licensed to provide care and treatment for sick or injured patients,
primarily while they are acutely ill or chronically ill, containing facilities for
diagnostic treatment and major surgery, and providing nursing care 24 hours a
day. The term does not include nursing home, rest home, home for the aged,
sanatorium, convalescent hospital or facility for treating alcohol or drug abuse, or
beds set aside for any of these purposes in a hospital. The term includes a
psychiatric hospital but does not include a psychiatric hospital for the care and
treatment of the criminally insane. A hospital may include other uses
customarily associated with the principal use, including medical offices,
pharmacies, gift shops and cafeterias. (See also: clinic, residential care
facility.)
Hotel
A building in which the primary use is transient lodging accommodations
offered to the public on a daily rate for compensation and where ingress and
egress to the sleeping rooms is made primarily through an inside lobby or office,
supervised by a person in charge at all hours. Such facilities may include, where
allowed, such accessory uses as restaurants, bars, taverns, nightclubs,
function rooms, places of public assembly or recreational facilities, but shall not
include casino gambling, keno or other forms of gambling. (See also: motel.)
Household pet
A small animal that is customarily kept on residential premises for company or
pleasure. Examples include dogs, cats, rabbits, birds and fish.
Hydric soil
Soil that is saturated or flooded during a sufficient portion of the growing season
to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper soil layers, as further defined in the
Federal Manual.
Hydrophytic vegetation
Macrophytic plant life growing in water, in soil, or on a substrate that is at least
periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excess water content, as further
defined in the Federal Manual.
I
IBC
The International Building Code (see Building Code).
Illuminance
The amount of light falling on a surface measured in foot-candles.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-21
Illumination
The act of lighting a surface or area.
Impact fee
An impact fee as defined by state law, as may be amended from time to time.
Impervious surface
Any modified surface that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate water.
Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs and paved areas such
as driveways, parking areas and walkways. Impervious surfaces also include
decks, patios and gravel or crushed stone surfaces unless such structures or
surfaces have been designed to effectively absorb or infiltrate water.
Impound lot
A facility that provides temporary outdoor storage for vehicles that are to be
claimed by titleholders or their agents.
Independent living unit
A dwelling unit in a continuing care retirement community (CCRC), in
which residents live independently while having access to all common facilities
and services of the CCRC, but without the inclusive supportive services typically
associated with Assisted Living or Skilled Nursing units. (See also: assisted
living unit, continuing care retirement community.)
Industrial use
The use of a building, structure or lot for assembling, fabricating, finishing,
manufacturing or packaging. Industrial uses are classified as electronics
manufacturing, general manufacturing, light industry, or research and
development.
Electronics manufacturing
Research and development, engineering and manufacturing of
electronic products and components, including communications
equipment, data systems equipment and precision instruments;
pharmaceutical, medical and dental supplies and equipment; architectural
and engineering supplies and equipment; and additive research. No such
use shall be classified as high hazard use A or high hazard use B.
General manufacturing
A facility for industrial use that is not classified as light industry,
electronics manufacturing, or research and development.
Light industry
A facility that (a) works predominantly with previously prepared,
manufactured, or processed materials or parts; (b) may include assembly,
fabrication, accessory research and development, office uses, most
high technology production, packaging, or combinations of such uses;
(c) does not result in significant noise, glare, odor, dust, smoke, or
vibration which could be detectable beyond the building; and (d) does
not include uses classified as H3 or H4 in the Building Code.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-22
Research and development
Laboratories and related facilities for research, development and testing,
excluding biological or chemical laboratories and high hazard uses.
Prototype production facilities and related assembly of high technology
equipment or components may be included, but shall not exceed 40
percent of the gross floor area of the building.
Inn
A building offering lodging for transient boarders with up to 15 sleeping rooms.
An inn may have a caretaker residence but does not have to be occupied by
the owner, and shall not serve food to the public. (See also: bed and breakfast,
hotel, motel.)
IRC
The International Residential Code (see Building Code).
J
Junk
Scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all
other scrap metals and their alloys, and bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used
rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old or used machinery, used tools, used
appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used lumber, used boxes or crates, used
pipe or pipe fittings, used automobiles or airplane tires, and other manufactured
goods that are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their
existing condition, but are subject to being dismantled.
Junk yard
The use of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, for the storage, keeping
or abandonment of junk.
K
Kennel
An establishment in which a primary use is housing dogs, cats, or other
household pets, and/or grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of
animals.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-23
L
Landside support facility
A facility on land for supporting the operation of a commercial passenger
vessel, including vehicular parking for employees and customers, passenger
ticketing and processing, administrative office space, baggage handling, shower
and restroom facilities, docking, maintenance and utility extensions.
Large format retail sales
See retail sales, large format.
Lamp
The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
Landscaping
The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass and shrubs and/or
trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental
objects such as fountains and statuary, and other similar natural objects.
Leg(h) [hourly equivalent sound level]
The equivalent, steady-state A-weighted sound level that in one hour contains the
same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound level during the same period.
This is the average noise over one hour adjusted for human hearing.
Loudest traffic hour sound level
The Leg(h) associated with the loudest highway traffic hour.
Lawful nonconforming
See nonconforming.
Light, Lighting
Accent lighting
Directional lighting to emphasize a particular object or to draw
attention to a part of the field of view.
Decorative lighting
Any exterior lighting used for decorative effects, including, but not
limited to architectural illumination, flag and monument lighting,
holiday decoration, and illumination of landscaping.
Direct light
Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector
diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a luminaire.
Indirect light
Direct light that has been reflected or scattered off of other surfaces.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-24
Light trespass
The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of
the property on which it is located.
Lighting fixture
The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps.
Outdoor lighting
The illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device
located outdoors that produces light by any means.
Temporary lighting
Lighting which will not be used for more than one thirty (30) day period
with at least 180 days passing before being used again. Temporary
lighting is intended for uses which by their nature are of limited duration
including, but not limited to, holiday decoration, civic events, or
construction projects.
Light truck
A truck of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating or less, including a pickup,
van, truck-based station wagon or sport utility vehicle.
Live/work unit
A dwelling unit which includes a nonresidential use that is otherwise allowed in
the zoning district in which the unit is located and that is operated by the resident
of the dwelling unit, and which complies with the following standards:
(a) The live/work unit shall not exceed 3,000 sq. ft. gross floor area.
(b) The nonresidential area shall be between 25 percent and 50 percent of the
gross floor area of the unit.
(c) The nonresidential area shall be limited to the first or main floor only of
the live/work unit.
(d) No workers shall be employed or occupied in the nonresidential use
other than residents of the live/work unit.
(e) The live/work unit shall not include any high hazard use, and shall not
include any storage use exceeding 10 percent of the space dedicated to
nonresidential activities.
Living shoreline
Any shoreline management system using native vegetation, alone or in
combination with offshore sills, to stabilize the shoreline without interrupting the
natural water/land continuum to the detriment of natural shoreline ecosystems.
Lot
A single parcel of land in the same ownership throughout as shown or defined on
a recorded instrument or defined by metes and bounds and having its principal
frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may be determined in
accordance with the provisions of law to be adequate as a condition of the
issuance of a building permit for building on such land.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-25
Corner lot
A lot having frontage on two intersecting streets, including their point
of intersection.
Through lot
A lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. On a
through lot, both street lines shall be deemed to be front lot lines.
Lot area
The total horizontal area included within the property lines.
Lot depth
The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
as measured along both side property lines.
Lot line
A property line bounding a lot.
Lot line, front
A boundary of lot that separates the lot from a street or public place. In
the case of a corner lot or waterfront lot, the front lot line shall be the
line bordering the street on which the lot has its address. A corner lot
or a through lot shall have two front lot lines.
Lot line, rear
A boundary of a lot that is opposite and most distant from the front lot
line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot forms
a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line 10 feet
in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
Lot line, side
Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Low impact development (LID)
A stormwater management approach that emphasizes conservation and use of
natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to
mimic predevelopment hydrologic conditions. LID is applied at the parcel and
subdivision scale and uses design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store,
evaporate, and detain runoff close to its source.
Lumen
A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One foot candle is one
lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the lumen output
values shall be the initial lumen output rating of a lamp.
Luminaire
A complete lighting system including lamp or lamps and a lighting fixture.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-26
Luminaire height
The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of a
luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
M
Mansard roof
A four-sided flat- or hip-top roof characterized by two slopes on each of its sides
with the lower slope punctured by dormer windows. The upper slope of the roof
may not be visible from street level when viewed from close to the building.
Maneuvering aisle
A travel lane located within the perimeter of a parking lot by which motor
vehicles directly enter and leave parking spaces.
Manufactured housing
Any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling
mode, is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or
when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include
plumbing, heating and electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured
housing does not include housing built in conformance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development minimum property standards or
the IBC.
Manufactured housing park
A single lot containing more than one manufactured housing unit, with or
without an internal road system or amenities.
Manufacturing, electronics
See under IndustrIal use.
Marina
A waterfront facility that provides docking, mooring, and/or wet or dry storage of
pleasure boats for a fee, and that may also provide one or more of the following:
(a) sales of marine supplies, parts and fuel; (b) boat service and repair; (c) boat
sales, rental or charter; and (d) as an accessory use, sales of provisions for
pleasure boats. A yacht club shall be considered a marina. Boat docks accessory
to a dwelling shall not be considered a marina.
Marine dependent
Dependent on the ocean or the Piscataqua River for transport, resources,
processing, production or cooling.
Marine-related retail
Retail sales of marine goods, groceries and ice.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-27
Maximum occupancy
The occupant load of a building or portion thereof as determined in accordance
with the Building Code.
Medical office
See office, medical.
Micro-unit
A dwelling unit with a gross floor area of 400 square feet or less in a
multifamily dwelling.
Mixed-use development
A development project that includes a mix of (a) residential and non-residential
uses, or (b) office and retail/service uses. The uses may be combined in one
building (“vertical mixed use”) or may consist of multiple buildings with
different uses on one development site (“horizontal mixed use”).
Motel
A building or group of detached or connected buildings intended or used
primarily to provide sleeping accommodations to the public on a daily rate for
compensation and having a parking space generally located adjacent to a
sleeping room with each sleeping room discharging directly outdoors. Such
facilities may include, where allowed, such accessory uses as restaurants,
bars, taverns, nightclubs, function rooms, places of public assembly or
recreational facilities, but shall not include casino gambling, keno or other forms
of gambling. (See also: hotel.)
Motor vehicle accessory sales and service
The sales, installation, and repair of interior motor vehicle accessories such as
audio, alarm and navigation systems.
Motor vehicle painting or body work
The repair or straightening of motor vehicle bodies or frames, or painting of
motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. Maintenance, service and engine repair
may be performed as an ancillary function of the body work.
Motor vehicle repair
The repair, overhaul, removing, adjusting, replacing or assembling,
disassembling, or installing new or used motor vehicle parts such as mufflers,
brakes, or tires.
Motor vehicle service station
An establishment that sells fuel (including but not limited to gasoline, diesel,
natural gas, electricity or hydrogen) to individual vehicles. A motor vehicle
service station may include the following:
? retail sale of propane and kerosene;
? retail sale of products required for motor vehicle maintenance such as oil,
transmission fluid, brake fluid, polish, wax, fuel additives and treatments,
wipers, tires, batteries, windshield wiper fluid, cleaning fluids and similar
items;
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-28
? minor automotive maintenance such as the addition of fluids, replacement of
wiper blades and similar activities; and
? retail sale of over-the-counter consumer merchandise.
Motor vehicle service station 1
A motor vehicle service station that includes not more than 12 square
feet of display area for the retail sale of consumer merchandise, and that
does not include any of the following:
? motor vehicle repair;
? motor vehicle painting or body work;
? motor vehicle sales, leasing or rental;
? outdoor storage or display of vehicles, boats, automobile parts or
other merchandise, except for (a) small sample displays of
automotive accessory items or (b) batteries or tires located adjacent
to the principal building or on the pump islands.
Motor vehicle service station 2
A motor vehicle service station that include the activities and
limitations of motor vehicle service station 1 and also includes
motor vehicle repair.
Motor vehicle service station 3
A motor vehicle service station that includes the activities and
limitations of motor vehicle service station 1 and also includes sale
of convenience goods 1 or 2.
Municipal trail
A full public right-of-way of indefinite duration subject to public trail use
restrictions, and classified as a Class A or Class B trail by the City Council
pursuant to RSA Chapter 231-A.
Museum
A non-profit permanent institution, open to the public, which acquires, conserves,
researches, exhibits, and interprets objects having scientific, historical or artistic
value. Museums may include exhibit and display areas, libraries and research
areas, administrative offices, areas for constructing exhibits, and storage areas
for museum materials, artifacts and objects. Accessory uses may include retail
sales, food services for museum visitors or others, manufacturing for museum
purposes, and events such as craft demonstrations, receptions, and periodic
celebrations, provided that all such accessory uses are incidental and
subordinate to the primary non-profit museum use.
N
Nightclub
See drinking establishment.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-29
Noise barrier
A noise wall, an earth berm, or a noise wall in combination with an earth berm,
that obstructs the path of sound from the sound source to the sound receiver.
Noise mitigation
Reduction of the noise that is transmitted from a noise source to a receiver as a
result of distance, natural features, noise barriers, or other structures.
Noise sensitive land use
Residential use, institutional residence or residential care facility, hospital,
lodging establishment, places of assembly, library, school, and day care
facility.
Nonconforming lot, building, structure, or use
Lawful nonconforming lot
A single lot of record which does not conform to a dimensional requirement
set forth in this Ordinance and applicable to the district in which it
is located (such as minimum lot area or frontage), but which conformed
to all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time
the lot was created; or a single lot of record created by legislative or
judicial decision which does not conform to a dimensional requirement.
Lawful nonconforming building or structure
A building or structure which does not conform to a dimensional
requirement set forth in this Ordinance and applicable to the district in
which it is located (such as maximum building height or building
coverage, or minimum yards or open space), but was legally existing
at the time that such requirement took effect.
Lawful nonconforming use
A use of land, building, structure or parts thereof, which does not
conform to the use requirements of this Ordinance or its amendments
but was legally existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or at the
time a district was changed by amendment thereafter.
Nursing home
See residential care facility.
O
Occupant load
The total number of persons that may occupy a building or portion thereof
(including outdoor decks) at any one time, calculated in accordance with the
Building Code.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-30
Office
A place of business where professional or clerical duties are performed.
General office
An office for the carrying on, conducting or managing of a business or
for the practice of a profession, except for a medical office as defined in
this Article.
Medical office
An office of a physician, dentist, psychologist, optometrist or other
licensed health care provider, which does not include any hospital or
ambulatory surgical care facilities.
Off-street parking
Parking that is totally located off the public right-of-way.
Open space
Land area vertically open to the sky, free of all structures, parking area/lots,
driveways and other uses which preclude attractive landscaping in such area.
Open space shall be predominantly pervious, may be landscaped with lawn,
trees, shrubs or other planting, and may include walks and terraces. For the
purposes of this definition, water areas are considered to constitute open space.
Open space coverage
The aggregate horizontal area or percentage (depending on context) of a lot or
development site covered by open space.
Outdoor activity areas
Residential yards, gardens, patios, pools, etc.; private and public play areas.
Outdoor recreation use
An area designed and intended to be used for active outdoor recreation, including
but not limited to athletic fields, golf courses, tennis courts and swimming pools;
but not including activities involving the use of motorized equipment or firearms,
and not including amusement parks, theme parks, water parks or similar
establishments.
Outdoor lighting
See under lighting.
Outdoor storage
Storage of materials on a lot without benefit of a structure with four walls and a
roof to protect said material from the elements. This definition shall not be
deemed to include the outside storage of junk (regulated separately) or as a
temporary structure.
Overlay district
A zoning district that is superimposed over portions of one or more underlying
zoning districts in order to apply additional or modified standards addressing a
special purpose, such as historic preservation or flood plain protection.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-31
P
Parapet wall
That part of an exterior wall extending entirely above the roof surface.
Parking lot
A ground-level open area within a lot for parking vehicles as a principal use or
accessory use. (See also: garage, parking structure, underground parking
level.)
Parking structure
A structure containing multiple stories of parking as a principal use or
accessory use. (See also: garage, parking lot, underground parking level.)
Penthouse
A habitable space within the uppermost portion of a building above the cornice
which is set back at least 15 feet from all edges of the roof and the total floor area
of which does not exceed 50% of the area of the story below. For internal
courtyards at least 40 feet from a street or vehicular right-of-way or easement,
the penthouse shall be setback at least 8 feet from the edge of the roof of the
story below.
Performance facility
A building or an area that is designed, intended or used primarily for musical,
dance, dramatic or other performances.
Indoor performance facility
A performance facility located entirely within a building or
structure, such as a theater (excluding a commercial cinema) or
auditorium.
Outdoor performance facility
A performance facility not located entirely within a building or
structure.
Permanently moored vessel (PMV)
A vessel that has been removed from navigation and is not inspected by the Coast
Guard. A PMV is either “substantially a land structure” or cannot be moved
except on a deliberate basis where extensive effort and equipment would be
required. PMVs include both vessels that would have received a Coast Guard
certificate of inspection had they stayed in navigation, and vessels whose utilities
and services (e.g., water, sewage, electrical, etc.) are tied directly to facilities on
land.
Person
An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal
entity.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-32
Personal services
Establishments providing frequent or recurrent services related to personal
needs, and including accessory retail sales of products related to the services
offered. Examples include beauty and barber shops, nail salons, tanning salons,
clothing rental, tailors, dry cleaning pick-up shops, garment and shoe repair
shops, and similar businesses.
Place of assembly
A building used in whole or in part for the gathering together of persons for
such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or religious services, or
for awaiting transportation. A place of worship is a place of assembly.
Place of worship
A church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is used primarily for
conducting formal religious services on a regular basis.
Planned unit development (PUD)
A coordinated development of a large parcel that allows more flexibility than a
conventional subdivision in the siting of buildings, open space, streets and
infrastructure.
Open space planned unit development (OS-PUD)
A PUD in which residential dwelling units are clustered so as to
preserve natural features and create usable open space.
Residential density incentive planned unit development (RDI-PUD)
A PUD in which the allowable residential development intensity is
increased based on the provision of dwelling units that will be restricted
for sale or rental at below-market prices.
Portico
A small porch composed of a roof supported by columns, often found in front of
a doorway.
Principal building
The primary building on a lot which contains one or more principle uses.
Principal use
The primary use on a lot, which may have accessory uses.
Q
Quarry, Sand Pit, Gravel Pit, Top Soil Stripping
A lot or land or part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel
or top soil for sale, as an industrial operation, and exclusive of the process of
grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building, for which application
for a building permit has been made to the Code Official.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-33
R
Rail transport
The transportation by rail of goods or passengers, including such infrastructure
and facilities as tracks, sidings, signals, shops and yards for maintenance and
storage of rail machinery, loading platforms, and passenger and freight terminals.
Rail trail
A multi-purpose public path (paved or natural) created within an abandoned rail
corridor right-of-way.
Rail with trail
A shared-use path that is located on or directly next to an active railroad corridor.
Recreational vehicle
A vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use
as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
Recycling facility
A building or yard area in which used material is separated and processed prior
to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture products. A
junk yard is not deemed to be a recycling facility. A recycling facility shall
not be a high hazard use B.
Recycling plant
A facility that is not a junk yard and in which recoverable resources such as
newspapers, magazines, books, other paper products, glass, aluminum, metal
cans, plastic, and other similar products are recycled, reprocessed and treated to
return such products to a condition in which these may be used for production. A
recycling plant shall not be a high hazard use B.
Reference line
For a fresh water body, the natural mean high water level as defined by state law;
for coastal waters, the highest observable tide line; and for a river or stream,
the ordinary high water mark as defined by State law.
Research and development
See under Industrial use.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-34
Residential care facility
A facility providing room and board together with continuing medical or nursing
supervision, or medical care or treatment, but not including a facility that is
primarily for the provision of alcohol, drug abuse or mental health services.
Examples include nursing home, rest home, convalescent home, rehabilitation
hospital, and hospice. (See also: assisted living facility, continuing care
retirement community, hospital.)
Restaurant
An establishment in which food is prepared on the premises and served to
customers. (See also: bar, nightclub and tavern)
Fast food restaurant
A restaurant where food or beverage is sold for consumption on-site or
off-premises within a short period of time, orders are made at either a
walk-up window or counter, payment is made prior to consumption, and
packaging of food is done in disposable containers, or is otherwise not a
“full service restaurant.” A fast food restaurant may provide, as
secondary activities, delivery service or related retail sales items.
Full-service restaurant
A restaurant where prepared food is sold for consumption on the
premises, customers are provided an individual menu, and a restaurant
employee serves customers at the same table or counter where the items
are consumed. A full-service restaurant may also provide, as
secondary activities, delivery service, take out service (except drive-up
customer service) or related retail sales items.
Take-out restaurant
A restaurant that offers prepared food for consumption entirely off the
premises, with no drive-through facility.
Retail sales
The sale or rental of goods or merchandise directly to the consumer, including
services incidental to the sale of such goods or merchandise, but excluding sale
or rental of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, marine craft and
manufactured housing.
Large format retail sales
A retail sales building, other than a shopping center, that is larger
than 50,000 square feet gross floor area.
Roof appurtenance
A device or structure not designed for human occupancy, attached to the
exterior of the roof of a building, such as a stair or elevator tower, cooling tower,
mechanical equipment housing, storage tank, antenna or similar equipment.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-35
S
School, Post-Secondary
A facility or establishment providing full-time or part-time education or
training beyond the high school level or whose students are usually age 18 or
older. Examples include colleges, community colleges, business schools and
trade schools.
School, Primary or Secondary
A school approved by the New Hampshire State Board of Education in which the
subjects taught are those prescribed by the state board for the grades kindergarten
through 12 of the public schools, including any schools recognized by the state
board as an elementary, middle, junior high or high school.
Self-service storage facility
A building or group of buildings in a fenced compound with controlled access
and which contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized stalls or
lockers that are used for the storage of customer’s personal property, goods or
wares.
Setback
The required distance between a structure or use and a specified reference
point such as a use, lot line, zoning district boundary, wetland or water body.
(See also: yard.)
Shopping center
An integrated group of commercial establishments that is planned, developed,
owned and managed as a unit. Uses in a shopping center may be in one or
more buildings and on one or more lots, provided that all buildings and lots are
developed with a unified approach to access and circulation, parking, truck
loading, vehicular entrances and exits, drainage, utilities, and management of
landscaped and buffer areas.
Sidewalk
A pedestrian way paved with concrete, bricks, pavers or other material, which is
parallel and adjacent or close to the front lot line, and which is either within
the public right-of-way or within an easement for public access.
Sign
See Section 10.1290 for all sign-related definitions.
Skilled nursing care unit
A nursing bed or individual room in a continuing care retirement community
(CCRC) or residential care facility which provides board, shelter and 24-hour
skilled nursing and medical care to a single chronic or convalescent patient.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-36
Sloped roof
A roof with a slope of 1:4 or more for at least 50% of the roof area.
Social service campus
A facility owned by a not-for-profit entity, containing one or more uses in a
planned campus, designed to support or promote the welfare of the community
and the health and well-being of individuals within the community.
Social service campus, residential
A social service campus which includes dwelling units or other
overnight living facilities.
Stacking lane
An area of stacking spaces and driving lane(s) provided for vehicles waiting
for drive-through service, which is physically delineated and distinct from other
traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site.
Stacking space
An area within a stacking lane for vehicles waiting to initiate and/or complete a
drive-through transaction.
Street
A thoroughfare or roadway which is either
(a) formally accepted by the City, or
(b) shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board and
constructed to City subdivision specifications or for which surety has
been posted to guarantee construction of all improvements required by
the Planning Board.
Storage trailer
Any operable or inoperable vehicle, truck or tractor trailer (with or without the
cab) located on a lot for more than 30 days in a calendar year.
Story
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the
upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is measured as the vertical
distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor
surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of
the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters. For
the purpose of determining the number of stories in a building, a story above
grade plane shall count as a full story. An attic, half story or penthouse
shall not be counted as a story, but a short story shall be counted as a story.
(See also: building height, grade plane, half story, short story, and story
above grade plane)
Half Story
A story immediately below a roof in which the floor area with a ceiling
height of 7 feet or more is not greater than 50 percent of the total floor
area of the story below.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-37
Short story
Either (1) a top story that is below the cornice line of a sloped roof and
is at least 20% shorter in height than the story below; or (2) a story
within a mansard roof with a pitch no greater than 30:12.
Story Above Grade Plane
Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade plane,
or in which the finished surface of the floor next above is more than 6
feet above grade plane, or more than 12 feet above the finished ground
level at any point.
Story height
The floor to floor distance between finished floors.
Structure (including roof structure)
Any production or piece of work, artificially built up or composed of parts and
joined together in some definite manner. Structures include, but are not limited
to, buildings, fences over 4 feet in height, signs, and swimming pools. (See also:
temporary structure.)
Structure height
See building height.
Substance abuse treatment facility
A facility that represents or advertises itself as an alcohol abuse or drug abuse
treatment program and that provides treatment, care or rehabilitation for
individuals who show the effects of drug abuse or alcohol abuse.
Superinsulated
Designed and constructed to achieve a noise level reduction of more than 20 dBA
Leq(h) between outdoor and indoor noise levels.
Sustainability
The characteristics defined for sustainable development.
Sustainable
Having the characteristics of sustainable development.
Sustainable development
Development that conserves land, protects natural and historic resources,
combines multiple land uses at various scales (site, neighborhood, and city), and
promotes equitable sharing of the benefits and burdens of development.
Sustainable development includes the following characteristics:
(1) Efficient use of land, energy, water, and materials;
(2) Reuse of existing sites, structures, and infrastructure, including remediation
where necessary;
(3) Protection and restoration of environmentally sensitive lands, natural
resources, wetlands and water resources, and cultural and historic landscapes;
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-38
(4) Promotion of pedestrian-friendly districts and neighborhoods;
(5) Provision of housing to meet the needs of people of all abilities, income
levels, and household types;
(6) Maintenance and expansion of the quantity, quality and accessibility of open
spaces and recreational opportunities;
(7) Support for transportation options that maximize mobility, reduce
congestion, conserve fuel and improve air quality; and
(8) Maximizing energy efficiency and renewable energy opportunities, and
minimizing greenhouse gas emissions and consumption of fossil fuels.
T
Tavern
See drinking establishment.
Temporary structure
A structure which by type and materials of its construction is erected for not
more than 180 days, but not including (a) a construction trailer or (b) a
structure erected in conjunction with a licensed circus or carnival or a nonprofit
fundraising activity. (See also: construction trailer.)
Theme park
An amusement park whose attractions are organized around one or more
themes.
Townhouse
A dwelling unit in a group of three or more attached units, foundation to roof,
open space on at least two sides, separated by a fire-rated wall.
Truck fueling facility
A facility primarily used for the fueling of trucks which may include such
accessory uses as service, repair, a convenience store and/or public bathrooms.
Truck, light
See light truck.
Truck stop
A facility for fueling and repair of trucks and which contains one or more of the
following: brokerage of loads, convenience goods, restaurant, public
bathrooms with showers and laundry facilities, the overnight parking of trucks,
storage of cabs or trailers and sleeping facilities.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-39
Truck terminal
Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one
vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for
permanent or long-term accessory storage for principal land uses at other
locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and
buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal.
U
Underground parking level
A story used for off-street parking that is below the grade plane.
Upland
Land that is not a wetland.
Use
Any purpose for which a lot, building or other structure or a tract of land may
be designated, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any activity,
occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a
building or other structure or on a tract of land.
use, nonconforming
See nonconforming use.
V
Vegetated buffer strip
An area retained in its natural state or replanted along the banks of watercourses,
water bodies or wetlands, for the purpose of preventing erosion, trapping the
sediment in overland runoff, and allowing for periodic flooding without damage
to structures. (see also: wetland buffer)
Vehicular use area
An accessway, driveway, maneuvering aisle, or off-street parking or
loading area.
Vernal pool
A surface water or wetland, excluding areas resulting from man-made activities
such as gravel pit operations, logging equipment rutting, sedimentation ponds, or
detention ponds but including areas intentionally created for purposes of
compensatory mitigation, which provides breeding habitat for amphibians and
invertebrates that have adapted to the unique environments provided by these
pools and which:
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-40
(a) Cycle annually from flooded to dry conditions, although their
hydroperiod, size, and shape might vary from year to year; and
(b) Typically have the following characteristics:
(1) Formed in a shallow depression or basin;
(2) Have no permanently flowing outlet;
(3) Hold water for at least 2 continuous months following spring ice-out;
(4) Lack a viable fish population; and
(5) Support one or more primary vernal pool indicators, or 3 or more
secondary vernal pool indicators.
Vessel, permanently moored
See permanently moored vessel.
Veterinary care facility
An establishment for the diagnosis and treatment of animals, which may
include animal boarding or animal crematory as accessory uses.
W
Water Park
An amusement park whose attractions include slides, fountains, pools and
other recreational settings involving water.
Wetland
An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, vernal pools
and similar areas. The following are specifically included in the definition of
wetland:
Created wetland
An area that has been transformed from upland to wetland where the
upland was not created by human activity such as by filling or water
diversion.
Inland wetland
A wetland that is not subject to periodic inundation by tidal waters.
Tidal wetland
A wetland whose vegetation, hydrology or soils are influenced by
periodic inundation of tidal waters.
Wetland buffer
An upland area, adjacent to a wetland or water body, which is subject to
special regulations and reviews in order to protect the adjacent wetland or
water body. (see also: vegetated buffer strip)
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-41
Wetland hydrology
Permanent or periodic inundation, or soil saturation to within 6 inches of the soil
surface for at least 7 consecutive days during the growing season and as further
defined in the Federal Manual.
Wholesale use
A facility that sells goods and materials to customers who are other business
entities or that sells by mail. Unless specifically allowed in the Table of Use
regulations, wholesale uses do not include retail sales or direct sales to
consumers.
Workforce housing
A dwelling, or group of dwellings developed as a single project, containing
workforce housing units, provided that a housing development that excludes
minor children from more than 20 percent of the units, or in which more than 50
percent of the dwelling units have fewer than two bedrooms, shall not constitute
workforce housing for the purposes of this Ordinance. All workforce housing
units shall include a restrictive covenant that ensures affordability as specified in
RSA 674:58,IV, for the maximum allowable term but no less than 30 years.
Workforce housing unit
A housing unit which qualifies as “workforce housing” under RSA 674:58, IV,
including:
(a) housing which is intended for sale and which is affordable to a
household with an income of no more than 100 percent of the median
income for a 4-person household for the Portsmouth-Rochester HUD
Metropolitan Fair Market Rent Area (HMFA) as published annually by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), or
(b) rental housing which is affordable to a household with an income of no
more than 60 percent of the median income for a 3-person household for
the Portsmouth-Rochester HMFA as published annually by HUD.
To qualify as a workforce housing unit under this Ordinance, the unit must be
subject to enforceable restrictions as to price and occupancy, such as a recorded
land lease or deed restriction, as determined by the Planning Board, in order to
ensure its long-term availability and affordability. A workforce housing unit is
a specific type of affordable unit as defined in this Ordinance. (See also:
affordable unit.)
X
Xeriscape
Landscape design that incorporates drought-tolerant native plants to conserve
water.
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-42
Y
Yard
An open space from the ground upward and open to the sky on the same lot
with a building or structure. (See also: setback)
Yard, front
A yard extending across the full width of a lot between the street right
of way line and nearest point of any building. Front yard dimensions
are to be measured from the street where a plan of the street is on file
with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds or in City records, or in
the absence of such plan, from a line 25 feet from and parallel to the
center line of the traveled way.
Principal front yard
On a lot with more than one front yard, the front yard designated to
bear the address. On a lot with one front yard, that front yard may be
referred to as the principal front yard.
Secondary front yard
On a lot with more than one front yard, the front yard that is not the
principal front yard.
Yard Designations
Article 15 Definitions
As Amended Through December 16, 2019 15-43
Yard, rear
A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear lot line and
extending in depth from the nearest point on the rear lot line to the
nearest point of the principal building or buildings.
Yard, side
A yard extending from a front yard to the rear yard and from the
nearest point of a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal
building or buildings.
Yard sale
The temporary sale of second hand goods held on a residential property and
limited to 3 days in any 6-month period per residential building. Such sales are
not considered to be commercial in character.
Z

Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 1
ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAPAMENDMENTS
ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
April 5, 2010
Ordinance # 04-2010
Section 10.1115.42 – Optional Payment In Lieu of Providing Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
? Changed “$5,000.00” to $2,000.00”
September 20, 2010
Ordinance # 07-2010
Section 10.1010 – Wetlands Protection
? In Sections 10.1016.10, 10.1016.20, 10.1016.30 and 10.1016.50, changed “use” to “use, activity
and alteration” (or “use, activity or alteration” where appropriate), including plural forms
? In Section 10.1016.10 – Permitted Uses, inserted new item (6) for emergency power generator
? In Section 10.1017.30 – Application Review Procedure, subsection 10.1017.33, changed “The
Planning Board” to “The Planning Board or the Planning Director”
? In Section 10.1018.10 – Stormwater Management, deleted reference to Innovative Stormwater
Treatment Technologies Best Management Practices Manual and insert reference to New
Hampshire Stormwater Manual
? In Section 10.1018.21, deleted the words “greater than 5,000 square feet” and replaced the words
“As required by the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, as amended” with “ 0’ – 25’ ”
under “Vegetated Buffer Strip” and “ 25’ – 50’ ” under “Limited Cut Area”
October 18, 2010
Ordinance # 09-2010
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? In Section 10.440 – Table of Uses – Residential, Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial
Districts, changed “N” to “P” for use #1.43 in the GA/MH district
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Insert new Section 10.522 – Multifamily Dwellings
? In Section 10.533 – Special Yard Requirements on Lafayette Road, inserted reference to Section
10.521
? In Section 10.570 – Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses, replaced subsection 10.572 with
new subsections 10.572, 10.573 and 10.576
Article 15 - Definitions
? Inserted new definition of “building length”
December 6, 2010
Ordinance # 11-2010
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Revised Section 10.517 – Roof Appurtenances and Other Rooftop Features
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 2
March 7, 2011
Ordinance # 03-2011
Article 7 – Flexible Development
? In Section 10.730 – Gateway Planned Development, revised subsection 10.735 – Sustainability
Standards
May 21, 2012
Ordinance # 8-2012
Article 5 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? In Section 10.440 – Table of Uses – Residential, Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial
Districts, changed “S” to “CU” for Use #19.40 – Drive-through facility, as accessory use to a
permitted use, in the GB, GW, B and OR districts
Article 8 – Supplemental Use Standards
? In Section 10.836 – Accessory Drive-Through Uses, revised subsections 10.836.20 and 10.836.30
May 21, 2012
Ordinance # 9-2012
Article 15 – Definitions
? In Section 10.1530 – Terms of General Applicability, revised the definition of “Museum”
August 6, 2012
Ordinance # 10-2012
Article 11 – Site Development Standards,
Section 10.1115 – Off-Street Parking Provisions in the Downtown Overlay District
? Deleted former paragraph 10.1115.12 and renumbered paragraph 10.1115.13 as 10.1115.12
? Revised subsection 10.1115.20 – Number of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces, paragraph
10.1115.21
? Deleted subsections 10.1115.30 – Optional Payment in Lieu of Providing Required Off-Street
Parking Spaces, 10.1115.40 – Amount of Payment in Lieu, and 10.1115.50 – Procedure and
Administration, and 10.1115.60 – Application of Provisions
January 7, 2013
Ordinance # 01-2013
Article 6 – Overlay Districts
Section 10.630 – Historic District
? Revised Section 10.633.20 – Exemptions from Certificate of Approval
Article 15 – Definitions
? In Section 10.1530 – Terms of General Applicability, inserted a definition for “contributing
structure”
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 3
January 22, 2013
Ordinance # 02-2013
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? In Section 10.535 – Exceptions to Dimensional Standards in the Central Business District,
inserted new Section 10.535.12 – Central Business A and B – Maximum Elevation Above Street
April 15, 2013
Ordinance # 04-2013
Article 12 – Signs
? In Section 10.1230 – Sign Districts, moved the Business district from Sign District 3 to Sign
District 4
? Revised Section 10.1242 – parapet signs and wall signs
? Revised Section 10.1251.10 – maximum aggregate sign area
? Revised Section 10.1251.20 – sign area for projecting signs in Sign District 3
? Revised Section 10.1271.10 – signs on building facing more than one street
? In Section 10.1290 – Sign Definitions, revised definition of “aggregate sign area”
April 15, 2013
Ordinance # 05-2013
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? In Section 10.515.10 – Building Coverage and Yards, inserted new paragraph (c) re: mechanical
systems
? Inserted new Section 10.516.40 – Projections Into Required Yards
Article 15 – Definitions
? In Section 10.1530 – Terms of General Applicability, inserted a definition for “portico”
April 15, 2013
Ordinance # 06-2013
Article 6 – Overlay Districts, Section 10.630 – Historic District
? Revised Section 10.635.20 – Work Sessions
September 16, 2013
Ordinance # 07-2013
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Revised Section 10.531 – Table of Dimensional Standards – Business and Industrial Districts
(maximum structure height in the CBA and CBB districts)
? Inserted new Section 10.535.13 – Increased Building Height by Conditional Use Permit
Article 15 – Definitions, Section 10.1530 – Terms of General Applicability
? Inserted definitions for “story,” “half story” and “story above grade plane”
December 16, 2013
Ordinance # 13-2013
Article 6 – Overlay Districts, Section 10.630 – Historic District
? Inserted new Section 10.633.30 – Administrative Approval
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 4
? Amended Section 10.634.10 – Application Submission, to require electronic (PDF) submissions
? Amended Section 10.634.20 – Application Contents, regarding scaled plans and massing models
? Inserted new Section 10.635.35 regarding Consent Agendas
April 7, 2014
Ordinance # 01-2014
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Amended Section 10.535.13 – Increased Building Height by Conditional Use Permit
April 21, 2014
Ordinance # 02-2014
Article 5A – Character Districts
? Added entire new Article 5A including Regulating Plan maps
April 21, 2014
Ordinance # 03-2014
Articles 4, 6, 12 and 15 – Miscellaneous Amendments to Conform to Article 5A
? Amended Section 10.410 – Establishment and Purpose of Districts by adding references to the
Character Districts.
? Inserted new Section 10.421.30 regarding maps incorporated in the Zoning Map by reference,
including Character District Regulating Plan and Special Requirements Maps, Flood Insurance
Rate Maps, and the “FAR Part 77 Imaginary Surfaces Plan.”
? Amended Section 10.641.10 by adding a reference to the Character Districts.
? Amended Sections 10.643.20 and 10.643.30 regarding off-street parking facilities on certain
streets in the Downtown Overlay District.
? Amended Section 10.1230 by adding references to the Character Districts in Sign Districts 2 and
3.
August 18, 2014
Ordinance # 05-2014
Article 15 – Definitions
? Added definition of “building footprint”
November 17, 2014
Ordinance # 08-2014
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Amended Section 10.440, use #1.30 Townhouses and #1.41 Multifamily Dwellings with 3 or 4
units to require a Special Exception within the GRA and GRB districts
January 5, 2015
Ordinance # 01-2015
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Amended Section 10.440, use #15.20 – helipads and heliports
Article 15 – Definitions
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 5
? Added definitions of “helipad” and “heliport”
January 5, 2015
Ordinance # 02-2015
Article 11 – Site Development Standards
? Inserted new Section 10.1115.24 to exempt properties in the Downtown Overlay District from the
required maximum number of parking spaces
July 20, 2015
Ordinance # 03-2015
Article 7 – Flexible Development
Section 10.730 – Gateway Planned Development
? Revised Section 10.734.20, front yard requirements
? Revised Section 10.734.33, maximum building height
? Revised Section 10.738.30, Modification of Standards
Article 15 – Definitions
? Added definitions of “affordable,” “workforce housing” and “workforce housing unit”
August 17, 2015
Ordinance # 06-2015
Article 5A – Character Districts
? Replace entire Article
? Articles 4, 6, 12 and 15 – Miscellaneous Amendments to Conform to Article 5A
December 21, 2015
Ordinance # 09-2015
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amended the definitions of “hotel” and “motel” to exclude gambling
January 25, 2016
Ordinance # 01-2016
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Amended Section 10.440, use #1.70 – Manufactured housing park by adding a reference to
supplemental regulations in Section 10.814
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Revised Section 10.531 – Table of Dimensional Standards – GA/MH by adding a reference to
dimensional standards for manufactured housing parks in Section 10.814
Article 8 – Supplemental Use Standards
? Added Section 10.814 – Manufactured Housing Park Dimensional Standards
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 6
January 25, 2016
Ordinance # 02-2016
Article 10 – Environmental Protection Standards
? Amended Section 10.1016 Permitted Uses by adding uses on an approved Wetland Protection
Plan
? Amended Section 10.1017 Conditional Uses by adding Section 10.1017.80 – Wetland Protection
Plan
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amended the definition of “impervious surface”
April 25, 2016
Ordinance # 04-2016
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Added Section 10.470 – Uses Permitted in the Transportation Corridor District
July 11, 2016
Ordinance # 05-2016
Article 5A – Character Districts
? Replaced entire Article
Articles 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 12 and 15
? Miscellaneous amendments to conform to revised Article 5A
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 01-2017
Article 2 – Administration and Enforcement
? Section 10.236 – Extended the term of variances and special exceptions to two years
Article 3 – Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses
? Section 10.320 – Amended provisions regarding nonconforming buildings and structures
Article 11 – Site Development Standards
? Sections 10.1113.31 and 10.1113.41 – Added the Gateway district to the tables of setback
requirements for parking areas
Article 15 – Definitions
? Section 10.1530 – Amended the definition of “structure”
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 7
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 02-2017
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Section 10.515.10 – Revised provisions related to measurement of yards
? Section 10.516.30 – Updated the district references for corner lot vision obstruction
? Section 10.516.40 – Revised the provisions regarding projections into required yards
Article 15 – Definitions
? Section 10.1530 – Amended the definition of “building coverage”
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 03-2017
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Section 10.521 – Reduced the maximum building height for buildings with flat roofs from 35 feet
to 30 feet in the Residential districts, and from 40 feet to 30 feet in the Mixed Residential districts
? Section 10.1530 – Added definitions for “flat roof” and “sloped roof”
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 04-2017
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Section 10.440 – Added accessory dwelling units and garden cottages as uses allowed by
conditional use permit from the Planning Board
Article 8 – Supplemental Use Standards
? Added Sections 10.814 – Accessory Dwelling Units and 10.815 – Garden Cottages
Article 15 – Definitions
? Added definitions for “accessory dwelling unit”, “attached accessory dwelling unit”, “detached
accessory dwelling unit”, and “garden cottage”
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 05-2017
Article 5A – Character Districts
? Deleted Section 10.5A45 – Architectural Design Guidelines
Article 6 – Overlay Districts
? Added Section 10.632.30 referencing the design guidelines adopted by the Historic District
Commission
? Amended Section 10.635.70(3) to reference the HDC’s design guidelines
? Amended Section 10.633.20 to revise and expand the list of activities that are exempt from HDC
review and approval, and to clarify that such activities require administrative review and approval
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 06-2017
Article 10 – Environmental Protection Standards
? Added Section 10.1013.40(e), to include a portion of the Piscataqua River shoreline as a
jurisdictional area
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 8
? Amended Section 10.1016.10(4)(a) to clarify the allowance for expansion of single or two-family
dwellings
? Added Section 10.1017.50(6) to require restoration of a vegetated buffer strip to the extent
feasible
January 9, 2017
Ordinance # 07-2017
Article 12 – Signs
? Added Section 10.1263.60 regarding the type and manner of illumination of signs using direct
illumination
? Amended definition of “changeable sign” in Section 10.1290
June 19, 2017
Ordinance 16-2017
Article 5A – Character-Based Zoning
? Added Section 10.5A46.23 to allowing for excess community space to be credited to another
development in the same Incentive Overlay District
June 19, 2017
Ordinance 17-2017
Article 6 – Overlay Districts
? Amended Section 10.633.20 to add an exemption for kiosks, signs, and other site elements related
to public parking in private parking lots authorized by a permit from the Department of Public
Works
Article 12 – Signs
? Amended Section 10.1222.20 to exempt directional or information signs pertaining to public
parking in a private lot authorized by a permit from the Department of Public Works
? Amended definition “Information Sign” in Section 10.1290
December 4, 2017
Ordinance 25-2017
Article 8 – Supplemental Use Standards
? Amend Section 10.814 and 10.815 by deleting the separate off-street parking requirements for
accessory dwelling units and garden cottages.
? Amend Sections 10.814.80 and 10.815.60 to allow the Planning Board to require additional offstreet
parking spaces when granting a conditional use permit.
Article 11 – Site Development Standards
? Insert new section 10.1111.10 and renumber the existing sections 10.1111.10 and 10.1111.20
accordingly.
? Replace Section 10.1112 – Number of Required Parking Spaces.
? Amend the table in subsection 10.1115.21 of the Off-Street Parking Provisions for the Downtown
Overlay District to reduce parking space requirements for residential uses and add a requirement
for conference or banquet facilities that are part of a hotel or motel.
? Insert a new Section 10.1116 – Bicycle Parking
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 9
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amend Section 10.1530 – Terms of General Applicability by deleting “single-family” from the
definition of townhouse and adding new definitions for driveway, maneuvering aisle, and
maximum occupancy.
December 4, 2017
Ordinance 26-2017
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Delete Gateway (GW) under Business Districts from Section 10.410 Establishment and Purpose
of Districts and add new Districts as follows: Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor (G1)
and Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Center (G2).
? Remove Gateway (GW) and add G1 and G2 to Section 10.440 Table of Uses – Residential,
Mixed Residential, Business and Industrial Districts.
Article 5 – Dimensional and Intensity Standards
? Amend Table 10.531 Table of Dimensional Standards to remove references to Gateway District.
? Remove reference to Section 10.730 in Section 10.533.
Article 5A – Character-Based Zoning
? Add the following new building types to Figure 10.5A43.60: Cottage, Paired House, Gateway
Townhouse, Mixed Use Building, Small Flex Space/Fabrication Building, and Community
Building
? Add the following Façade Types to Figure 105A43.10: Dooryard, Terrace, Gallery, and Arcade
? Add the following Community Space Types to Figure 10.5A45.10: Recreation Field or Court,
Common or Green, Community Garden, Outdoor Dining Café, and Courtyard
? Amend the Definitions in Section 10.5A60 to revise the definitions of block, community space,
and front building setback, and add new definitions for building stepback, development site,
development site area, and public realm.
Article 5B – Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts
? Add new Article and amend Zoning Map.
Article 7 – Flexible Development
? Delete Section 10.730 Gateway Planned Development.
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amend the definitions for building coverage and coverage and add new definition for open space
coverage.
August 20, 2018
Ordinance # 03-2018
Article 4 – Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
? Change use 3.512 (indoor performance facility with occupancy less than 500 to be allowed by
Special Exception in the Business District and Character District 4-West End
? Add new accessory use #19.50 Outdoor dining or drinking area to be permitted permitted (P) in
CD5, CD4, GB, G1, and G2 and allowed by conditional use permit (CUP) in CD4-L2, B, and
CD4-W
Article 5A – Character-Based Zoning
? Insert new section 10.5A42.40 North Mill Pond Public View Corridors to be located at Dover
Street
? Amend Table 10.5A46.10 – Incentives to Development Standards regarding minimum ground
story height, minimum off-street parking, ground story parking, and maximum building footprint
for properties in the CD4-W district within 200’ of the North Mill Pond.
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 10
? Amend Section 10.5A46.20 – Requirements to Receive Incentives to the Development Standards
to clarify 10.5A46.21 public greenway requirements for lots within 100 feet of the North Mill
Pond or Piscataqua River.
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amend definition of building block length to include public greenway.
August 20, 2018
Ordinance # 04-2018
Article 5A – Character-Based Zoning
? Amend Table 10.5A46.10 – Incentives to Development Standards regarding maximum building
block length and maximum building footprint in the CD4-L1 and CD4-L2 Districts.
? Amend section 10.5A42.40 North Mill Pond Public View Corridors to include Cabot Street,
Cornwall Street, and Langdon Street.
August 20, 2018
Ordinance # 05-2018
Article 5A – Character-Based Zoning
? Amend Figure 10.5A41.10A Development Standards to add new building and façade types
originally added for the Gateway Districts to the Character Districts
? Amend the definitions of Façade Types in Figure 10.5A43.10
? Amend the definitions of Building Types in Figure 10.5A43.60
? Amend the definitions of Community Spaces in Figure 10.5A45.10
October 15, 2018 (effective date January 1, 2019)
Ordinance #09-2018
Article 6 – Overlay Districts
? Insert a new Section 10.613.60 for Highway Noise Overlay District
? Insert a new Section 10.670 for Highway Noise Overlay District
? Ordinance to be in effect as of January 1, 2019
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amend terms of general applicability to insert new definitions related to the Highway Noise
Overlay District.
? Ordinance to be in effect as of January 1, 2019
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 11
February 4, 2019
Ordinance #01-2019
Article 11 – Site Development Standards, Section 10.1110 – Off Street Parking
? Delete existing Section 10.1112.52 and insert a new Section 10.1112.14 regarding requirements
for granting of a conditional use permit
? Amend Section 10.1112.21 to remove reference to shopping center
? Amend Section 10.1112.323 to remove reference to Site Plan Review process
? Amend Section 10.1115.21 to apply same residential requirements to Downtown Overlay District
as listed in Section 10.1112.30
February 4, 2019
Ordinance #02-2019
Article 2 – Administration and Enforcement
? Insert a new Section 10.240 for Conditional Use Permits
February 4, 2019
Ordinance #03-2019
Article 12 – Signs
? Amendments to Sections 10.1210, 10.1222, 10.1224, 10.1225 regarding content neutrality
? Insert new Section 10.1223 regarding Temporary Signs
? Add Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Districts to Sign Districts Section 10.1232
? Amendments to Section 10.1242 to clarify parapet and walk sign requirements for buildings
facing multiple streets
? Amend Section 10.1243 to remove reference to shopping center
? Amend Section 10.1251.30 to add dimensional requirements for multiple freestanding signs on a
lot
? Insert new Section 10.1251.40 regarding illuminated projection signs
? Amend Section 10.1271 to clarify requirements regarding signs on more than one façade of a
building
? Amend Section 10.1290 Sign Definitions to incorporate changes made for content neutrality
March 4, 2019
Ordinance #05-2019
Article 8 – Supplemental Use Standards
? Delete existing Sections 10.814 – Accessory Dwelling Units and 10.815 – Garden Cottages and
insert in their place new Sections 10.814 and 10.815 with revisions to clarify and adjust zoning
compliance requirements for lots, design standards, Planning Board findings, and owneroccupancy.
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 12
Article 15 – Definitions
? Revise definitions for accessory building or structure, attached accessory dwelling unit, detached
accessory dwelling unit, and principal building.
? Add new definitions for principal dwelling and principal dwelling unit.
December 2, 2019
Ordinance #19-2019
Article 10 – Environmental Protection Standards
? Amendments to Section 10.1010 – Wetlands Protection including requirements for fencing
clarifying the characterization of impacts to the wetland and buffer, adding information related to
the compensatory removal of impervious surface and the requirements for a wetland buffer
enhancement plan, providing guidance on living shorelines for tidal areas and use of porous
pavement in the wetland buffer, and delineating wetland buffer areas.
December 16, 2019
Ordinance #20-2019
Article 6 – Overlay Districts
? Add new “extended flood hazard area” and requirements and standards for this area.
? Update definitions and other sections to be consistent with requirements of National Flood
Insurance Program.
? Add requirement for new construction in the special flood hazard to be built 2-feet above the
BFE.
? Amend definition of “substantial improvement” to lower the value of improvements from 50% of
market value to 40% of market value.
Article 15 – Definitions
? Amend list of definitions to conform with Article 6.
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 13
ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
June 21, 2010
Ordinance # 06-2010
Map 201, Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 (1–6 Sagamore Grove) rezoned from Waterfront Business to Single
Residence B
October 18, 2010
Ordinance # 08-2010
Map 285, Lot 12 (2700 Lafayette Road) rezoned from Municipal to Gateway
June 6, 2011
Ordinance # 8-2011
Portion of Map 116, Lot 44 rezoned from Municipal to Mixed Residence Office
November 13, 2012
Ordinance # 17-2012
Map 105, Lot 19 (143 Daniel Street) rezoned from Municipal to Central Business B and Downtown
Overlay District
April 21, 2014
Ordinance # 02-2014
New Zoning Map adopted for Character Districts, comprising the following maps:
? Map 10.5A21A – Regulating Plan
? Map 10.5A21B – Special Requirements: Specific Building Height Requirement Areas
? Map 10.5A21C – Special Requirements: Shopfront, Officefront, Step Frontage, and Frontage
Buildout and Special Use Requirement Areas
July 20, 2015
Ordinance # 03-2015
Rezoned the following lots from Industrial, Office Research and Municipal to Gateway:
? Assessors Map 163, Lots 33, 34 and 37
? Assessors Map 165, Lots 1, 2 and 14
? Assessors Map 172, Lots 1 and 2
? Assessors Map 173, Lots 2 and 10
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 14
August 17, 2015
Ordinance # 06-2015
New Zoning Map adopted for Character Districts, comprising the following maps:
? Map 10.5A21A – Character Districts and Civic Districts
? Map 10.5A21B – Building Height Standards
? Map 10.5A21C – Special Requirements for Façade Types, Front Lot Line Buildout & Uses
December 21, 2015
Ordinance # 08-2015
Portion of Map 201, Lot 1 rezoned from Waterfront Business to Single Residence B
April 25, 2016
Ordinance # 04-2016
Amend the Zoning Map by rezoning the following lots or parts thereof to the Transportation Corridor
District:
? Assessors Map 165 Lot 14
? Assessors Map 234 Lot 2A
? Part of Assessors Map 164 Lot 4 (100-foot wide corridor, measured from the southeasterly
property line)
? Assessors Map 125 Lot 20
? Assessors Map 124 Lot 13
? Assessors Map 119 Lot 3
? Part of Assessors Map 119 Lot 5 (50-foot wide corridor, measured from the southwesterly
property line)
July 11, 2016
Ordinance # 05-2016
New Zoning Map adopted for Character Districts, comprising the following maps:
? Map 10.5A21A – Character Districts and Civic Districts
? Map 10.5A21B – Building Height Standards
? Map 10.5A21C – Special Requirements for Façade Types, Front Lot Line Buildout & Uses
Rezoned the following lots from Character District 4-L1, Mixed Residence Business, Business and
Central Business B to General Residence C:
? Assessors Map 126, Lots 27, 28, 31 and 32
? Assessors Map 138, Lots 34, 48, 48-1, 48-2, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58 and 59
? Assessors Map 139, Lots 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
? Assessors Map 144, Lot 40
? Assessors Map 145, Lots 14, 19, 20, 21, 29 and 30
? Assessors Map 146, Lots 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23
? Assessors Map 147, Lots 22, 23,24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 30A
? Assessors Map 156, Lots 24 and 35
? Assessors Map 157, Lots 10, 11, 12,13 and 14
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 15
December 4, 2017
Ordinance # 26-2017
Rezoned the following lots from Gateway to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor (G1):
? Assessors Map 163 Lot 33
? Assessors Map 163 Lot 34
? Assessors Map 163 Lot 37
? Assessors Map 165 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 172 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 172 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 173 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 173 Lot 10
? Assessors Map 229 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 229 Lot 9
? Assessors Map 229 Lot 8B
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 67
? Assessors Map 243 Lot 67-1
? Assessors Map 244 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 244 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 244 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 244 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 245 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 245 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 245 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 245 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 267 Lot 0
? Assessors Map 267 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 267 Lot 28
? Assessors Map 268 Lot 98
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 7
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 9-4
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 9-5
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 9-6
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 10
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 0
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 2-1
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 2-2
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 2-4
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 2-50
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 273 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 12
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 13
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 15
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 16-1
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 16-2
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 15A
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 0
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 17
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 18
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 19
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 20
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 21
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 22
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 23
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 26-1
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 26-3
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 22A
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 291 Lot 9
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 0
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 4-1
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 4-2
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 6
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 9
? Assessors Map 297 Lot 10
? Assessors Map 298 Lot 7
? Portions of Assessors Map
297 Lot 11, Map 297 Lot 5A,
Map 298 Lot 1, Map 298 Lot
2, Map 298 Lot 3, Map 298
Lot 4, Map 298 Lot 5, Map
298 Lot 6, Map 215 Lot 9,
Map 239 Lot 8, Map 272 Lot
1, Map 272 Lot 9, Map 273
Lot 5, Map 244 Lot 1, Map
244 Lot 2
Rezoned the following lots from Gateway to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Center (G2):
? Assessors Map 251 Lot 124
? Assessors Map 251 Lot 125
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 7
? Assessors Map 252 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 5-1
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 9
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 11
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 12
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 13
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 14
? Assessors Map 253 Lot 2A
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 16
Rezoned the following lots from General Business to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor (G1):
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 5
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 7
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 10
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 11
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 12
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 13
? Assessors Map 215 Lot 14
? Assessors Map 216 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 10-2
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 15
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 16
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 17
? Assessors Map 238 Lot 20
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 7-1
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 7-2
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 7-3
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 9
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 10
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 11
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 13
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 13-1
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 13-2
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 15
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 16
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 18
? Assessors Map 267 Lot 1
? Assessors Map 267 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 272 Lot 8
? Assessors Map 285 Lot 14
? Assessors Map 286 Lot 1
? Portions of Assessors Map
217 Lot 1, Map 217 Lot 2A
Rezoned the following lots from General Business to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Center (G2):
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 22
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 24
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 25
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 28
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 29
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 30
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 32
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 33
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 34
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 38
? Assessors Map 218 Lot 39
Rezoned the following lots from Single Residence B to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Center (G2):
? Assessors Map 210 Lot 2
? Assessors Map 210 Lot 3
? Assessors Map 210 Lot 4
? Assessors Map 210 Lot 5
Rezoned the following lots from Garden Apartment / Mobile Home to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed
Use Corridor (G1):
? Assessors Map 239 Lot 12
Rezoned the following lots from Single Residence A to Gateway Neighborhood Mixed Use Corridor
(G1):
? A portion of Assessors Map 239 Lot 8
Zoning Ordinance and Map Amendments
A – 17
August 20, 2018
Ordinance # 03-2018
Amendments to the Character-Based Zoning Regulation Plan Maps (Maps 10.5A21A) to change
Assessors Map 157 Lots 1 and 2 from Office Research (OR) to Character District 4 West End (CD4-W)
and a portion of Assessors Map 164 Lot 4 from OR and Transportation Corridor (TC) to CD4-W
Amendments to the Character-Based Zoning Regulation Plan Maps (Maps 10.5A21B) to extend the West
End Overlay District and add new Building Height Standards for Assessors Map 157 Lots 1 and 2 and a
portion of Assessors Map 164 Lot 4
August 20, 2018
Ordinance # 04-2018
Amendments to the Character-Based Zoning Regulation Plan Maps (Maps 10.5A21A) to change a
portion of Assessor Map 164 Lot 4 from Office Research (OR) and Transportation Corridor (TC) to CD4-
L1
Amendments to the Character-Based Zoning Regulation Plan Maps (Maps 10.5A21B) to extend the West
End Overlay District and add new Building Height Standards for a portion of Assessors Map 164 Lot 4
October 15, 2018 (effective date January 1, 2019
Ordinance #09-2018
Amend the Zoning Map to add a new High Noise Overlay District including the following lots or parts
thereof:
? Lots within 500 feet of the centerline of I-95 or NH 16 except land subject to the Pease
Development Authority’s land use regulations
February 19, 2019
Ordinance #04-2019
Rezoned Map 213, Lot 1 (290 Gosling Rd) from Waterfront Industrial (WI) to Office Research (OR).
May 20, 2019
Ordinance #06-2019
Rezoned Map 126, Lot 12 (15 Middle St) from CIVIC District to Character District 4 (CD4) and from no
height standard to 2-3 stories (40’).
CITY OF PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE
SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS
Adopted by Planning Board: December 17, 2009
Amended: September 15, 2016

Site Plan Review Regulations i September 15, 2016
SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 1
SECTION 1.1 PURPOSE.................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION 1.2 APPLICABILITY............................................................................................................. 1
ARTICLE 2 APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS 3
SECTION 2.1 PLANNING BOARD RESPONSIBILITIES............................................................................ 3
SECTION 2.2 SITE PLAN REVIEW TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ................................................. 3
SECTION 2.3 TECHNICAL REVIEW AND ASSISTANCE .......................................................................... 3
SECTION 2.4 PREAPPLICATION REVIEW ............................................................................................ 4
SECTION 2.5 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS ...................................................................................... 6
SECTION 2.6 REFERRALS TO CITY DEPARTMENTS........................................................................... 12
SECTION 2.7 PUBLIC HEARING....................................................................................................... 13
SECTION 2.8 DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS...................................................... 14
SECTION 2.9 EVALUATION CRITERIA............................................................................................... 14
SECTION 2.10 WAIVER REQUESTS ................................................................................................... 15
SECTION 2.11 APPROVAL PROCEDURES........................................................................................... 16
SECTION 2.12 SITE PLAN REVIEW AGREEMENT ................................................................................ 16
SECTION 2.13 RECORDING OF SITE PLANS....................................................................................... 16
SECTION 2.14 APPROVAL EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION..................................................................... 18
SECTION 2.15 POST APPROVAL PROCEDURES.................................................................................. 19
SECTION 2.16 PROJECT INSPECTION AND COMPLETION .................................................................... 19
SECTION 2.17 EXEMPTION OF APPROVED SITE PLAN FROM CHANGES IN LAND USE REGULATIONS ..... 20
ARTICLE 3 VEHICULAR CIRCULATION STANDARDS 23
SECTION 3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 23
SECTION 3.2 OFF-SITE IMPACTS .................................................................................................... 23
SECTION 3.3 GENERAL ACCESSWAY AND DRIVEWAY DESIGN .......................................................... 24
SECTION 3.4 CURBING................................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 3.5 TRAFFIC CALMING AND CONNECTIONS........................................................................ 25
SECTION 3.6 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES ...................................................................................... 25
SECTION 3.7 LOADING AND SERVICE AREAS ................................................................................... 27
SECTION 3.8 FIRE LANES............................................................................................................... 28
SECTION 3.9 MASS TRANSIT FACILITIES ......................................................................................... 28
Site Plan Review Regulations ii September 15, 2016
ARTICLE 4 PARKING AREA STANDARDS 29
SECTION 4.1 PARKING PROVISION.................................................................................................. 29
SECTION 4.2 REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSIBLE PARKING FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED................ 29
SECTION 4.3 OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE DESIGN AND LAYOUT ................................................... 29
ARTICLE 5 PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE CIRCULATION 30
SECTION 5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 30
SECTION 5.2 SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN PATHWAYS................................................................... 30
SECTION 5.3 BICYCLE FACILITIES................................................................................................... 31
ARTICLE 6 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS 33
SECTION 6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 33
SECTION 6.2 LANDSCAPING PLAN................................................................................................... 33
SECTION 6.3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................... 34
SECTION 6.4 PLANTING REQUIREMENTS......................................................................................... 35
SECTION 6.5 PLANT SELECTION..................................................................................................... 36
SECTION 6.6 LANDSCAPED AREAS ................................................................................................. 37
SECTION 6.7 LANDSCAPING ALONG PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY........................................................... 37
SECTION 6.8 PERIMETER LANDSCAPING ......................................................................................... 38
SECTION 6.9 SCREENING............................................................................................................... 38
SECTION 6.10 MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT OF LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING......................... 39
SECTION 6.11 IRRIGATION ............................................................................................................... 39
SECTION 6.12 INNOVATIVE LANDSCAPING PRACTICES....................................................................... 40
ARTICLE 7 WATER RESOURCES STANDARDS 41
SECTION 7.1 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID).............................................................................. 41
SECTION 7.2 WATER QUALITY PROTECTION ................................................................................... 41
SECTION 7.3 WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREAS................................................................................. 41
SECTION 7.4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT..................................................................................... 42
ARTICLE 8 UTILITIES STANDARDS 47
SECTION 8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 47
SECTION 8.2 WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM............................................................... 47
SECTION 8.3 SANITARY SEWERS.................................................................................................... 48
SECTION 8.4 OTHER UTILITIES....................................................................................................... 48
SECTION 8.5 OVERSIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS................................................................... 49
Site Plan Review Regulations iii September 15, 2016
ARTICLE 9 ON-SITE WASTE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL STANDARDS 50
SECTION 9.1 WASTE ACCUMULATION ............................................................................................. 50
SECTION 9.2 STORAGE CONTAINERS.............................................................................................. 50
SECTION 9.3 LOCATION AND DISPOSAL........................................................................................... 50
SECTION 9.4 FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS..................................................................... 51
SECTION 9.5 SCREENING.............................................................................................................. 51
ARTICLE 10 OUTDOOR LIGHTING 52
SECTION 10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS............................................................................................... 52
SECTION 10.2 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE ..................................................................... 52
SECTION 10.3 LIGHTING PLAN.......................................................................................................... 52
SECTION 10.4 LAMPS ...................................................................................................................... 53
ARTICLE 11 RADIO COMMUNICATIONS STANDARDS 54
SECTION 11.1 SITE SURVEY ............................................................................................................ 54
ATTACHMENT A: DIGITAL AS-BUILT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 55

Site Plan Review Regulations 1 September 15, 2016
Article 1 Purpose and Applicability
Section 1.1 Purpose
The purposes of these Regulations are to:
(a) Further the safe and orderly development of the City;
(b) Promote sustainable design and development that supports long-term
economic vitality and ecologic integrity;
(c) Achieve a high-quality and sustainable site appearance that conserves and
protects natural resource systems, helps to reduce infrastructure costs, and
conserves energy;
(d) Encourage site design techniques that protect water quality and natural
hydrology, prevent increases in the quantity of stormwater runoff, and
manage stormwater runoff at the source;
(e) Protect abutters against hazards, unsightliness, and nuisances detrimental to
property values;
(f) Insure that development of land is appropriate for the public and private
services and facilities available;
(g) Insure that pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation can be
accommodated in a safe manner;
(h) Preserve and enhance the historic and cultural character of the community.
Section 1.2 Applicability
1.2.1 Uses Requiring Site Plan Approval
Site Plans shall be submitted for Site Plan Review for any development or
redevelopment of land within the municipal boundaries that includes one or more
of the following:
(a) Residential development or redevelopment which, when completed, will
have three (3) or more dwelling units regardless of whether the development
involves a subdivision of land;
(b) Nonresidential development or redevelopment including alterations,
additions or extensions (including the addition of a drive-through facility),
Site Plan Review Regulations 2 September 15, 2016
or new nonresidential uses that increase the amount of required off-street
parking by five (5) or more spaces;
(c) The addition of five (5) or more parking spaces.
1.2.2 Exemption of Small Projects
The Planning Director may determine that a proposed development is exempt
from Site Plan Review if it meets all of the following three criteria:
(a) There is no increase in building height or gross floor area; and
(b) There is no reduction in the setback of any structure or vehicular service
area from any property line; and
(c) Lot coverage by impervious surfaces does not increase by more than 500
square feet.
1.2.3 Determination of Developments of Regional Impact
1. The Planning Board shall make a determination as to whether the proposed
development has the potential for regional impact.
2. In determining whether a project has regional impact, the Planning Board
may consider, but is not limited to the consideration of, such factors as: the
relative size or number of dwelling units compared to the existing housing
stock, the proximity to the borders of a neighboring community,
transportation networks, anticipated emissions or environmental impacts
such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles, the proximity to aquifers or
surface waters which transcend municipal boundaries, water demand, and
shared facilities such as schools, wastewater treatment plants, and solid
waste disposal facilities or other criteria as allowed under NH State Law.
1.2.4 Other Local, State, and Federal Requirements
1. These Site Plan Review Regulations in no way relieve a developer, agent or
individual from compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Rules
and Regulations, Building Codes, Historic District Commission, standard
construction plans and specifications of the Department of Public Works, or
any other local ordinance, regulation, or code that pertains to the proposed
development.
2. The Site Plan Review Agreement shall not be executed until all other
required municipal approvals have been granted.
Site Plan Review Regulations 3 September 15, 2016
Article 2 Application and Review Process
Section 2.1 Planning Board Responsibilities
The Planning Board and the Site Plan Review Technical Advisory Committee
(TAC) are responsible for the review of all Site Plan Review applications.
Section 2.2 Site Plan Review Technical Advisory Committee
2.2.1 Committee Composition
A Site Plan Review Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) is hereby established
to assist and advise the Planning Board in reviewing Site Plan Review
applications. The TAC shall consist of eight (8) members as follows:
(a) The Planning Director or a representative of the Planning Department as
designated by the Director (either of whom shall act as Chair);
(b) Two (2) representatives of the Planning Department as designated by the
Director;
(c) The Director of Public Works or a representative of the Department of
Public Works as designated by the Director;
(d) Two (2) representatives from the Divisions of the Department of Public
Works as designated by the Director of Public Works;
(e) The Chief Building Inspector or a representative of the Inspection
Department as designated by the Chief Building Inspector;
(f) A representative of the Fire Department as designated by the Fire Chief;
2.2.2 Technical Advisory Committee Responsibilities
The Site Plan Review Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) shall make
recommendations to the Planning Board for approval or disapproval of all Site
Plan Review applications.
Section 2.3 Technical Review and Assistance
1. The TAC or the Planning Board may request any additional information it
deems necessary in order to find that the application satisfies the review
standards.
Site Plan Review Regulations 4 September 15, 2016
2. The TAC or the Planning Board may request information or technical
assistance from City staff, Boards, or Commissions, or from independent
experts in any field. If the TAC or the Planning Board determines that it
requires the assistance of independent consultants, the applicant shall agree
in advance to fund or reimburse the City for all costs of engaging such
consultants.
3. When the TAC or the Planning Board notifies the applicant of the need for
technical assistance or additional information, then the time periods for
review and approval of a Site Plan Review application shall be waived only
upon written request by the applicant. In the event that such a request is not
forthcoming, the Planning Board may deny the application.
Section 2.4 Preapplication Review
2.4.1 Preapplication Review – General
1. An applicant may request to meet with the Planning Board for preliminary
nonbinding discussions of a proposal as provided herein. An applicant may
request to meet with the Board for either Preliminary Conceptual Consultation
or Design Review, or both. The preliminary conceptual consultation
phase is mandatory for certain applications as stated in Section 2.4.2 below.
2. Discussions in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation and Design Review
Phases shall not bind either the applicant or the Board. Statements made by
Planning Board members during either phase shall not be a basis for
disqualifying said members or invalidating any action subsequently taken by
the Board.
3. Preliminary review shall be separate and apart from formal consideration of
an application for Site Plan Review, and the time limits for acting on a
proposal shall not apply until a formal application has been submitted and
has been determined by the Planning Board to be complete.
2.4.2 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase
1. The applicant may request a meeting with the Planning Board to discuss a
proposal in conceptual form. The preliminary conceptual consultation phase
is mandatory for a site plan that meets any of the following criteria:
(a) Includes the construction of 30,000 square feet or more gross floor
area;
(b) Includes the creation of 20 or more dwelling units;
(c) Includes the construction of more than one principal structure on a
single parcel.
Site Plan Review Regulations 5 September 15, 2016
2. A request for preliminary conceptual consultation shall be submitted to the
Planning Department at least 10 days prior to the date of a scheduled
meeting of the Board, and shall be accompanied by 12 copies of any plans,
sketches and other documents or exhibits to be discussed with the Board,
along with digital copies of said documents and exhibits in Portable
Document Format (PDF).
3. Preliminary conceptual consultation may occur only at formal meetings of
the Planning Board. However, such discussions shall not be the subject of a
public hearing, and formal notice of abutters and the public shall not be
required.
4. Preliminary conceptual consultation shall be directed at review of the basic
concept of the proposal and suggestions that might be of assistance in
resolving problems with meeting requirements during final consideration.
The Board and the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only
and in general terms such as the desirability of the proposed development
type, scale, intensity and layout under the Master Plan.
2.4.3 Design Review Phase
1. The applicant may request to meet with the Board for nonbinding
discussions of a potential application that involve more specific design and
engineering details than in the preliminary conceptual consultation phase.
2. A request for design review shall be submitted to the Planning Department
at least 14 days prior to the date of a scheduled meeting of the Board, and
shall be accompanied by 12 copies of all plans and exhibits, along with
digital copies of said documents and exhibits in Portable Document Format
(PDF).
3. The request for design review shall include enough of the information listed
in Section 2.5.3(1) and plans displaying enough of the information listed in
Section 2.5.4(3) so that the Board is able to review the project. Detailed
engineering of infrastructure and utilities are not required at the design
review phase, but the information listed in Section 2.5.4(3) should be
displayed in sufficient detail to enable the Board to understand the proposed
project and identify potential issues and concerns.
4. At a regular meeting of the Planning Board, the Board shall determine if the
request for design review includes sufficient information to allow the Board
to understand the project and identify potential issues and concerns, and
shall vote on whether to accept the request for design review and to schedule
a public hearing. If the Board determines that the request does not describe
the proposed project in sufficient detail, it shall notify the applicant of the
specific deficiencies that need to be addressed.
Site Plan Review Regulations 6 September 15, 2016
5. Design review discussions shall take place in a public hearing at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, after notice to abutters, holders of
conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, and the
general public as required by State statute.
6. At any public meeting of the Planning Board, the Board may determine that
the design review process of an application has ended and shall inform the
applicant in writing within 10 days of such determination.
Section 2.5 Application Requirements
2.5.1 Applicant
An application for Site Plan Review shall be submitted by the owner or lessee of
the parcel or parcels, or by the holder of an option or other contract for purchase
or lease of the property. If the applicant is not the current owner, the application
shall include a copy of the lease, option or other contract, and a written letter from
the current property owner.
2.5.2 Applicant Responsibilities
The applicant shall be responsible for fulfilling the following responsibilities
before a Site Plan Review Agreement will be executed.
1. The applicant shall submit a completed application on a form entitled “Site
Plan Review Application” to the Planning Department along with the
application fee and ten (10) copies of the Site Plan (see section 2.5.4 for
plan specifications) and supporting documents and studies for review by the
TAC.
2. After review of the application by the TAC, the applicant shall submit
twelve (12) copies of the Site Plan (see section 2.5.4 for plan specifications)
to the Planning Department including any revisions as requested by the TAC
and supporting documents and studies.
3. The application shall be fully executed and signed, and shall provide
evidence of ownership or legal authorization to represent the landowner.
4. The application shall be complete as submitted and provide adequate
information for evaluation of the proposed site development.
5. The applicant shall pay any application fees and costs of advertising and
providing notice to abutters.
Site Plan Review Regulations 7 September 15, 2016
6. The applicant shall appear and present the Site Plan before the TAC and also
at the public hearing before the Planning Board.
7. The applicant shall provide technical information and expertise sufficient for
evaluation of the application. Such information shall be made available to
the Planning Department at least seven (7) days in advance of any public
hearing or scheduled Planning Board or TAC meeting at which the Site Plan
will be discussed.
8. All application documents, plans, supporting documentation and other
materials shall also be provided in digital Portable Document Format (PDF)
on compact disc, DVD or flash drive. Digital files shall be complete and
exact copies of the corresponding paper submittals (e.g., plans shall be at the
same scale and sheet size as the paper copies). Applicants may submit
additional digital files to assist in presentations at public hearings, but such
additional digital files shall not be considered part of the application unless
corresponding paper documents are also provided.
2.5.3 Site Plan Review Application Required Information
1. The following information shall be included with the Site Plan Review
application:
(a) Detailed statement that lists and describes “green” building components
and systems, including, but not limited to, whether the project is
certifiable as demonstrated by a completed LEED (Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design) checklist. For example, building
orientation, HVAC efficiencies, reductions in water usage, landscaping,
source of building materials, production of on-site electricity, onsite
rainwater recovery systems, energy efficient lighting, “cool” roof
products, “green” refrigerant and plumbing systems, and energy
efficient windows.
(b) Gross floor area and dimensions of all buildings and statement of uses
and floor area for each floor.
(c) Tax map and lot number, and current zoning of all parcels under Site
Plan Review.
(d) Owner’s name, address, telephone number, and signature. Name,
address, and telephone number of applicant if different from owner.
(e) Names and addresses (including Tax Map and Lot number and zoning
districts) of all direct abutting property owners (including properties
located across abutting streets) and holders of existing conservation,
Site Plan Review Regulations 8 September 15, 2016
preservation or agricultural preservation restrictions affecting the
subject property.
(f) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all professionals involved
in the site plan design.
(g) List of reference plans.
(h) List of names and contact information of all public or private utilities
servicing the site.
2. As part of final approval of the site plan by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall submit the following.
(a) All local approvals, permits, easements and licenses required,
including but not limited to:
• Waivers;
• Driveway permits;
• Special exceptions;
• Variances granted;
• Easements;
• Licenses.
(b) Any exhibits, data, reports or studies that may have been required as
part of the approval process, including but not limited to:
• Calculations relating to stormwater runoff;
• Information on composition and quantity of water demand and
wastewater generated;
• Information on air, water or land pollutants to be discharged,
including standards, quantity, treatment and/or controls;
• Estimates of traffic generation and counts pre- and postconstruction;
• Estimates of noise generation;
• A Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan;
• Endangered species and archaeological / historical studies;
• Wetland and water body (coastal and inland) delineations;
• Environmental impact studies.
(c) Amendments and any conditions for final Site Plan approval as
modified from the original Site Plan Review application submittal.
These should be annotated and highlighted on the final site plan in the
index and on each affected plan sheet.
Site Plan Review Regulations 9 September 15, 2016
(d) A document from each of the required private utility service providers
indicating approval of the proposed site plan and indicating an ability
to provide all required private utilities to the site.
(e) A list of any required state and federal permit applications required for
the project and the status of same.
2.5.4 Site Plan Specifications and Required Exhibits and Data
1. Plan sheets submitted as part of the Site Plan Review application process
shall meet the following specifications:
(a) Full size plans shall not be larger than 22 inches by 34 inches with
match lines as required, unless approved by the Planning Director;
(b) Scale: Not less than 1 inch = 60 feet and a graphic bar scale shall be
included on all plans;
(c) GIS data should be referenced to the coordinate system New
Hampshire State Plane, NAD83 (1996), with units in feet;
(d) Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall be prepared and stamped by a
NH licensed civil engineer;
(e) Wetlands shall be delineated by a NH certified wetlands scientist and
so stamped.
2. The following information is required on all sheets of the plan set submitted
as part of the application process:
(a) Title (name of development project), north point, scale, legend;
(b) Date plans first submitted and the date and explanation of all revisions;
(c) Individual plan sheet title that clearly describes the information that is
displayed;
(d) Source and date of data displayed on the plan;
(e) A note shall be provided on the Site Plan stating: “All conditions on
this Plan shall remain in effect in perpetuity pursuant to the
requirements of the Site Plan Review Regulations.”
Site Plan Review Regulations 10 September 15, 2016
3. Plans displaying the following information shall be submitted as part of the
Site Plan Review application process. Where possible, the information on
each plan should be grouped according to the review standards outlined in
Articles 3 through 11 of these regulations.
(a) Existing Conditions
• Surveyed plan of the site showing existing natural and built
features.
• Zoning boundaries.
• Wetland delineation, wetland function and value assessment
(including vernal pools).
• Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), the 100-year flood
elevation line, and Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data, as
required.
(b) Buildings and Structures
• Plan view of all buildings and/or structures indicating their use,
size, dimensions, location and first floor elevation, footings,
overhangs and snow dams.
• Elevations of building(s) indicating their height, massing,
placement, materials, lighting and façade treatments.
• Total floor area.
• Number of usable floors.
• Gross floor area by floor and use.
(c) Access and Circulation
• The location and width of accessways within the site.
• The location of curbing, right-of-ways, edge of pavement and
sidewalks.
• The location, type, size and design of proposed traffic signing
and traffic signal equipment including conduits and pavement
markings on and off-site.
• Names and layout of existing abutting streets (including paper
streets).
• Driveway curb cuts for abutting properties and for any adjacent
properties that front on public roads that provide access to the
site.
• If a subdivision, then right-of-way lines and names of all
proposed streets, accessways, lanes, right-of-ways or
easements and licenses intended to be dedicated for public use.
• Use current AASHTO truck turning templates descriptions
with the minimum vehicle allowed being a WB-50, unless
otherwise approved by the TAC.
Site Plan Review Regulations 11 September 15, 2016
(d) Parking and Loading
• The location of off-street parking and loading areas with the
layout of the parking spaces and landscaped areas and buffers.
• Parking calculations showing number required and number
provided.
(e) Water Infrastructure
• The size, type, and proposed location of water mains, shut-offs,
hydrants, gate boxes, valves, and other water facilities with all
necessary engineering data.
• Location of water wells and monitoring wells including
protective radii and reserve areas and distance to seasonal high
water.
(f) Sewer Infrastructure
• The size, type and proposed location of sanitary sewage
facilities with all necessary engineering data.
(g) Utilities
• The size, type, and location of all above ground and
underground public service connections and private service
connections; including gas lines, power lines, telephone lines,
other communication lines and fire alarm connections.
• Size, type, and location of generator pads, transformers, pad
mounted condensers, and other electrical or mechanical bases
or fixtures.
(h) Solid Waste Facilities
• The size, type, and location of solid waste disposal facilities.
(i) Stormwater Management
• The location, elevation, and layout of surface and subsurface
stormwater drainage system features.
(j) Outdoor Lighting
• The type and placement of outdoor lighting fixtures for the
exterior of the buildings, parking areas, and any other areas of
the site, and photometric plan.
(k) Landscaping
• Landscaping plan identifying dimensions of the undisturbed
area, existing vegetation, all vegetation to be retained, and
measures used to protect natural features to be retained.
• Location of any landscaping irrigation systems and water
source.
Site Plan Review Regulations 12 September 15, 2016
(l) Contours and Elevations
• Existing and proposed contours (2-foot minimum) and finished
grade elevations.
(m) Open Space
• Type, extent, and location of existing and proposed open space.
(n) All easements, deed restrictions and non-public rights of ways.
(o) Location of snow storage areas and/or off-site snow removal
provisions.
(p) Any other information that the TAC or the Planning Board may
require in order to adequately evaluate the proposed development.
(q) For sites within a Character District or Civic District, the following
additional information shall be included in the plan set:
• Applicable building height standards (Zoning Ordinance, Sec.
10.5A21.20 and 10.5A43.30, and Regulating Plan) and
proposed building height.
• Applicable special requirements (Zoning Ordinance, Sec.
10.5A21.30 and Regulating Plan), if any, and demonstration of
compliance.
• Proposed building form and building type (Zoning Ordinance,
Sec. 10.5A43).
• Proposed community space, if applicable (Zoning Ordinance,
Sec. 10.5A46).
4. For any of the Site Plan Review requirements, the applicant shall submit
either the requested information or request a waiver.
Section 2.6 Referrals to City Departments
The Planning Director shall refer applications to other City departments as
follows:
1. Applications that involve proposed food service establishments shall be
referred to the Health Department.
2. Applications that involve the creation of new dwelling units shall be referred
to the School Department
Site Plan Review Regulations 13 September 15, 2016
Section 2.7 Public Hearing
1. A public hearing by the TAC will be held for all Site Plan Review
applications.
2. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a recommendation from the TAC, the
Planning Board shall place the application on its agenda for a public
hearing.
3. In accordance with NH State Law, the following parties shall be given at
least ten (10) days’ notice of the public hearing at which Site Plan Review
will occur:
(a) Direct abutters;
(b) Holders of conservation, preservation or agricultural preservation
restrictions on the property.
4. The general public shall be notified by posting a copy of the written notice
at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing at two public places
and by printing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation.
5. The applicant shall post a notice at least ten (10) days in advance of the
public hearing advertising the public hearing on the perimeter of the site
where it can easily be viewed and readable from the immediate exterior of
the site and shall maintain the notice until Site Plan approval is received.
6. Notices shall include a general description of the proposed development, the
name of the applicant, the location of the property which is to be developed
and the time, date and place of the meeting or public hearing.
7. When computing the period for notification, the day of mailing, posting or
publication and the day of the meeting shall not be counted.
8. All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid by the
applicant.
9. At the public hearing, any applicant, abutter, or individual may testify in
person or in writing.
10. The Planning Board may deny an application for Site Plan Review without a
public hearing, based upon failure of the applicant to supply information
required by these regulations, failure to meet deadlines established by the
Planning Board, or failure to pay costs of the notice or other fees required by
the Planning Board.
Site Plan Review Regulations 14 September 15, 2016
Section 2.8 Determination of Application Completeness
1. Upon submission of a formal application for Site Plan Review, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing on the application, with notice to abutters
and the public as required by State statute, and shall determine if the application
is complete according to these Regulations and shall vote upon its
acceptance.
2. If the Board determines that a submitted application is incomplete according
to these Regulations, the Board shall notify the applicant of the determination
in accordance with RSA 676:3, which shall describe the information,
procedure, or other requirement necessary for the application to be
complete.
3. Upon determination by the Board that a submitted application is complete
according to these Regulations, the Board shall begin formal consideration
and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove within 65
days, subject to extension or waiver as provided by State statute.
Section 2.9 Evaluation Criteria
In order to grant site plan review approval, the TAC and the Planning Board shall
find that the application satisfies evaluation criteria pursuant to NH State Law and
listed herein. In making a finding, the TAC and the Planning Board shall consider
all standards provided in Articles 3 through 11.
1. Compliance with all City Ordinances and Codes and these regulations.
2. Provision for the safe development, change or expansion of use of the site.
3. Adequate drainage and other mitigative measures to prevent flooding of the
property or that of another.
4. Adequate protection for the quality of groundwater.
5. Adequate and reliable water supply sources.
6. Adequate and reliable sewage disposal facilities, lines, and connections.
7. Absence of undesirable and preventable elements of pollution such as
smoke, soot, particulates, odor, wastewater, stormwater, sedimentation or
any other discharge into the environment which might prove harmful to
persons, structures, or adjacent properties.
8. Adequate provision for fire safety, prevention and control.
Site Plan Review Regulations 15 September 15, 2016
9. Adequate protection of natural features such as, but not limited to, wetlands.
10. Adequate protection of historical features on the site.
11. Adequate management of the volume and flow of traffic on the site and
adequate traffic controls to protect public safety and prevent traffic
congestion.
12. Adequate traffic controls and traffic management measures to prevent an
unacceptable increase in safety hazards and traffic congestion off-site.
13. Adequate insulation from external noise sources.
14. Existing municipal solid waste disposal, police, emergency medical, and
other municipal services and facilities adequate to handle any new demands
on infrastructure or services created by the project.
15. Provision of usable and functional open spaces of adequate proportions,
including needed recreational facilities that can reasonably be provided on
the site.
16. Adequate layout and coordination of on-site accessways and sidewalks in
relationship to off-site existing or planned streets, accessways, bicycle paths,
and sidewalks.
17. Demonstration that the land indicated on plans submitted with the
application shall be of such character that it can be used for building
purposes without danger to health.
18. Adequate quantities, type or arrangement of landscaping and open space for
the provision of visual, noise and air pollution buffers.
19. Compliance with applicable City approved design standards.
Section 2.10 Waiver Requests
1. When the Planning Board finds by a vote of six members that a waiver will
not have the effect of nullifying the spirit and intent of the City’s Master
Plan or these regulations, it may grant a waiver.
2. In granting waivers the Planning Board may require such conditions as will
in its judgment secure the objectives of the regulations.
Site Plan Review Regulations 16 September 15, 2016
Section 2.11 Approval Procedures
1. Recommendations of the TAC for approval shall require a majority of those
present and voting. Five voting members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
2. Once the TAC has made a recommendation to the Planning Board and a
public hearing has been held, final approval shall require a vote by the
majority of those Planning Board members present and voting.
3. If the TAC or the Planning Board determines that the proposed site plan
does not meet all of the applicable requirements, the TAC or the Planning
Board shall vote to disapprove the plan.
4. The reasons for disapproval will be clearly stated in the Planning Board’s
records and shall be communicated to the applicant in writing.
5. Approval of the site plan shall not be effective until a site plan agreement
has been signed (see Section 2.12) and the applicable sheets of the site plan
have been recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds (see
Section 2.13).
Section 2.12 Site Plan Review Agreement
1. A Site Plan Review Agreement to ensure the site is developed in accordance
with the approved plan shall be drafted for all approved site plans. Terms
and conditions of the Site Plan Review Agreement shall indicate any stipulation
or condition which may be necessary to secure the public health, safety,
and welfare and insure compliance with all of the ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth, all applicable state and local regulations, and requirements of
the Building Code to insure that all site development and construction is
completed according to the Plan approved. A security shall be provided in a
form and amount approved by the City.
2. The Site Plan Review Agreement shall be considered fully executed when
the Agreement has been endorsed by the owner of the property and the
Planning Director, and when the security has been approved by the City
Attorney and placed on file with the Planning Department.
Section 2.13 Recording of Site Plans
1. An approved site plan shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairperson
(or designee) and shall be recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of
Deeds (RCRD). Site plans are not valid until recorded at the Registry of
Deeds.
Site Plan Review Regulations 17 September 15, 2016
(a) For the purpose of this requirement, only those sheets in the approved
plan set which are intended to show the layout and arrangement of onsite
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, off-street parking, and/or
landscaping and screening shall typically be required to be recorded.
(b) Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board may require the
recording of additional plan sheets or supporting documentation if the
Board determines that such recording is necessary to ensure continued
compliance with the conditions shown on the plans. Examples include
plans showing specific measures designed to protect wetlands or
manage stormwater.
2. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Department the following:
(a) Three (3) copies of the final site plan incorporating any changes that
have been required as a condition of the Planning Board vote;
(b) One original Mylar of the sheets from the final site plan that are
required to be recorded at the RCRD.
3. The plan sheet(s) submitted for recording shall include the following notes:
“1. This Site Plan shall be recorded in the Rockingham County
Registry of Deeds.
2. All improvements shown on this Site Plan shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with the Plan by the property
owner and all future property owners. No changes shall be made
to this Site Plan without the express approval of the Portsmouth
Planning Director.”
4. The plan sheet(s) showing landscaping and screening shall also include the
following additional notes:
“1. The property owner and all future property owners shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all
required screening and landscape materials.
2. All required plant materials shall be tended and maintained in a
healthy growing condition, replaced when necessary, and kept
free of refuse and debris. All required fences and walls shall be
maintained in good repair.
3. The property owner shall be responsible to remove and replace
dead or diseased plant materials immediately with the same type,
size and quantity of plant materials as originally installed, unless
alternative plantings are requested, justified and approved by the
Planning Board or Planning Director.”
Site Plan Review Regulations 18 September 15, 2016
5. An amended site plan shall be recorded at the RCRD as above, provided that
in the case of a plan amendment that is granted approval by the Planning
Director or TAC without a hearing before the Planning Board, the recording
of a notice of approval shall be sufficient.
6. The applicant shall have the required site plans pre-approved by the Registry
of Deeds prior to submitting mylars to the Planning Department for
signature and recording.
Section 2.14 Approval Expiration and Extension
1. Site plan approval by the Planning Board shall expire unless used (obtain a
Building/Change in Use Permit) within a period of one (1) year from the
date granted.
2. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend such period by as
much as one (1) year if requested and acted upon prior to the expiration
date.
3. If additional one (1) year extensions are requested, the owner will be
required to have the previously approved plans reviewed by the TAC and
the Planning Board. For this review the owner shall provide to the Planning
Department the previously approved plans and supporting data.
4. Upon review of a request for an extension, the Planning Board shall have
the authority to amend or deny a previously approved application. This
review shall not require an application fee; however, the Planning Board
and/or TAC may, if deemed necessary by either chair, conduct a public
hearing at the owner’s expense.
5. A time extension shall be granted if determined that no change has taken
place that would materially affect the currently approved site plan in regard
to:
(a) Traffic flow, volume, or congestion;
(b) Pedestrian safety;
(c) Drainage;
(d) Water availability;
(e) Sewer capacity;
(f) Design standards;
(g) Landscape elements; and
(h) Zoning compliance.
6. The Planning Board shall not deny a request for an extension without first
having held a public hearing.
Site Plan Review Regulations 19 September 15, 2016
Section 2.15 Post Approval Procedures
2.15.1 Amendments
After approval of the site plan the owner may request, in writing, approval of
minor amendments. The Planning Director may approve the amendment in
writing or may require review by the TAC or the Planning Board.
2.15.2 Landscape Markings
Once a site plan has been approved and prior to the signing of the Site Plan
Review Agreement, the applicant shall tag or otherwise identify at the site all
vegetation and natural features to be retained as shown on the approved site plan.
2.15.3 Construction Management and Mitigation Plan
1. The Planning Board, as a condition of approval, may require a Construction
Management and Mitigation Plan (CMMP). If such a plan is required, no
site work is authorized nor shall work commence before the Plan has been
accepted and approved as to content and form by the City.
2. If the Planning Board requires completion of a CMMP all activities on the
site shall be in full compliance with the CMMP.
Section 2.16 Project Inspection and Completion
2.16.1 Compliance and Enforcement
During construction and upon completion of the project, the Planning Board may
require routine inspections to insure compliance with the approved site plan. Such
inspections shall be performed by an oversight engineer or other licensed
professional.
2.16.2 Final Inspection
At the completion of the project, the applicant shall notify the Planning Director
that the project is ready for final inspection.
2.16.3 As-Built Plan
1. At the completion of the project, the applicant shall submit to the Planning
Director three (3) copies of an “as-built plan” which shall include all surface
and subsurface features, easements, licenses, rights-of-way, and maintenance
agreements. The plan shall be prepared and stamped by a New
Hampshire licensed land surveyor.
Site Plan Review Regulations 20 September 15, 2016
2. At the completion of the project, the owner shall submit to the Planning
Director documents showing all easements, licenses, rights-of-way, and
maintenance agreements in a recordable format.
3. The applicant shall provide a digital version of the as-built plan. The
purpose of the digital plan is to aid in updating the City’s geographic
information system (GIS). The City respects the copyright interests of the
applicant’s representatives and requires only factual, not expressive, data.
The digital plan shall meet the requirements outlined in Attachment A.
4. The Planning Director may waive the requirement for an as-built plan.
2.16.4 Release of Performance Security
1. The Planning Director and City Attorney may order release of the performance
security only after receipt of the Building Inspector’s Certificate
of Occupancy, the as-built plan, final inspection and any other additional
reports required by the Planning Board.
2. If necessary, the Planning Director and City Attorney may order a partial
release of the performance security, but no more than one partial release
shall be permitted.
2.16.5 Long-Term Maintenance
The property owner shall maintain the property to comply with the approved site
plan and shall fulfill all reporting requirements stipulated in the site plan review
agreement.
Section 2.17 Exemption of Approved Site Plan from Changes in Land Use
Regulations
1. Under State statute (RSA 674:39), approved site plans are protected from
future changes in regulations and ordinances as follows:
(a) A site plan that has been approved by the Planning Board shall be
exempt from all subsequent changes in site plan regulations and
zoning ordinances (except those regulations and ordinances which
expressly protect public health standards, such as water quality and
sewage treatment requirements) for a period of 4 years after the date of
approval of the site plan by the Planning Board, provided that:
(1) Active and substantial development or building has begun on the
site by the owner or the owner’s successor in interest in accordance
with the approved plans within 12 months after the date of
approval, or in accordance with the terms of the approval, and
Site Plan Review Regulations 21 September 15, 2016
any required site plan security is provided to the City at the time
of commencement of such development; and
(2) The development remains in full compliance with the public
health regulations and ordinances of the City of Portsmouth; and
(3) At the time of approval, the site plan conforms to the site plan
regulations and zoning ordinances then in effect at the site of
such plan.
(b) Once substantial completion of the improvements as shown on the site
plans has occurred in compliance with the approved site plans or the
terms of said approval, or unless otherwise stipulated by the Planning
Board, no subsequent changes in these Site Plan Review Regulations
or the Zoning Ordinance shall operate to affect such improvements.
2. In the absence of a specific finding by the Planning Board, the following
terms are defined for the purpose of determining exempting a project from
subsequent amendments to local land use regulations:
(a) “Active and substantial development or building” shall mean the
completion of all of the following in accordance with the approved
plans:
(1) Installation and maintenance of erosion control measures; and
(2) Construction of all drainage improvements to service the
development, including all detention/retention basins, treatment
swales, pipes, underdrains, catch basins, etc.; and
(3) Construction of all roadways, accessways, etc. to a minimum of
gravel base; and
(4) Construction and/or installation of all utilities ready for
connection to proposed buildings and structures; and
(5) Construction of at least one building foundation or 20% of the
total building foundations on the site, whichever is greater; and
(6) Review and approval of items (1) through (5) by the Department
of Public Works or designated agent.
Site clearing, excavation or earth movement without completion of
items (1) through (6) above shall not be considered “active and
substantial development.” A plan approved in phases shall be subject
to this definition only for the phase currently being developed.
2. “Substantial completion of the improvements as shown on the site plan” is
defined as the establishment of all on-site and off-site improvements
specified in the site plan approval, except for those improvements which are
specifically deferred by recorded vote of the Planning Board prior to the
Site Plan Review Regulations 22 September 15, 2016
expiration of the four (4) year period specified in RSA 674:39. To the extent
that the Planning Board calls a bond or other security for such improvements
and the funds are paid to the City, substantial completion of the
improvements in the subdivision shall be deemed to have occurred.
Site Plan Review Regulations 23 September 15, 2016
Article 3 Vehicular Circulation Standards
Section 3.1 General Provisions
1. All site development shall be designed and constructed to consider the
safety, interests and convenience of all users – drivers, bicyclists, transit
users and pedestrians of all ages and abilities.
2. All site plans shall portray the design of every element of vehicular
circulation that provides access in and around the site, unless otherwise
specified. The Planning Board may require that work involving areas of
special sensitivity or significance be conducted by a traffic engineer licensed
in New Hampshire.
Section 3.2 Off-Site Impacts
1. The applicant is responsible for assessing the impact of the proposed
development on traffic patterns and vehicular circulation systems. The TAC
and/or the Planning Board may require that a traffic study be performed and
that a technical expert may be hired to review any traffic analysis performed
by the applicant.
2. A traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in New Hampshire and experienced and qualified in traffic
engineering, and shall contain the following information:
(a) Existing traffic conditions on streets and intersections adjacent to the
site, including daily and peak-hour traffic volumes, seasonally adjusted
as determined by the TAC;
(b) Projected traffic conditions on adjacent streets for the design year of
occupancy and for the tenth year following occupancy or such longer
period as the TAC or Planning Board determines applicable based on
the scale of the project;
(c) Projected impacts of the proposed development including:
? total daily and peak-hour traffic entering and exiting the site
? turning movements
? estimates of induced vs. pass-by trips;
(d) A proposed plan to mitigate the projected impacts of the development.
3. Projects shall be designed to maintain, and where possible enhance, the
quality of vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and safety on
affected public streets.
Site Plan Review Regulations 24 September 15, 2016
4. The applicant shall provide traffic signal equipment, traffic signs, travel
lanes, pavement widening, markings, sidewalks, and other improvements to
existing streets upon determination by the Planning Board that the specific
improvements are necessary for safe handling of traffic generated by the
proposed development.
5. Projects having access onto congested public streets may be required to
eliminate certain turning movements as determined necessary and practical
by the Planning Board.
Section 3.3 General Accessway and Driveway Design
3.3.1 General Requirements
1. The internal network of accessways and driveways shall:
(a) Provide for the safe, efficient and orderly movement of all modes of
transportation, including vehicles, public transit, bikes and pedestrians;
(b) Be designed to meet, but not exceed, the needs of the present and
projected population served by the site, and;
(c) Be designed to respect natural features and topography.
2. Accessways shall be designed based on the anticipated role within the
project site of the accessway as defined by AASHTO road classifications
and/or approved by the Planning Board.
3. A driveway permit from the Department of Public Works shall be required
for all existing and new driveways accessing a street.
3.3.2 Accessway and Driveway Design and Location
1. Accessways and driveways shall, where practical, have an all-season safe
sight distance (according to AASHTO standards) in both directions along
the public street. Where only a lesser sight distance is obtainable, no more
than one accessway per single parcel shall be allowed.
2. Accessways and driveways shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to
the curb line of an intersecting street.
3. Driveways shall be limited to one per lot.
Site Plan Review Regulations 25 September 15, 2016
3.3.3 Travel Lanes
Where multiple travel lanes are required, planted medians (designed in
accordance with the landscaping standards in Article 6 herein) may be required at
the discretion of the Planning Board to reduce the visual impact of pavement.
3.3.4 Shared Access
Shared driveways are encouraged and may be permitted between adjacent lots. In
such cases, a joint access easement between the property owners may be required.
Section 3.4 Curbing
Granite curbing shall be installed per the Department of Public Works
specifications in all of the following situations:
(a) Where accessways and driveways meet public streets;
(b) Where curbing is necessary to channelize surface drainage; and
(c) Where otherwise required by the Planning Board.
Section 3.5 Traffic Calming and Connections
1. Internal accessway networks shall be designed to optimize public safety.
2. Traffic measures shall be implemented to support the overall
interconnectedness and coherence of the City’s public street system.
Section 3.6 Drive-Through Facilities
3.6.1 Site Access and Circulation Standards
1. The internal entrance into the drive-through lane shall not conflict with the
general access to the site.
2. The distance from any transaction window to the site exit shall be a
minimum of sixty (60) feet.
3. Where a turn in the drive-through lane is required between a transaction
window and the site exit, the distance from the transaction window to the
beginning of the turn shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet with an internal
minimum turning radius of seventeen (17) feet.
Site Plan Review Regulations 26 September 15, 2016
3.6.2 Stacking Lanes and Spaces
1. Stacking lanes shall be provided to prevent circulation congestion and
conflicts, both within the site and on adjacent public streets. Stacking lanes
shall be designed to separate drive-through traffic from other vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
2. Stacking lanes shall not conflict with or impede vehicular or pedestrian
circulation within the site, access into or out of parking spaces, or access
into buildings; and shall not interfere with required loading and trash storage
areas.
3. Stacking lanes shall be at least 10 feet wide and stacking spaces shall be at
least 20 feet in length.
4. The applicant must demonstrate that the number of stacking lanes and
spaces proposed are sufficient for the intended use.
5. A bypass lane at least 11 feet wide shall be provided in order to permit
vehicles to exit the site without using the drive-through lane(s).
6. Stacking lanes (not including bypass lanes) shall be set back 15 feet from
the property line fronting on any public way, 15 feet from any side or rear
property lines which abut non-residential properties, and 20 feet from any
side or rear property lines which abut residential property.
7. Stacking lanes shall be integrated with the onsite circulation pattern, and
shall not enter directly from a public right-of-way.
8. Stacking lanes shall be distinguished from traffic aisles, other stacking lanes
and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping or the use of
alternative paving materials or medians.
9. The intersection of stacking lanes and walk-in customer access shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from site entrances and exits and from
transaction windows. Said intersections shall be provided with crosswalks
delineated by patterned or contrasting paving and striping and shall include
warning signage aimed at both the pedestrian and vehicle.
3.6.3 Traffic Impact Study
A traffic impact analysis conforming to the standards in Section 3.2 shall be
submitted with any site plan review application containing a drive-through
facility.
Site Plan Review Regulations 27 September 15, 2016
3.6.4 Noise Reduction
Sound pressure levels created by devices in the drive-through facility, including
but not limited to speakers, shall comply with the standards for noise control in
the Zoning Ordinance. Methods of communicating to patrons that do not require
the use of speakers shall be used where feasible or where required by the Planning
Board.
3.6.5 Screening
1. Drive-through lanes, stacking spaces and bypass lanes that would be visible
from a public right-of-way or from land in a Residential or Mixed
Residential zoning district shall be screened from view to at least three feet
above grade.
2. Screening shall be with brick or stone walls, berms, or equivalent structures
approved by the Planning Board. Walls, berms and other screening
structures shall be supplemented by plantings such as shrubs and trees.
3. Notwithstanding the above, drive-through facilities need not be screened
from a public right-of-way if (a) the right-of-way is more than 100 feet from
the drive-through facility and (b) the Planning Board determines that
existing or proposed topography or landscaping will provide adequate visual
relief and prevention of glare.
Section 3.7 Loading and Service Areas
3.7.1 Location
1. Loading and services areas shall not be located between the front property
line and any building or structure nor in the required side yard or rear yard
areas.
2. No off-street loading or maneuvering areas shall be nearer than 100 feet to
any adjoining Residential or Mixed Residential Zoning Districts.
3. All such areas shall be screened in accordance with Article 6 of these
regulations.
4. No off-street loading areas shall be a part of an area used to satisfy the offstreet
parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
3.7.2 Design Standards
Loading areas and accessways to loading areas shall have a durable surface
(whether pervious or impervious) that meets the load bearing capacity of the
Site Plan Review Regulations 28 September 15, 2016
project, minimizes dust, material tracking and erosion, and facilitates snow
removal.
Section 3.8 Fire Lanes
1. Fire lanes shall be provided in accordance with the City’s Emergency Lanes
Ordinance.
2. Fire lanes may be required to be within 30 feet of a building if deemed
necessary by the TAC. A minimum of 5 foot wide unobstructed pathway
shall be provided through all barriers, including rows of parked cars.
3. Fire lane and access easements shall be provided to serve all buildings and
any areas deemed necessary for emergency vehicle access.
4. Required “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” signs shall be 12 inches wide and
18 inches high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters
and borders in red, using not less than 2 inches lettering. Signs shall be
permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be
six (6) feet, six (6) inches above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not
more than one hundred (100) feet apart. Signs may be installed on
permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the TAC.
5. Pavement marking lines shall be painted in red traffic paint, six (6) inches in
width to show the boundaries of the fire lane. The words “NO PARKING
FIRE LANE” shall appear in four (4) inch white letters at 25 feet intervals
on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes.
6. Curb marking shall be painted in red traffic paint from the top seam of the
curb to a point even with the driving surface. The words “NO PARKING
FIRE LANE” shall appear in four (4) inch white letters at 25 feet intervals
along the curb(s).
7. All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in a good state of repair at all
times by the owner.
Section 3.9 Mass Transit Facilities
Mass transit facilities shall be incorporated at the discretion of the Planning Board
based on future transit system needs. Transit routes, access points and shelter
locations shall be addressed along major streets or accessways within and on the
perimeter of such projects. Transit facilities shall be provided in a manner to make
transit an attractive mode of travel for both employees and patrons.
Site Plan Review Regulations 29 September 15, 2016
Article 4 Parking Area Standards
Section 4.1 Parking Provision
The number of parking spaces required, parking facility setbacks, and location of
parking facilities shall be in accordance with the off street parking standards in
the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 4.2 Requirements for Accessible Parking for the Physically
Disabled
1. Specially designated parking spaces for the physically disabled shall be
located closest to the designated accessible primary entrance(s).
2. If possible, these shall be located so that physically disabled persons do not
have to cross vehicular travel lanes.
3. Ramps required as a means of egress leading from specially designated
parking spaces for the physically disabled in parking lots shall be in
conformity with Building Code.
4. Parking for the physically disabled shall comply at a minimum with the
standards provided by Accessible and Usable Buildings & Facilities
(ICC/ANSI A117.1 latest edition).
Section 4.3 Off-Street Parking Space Design and Layout
In addition to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, the following design
standards shall apply.
1. Every effort shall be made to use pervious parking and pathway surfaces as
an alternative to impervious asphalt or concrete for overflow parking areas,
except in cases where it is determined that a traditional impervious parking
lot with engineered stormwater systems renders greater protection of surface
and groundwater resources than pervious pavement.
2. When provided, motorcycle parking pads shall be concrete.
Site Plan Review Regulations 30 September 15, 2016
Article 5 Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation
Section 5.1 General Provisions
1. The site plan shall provide for a system of pedestrian or bicycle paths, or a
combination of both, as appropriate to the type and scale of development.
This system shall connect the major building entrances/exits, parking areas
and any existing or proposed sidewalks within or adjacent to the project.
2. Any paths shall be located within the lot lines of the site, unless it is
determined by the Planning Board that it would be more appropriate to
locate these in the public right of way.
3. The system shall also be designed to link the project with residential,
recreational, commercial facilities, schools, bus stops and existing bicycle or
pedestrian facilities in the neighborhood.
4. The system shall minimize conflicts between pedestrians, bicycles and
motor vehicles.
Section 5.2 Sidewalks and Pedestrian Pathways
5.2.1 Accessibility
Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be easily accessible to all users,
whatever their level of physical ability, and comply at a minimum with the
standards provided by Accessible and Usable Buildings & Facilities
(ICC/ANSI A117.1, latest edition).
5.2.2 Travel Width
The sidewalk or pedestrian pathway shall be at least five (5) feet wide. If
anticipated pedestrian volumes warrant, the Planning Board may require a wider
pathway.
5.2.3 Continuity
1. A sidewalk or pedestrian pathway shall connect destinations and shall not
require pedestrians to travel out of their way unnecessarily.
2. Pedestrian areas shall be clearly distinguished from vehicular and bicycle
traffic areas through the use of paving materials, landscaping buffers, or
other means.
Site Plan Review Regulations 31 September 15, 2016
5.2.4 Location
At a minimum, sidewalks shall be located along the front of the site, along the
front of buildings, and shall connect to building entrances.
5.2.5 Pedestrian Amenities
1. Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways longer than 500 feet shall provide areas
for standing and sitting and may include pedestrian amenities such as
benches, tables, shade trees or grassy areas.
2. Such pedestrian areas shall be a minimum of 100 square feet in area and
shall be provided at regular intervals of 300 feet along the sidewalk or
pedestrian pathway.
5.2.6 Surfacing Materials
Any off-site improvements to public sidewalks that are required as part of the
project shall use surfacing materials specified by the Planning Board.
Section 5.3 Bicycle Facilities
5.3.1 General
1. Bicycle facilities (including routes and racks) may be combined with
pedestrian facilities when designed according to shared path standards of
AASHTO, but not on City sidewalks.
2. Bicycle facilities shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO, Guide for
the Development of Bicycle Facilities, as amended.
5.3.2 Bicycle Routes
Bicycle routes may be required by the Planning Board in the form of a separate
off-street path or on-street marked bicycle lanes.
5.3.3 Bicycle Racks
Bicycle racks, when required by the Planning Board, shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) All racks shall be located in a convenient and secure location.
(b) Where bicycle racks are placed near trees, trees shall be protected with tree
guards to prevent the securing of bicycles to trees.
Site Plan Review Regulations 32 September 15, 2016
(c) All racks shall be designed to allow the frame and one wheel to be locked to
the rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left
on the bicycle.
(d) All racks shall be securely anchored to a durable, hard paved (preferably
concrete) permanent surface.
Site Plan Review Regulations 33 September 15, 2016
Article 6 Landscaping and Screening Standards
Section 6.1 General Provisions
Landscaping shall be provided that:
(a) Defines areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
(b) Breaks up the mass of buildings and impervious areas;
(c) Incorporates existing native vegetation and other natural features into the
site design;
(d) Micromanages and controls stormwater at its source to minimize off-site
impacts;
(e) Conserves water and reduces outside water use on the site;
(f) Provides buffers between incompatible land-uses or sites;
(g) Softens architectural and structural materials;
(h) Minimizes the introduction of pollutants to the environment.
Section 6.2 Landscaping Plan
1. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each application for Site Plan
Review showing:
(a) Existing and proposed vegetation including trees, shrubs and plant
beds including all vegetation that shall be retained as required by the
Planning Board;
(b) Dimensions of undisturbed areas and measures that shall be used to
protect during construction existing natural features that are to be
retained;
(c) Location of all utilities above ground and below ground and related
easements;
(d) Required front, side, and rear yards.
2. A plant schedule shall accompany the plan that includes the following
information:
(a) Botanical and common names;
Site Plan Review Regulations 34 September 15, 2016
(b) Planting size and size at maturity;
(c) Quantity;
(d) Growth habits (branching, crown spread, root spread);
(e) Tolerance to urban conditions including road salt, soil; compaction,
drought, heat, and air pollution;
(f) Planting requirements.
Section 6.3 General Requirements
1. Areas not occupied by buildings or other structures, parking, loading, and
accessways shall be landscaped to provide visual relief from expanses of
paving and buildings while providing shade and stormwater management
benefits.
2. At a minimum, all yards, setbacks, and areas of open space as required by
the Zoning Ordinance shall retain existing natural features or be landscaped
as required herein.
3. Landscaped areas shall consist of a combination of grass, flowers, vines,
groundcovers, trees and/or shrubs. All planting areas shall be landscaped
with a combination of climate tolerant plant material and protective
groundcover. Bare soil is not permitted.
4. Natural features, existing healthy mature trees, and other existing vegetation
shall be identified on the landscaping plan and shall be retained when
required by the Planning Board.
5. Existing invasive plant species shall be removed and destroyed if required
by the Planning Board. Applicants shall refer to the Prohibited Invasive
Plant Species List maintained by the NH Department of Agriculture.
6. No loam or other topsoil shall be removed from the site as part of site
development. Topsoil shall be appropriately stockpiled and stabilized for
redistribution within new planting areas.
7. Existing topography shall be maintained unless otherwise permitted by the
Planning Board.
8. Any areas disturbed during construction that will not be occupied by
buildings or other structures, parking, loading, and accessways shall be
Site Plan Review Regulations 35 September 15, 2016
replaced with a minimum of 6 inches of suitable topsoil and then shall be
replanted according to the requirements herein.
9. Plant material and landscape maintenance procedures that incorporate water
conservation techniques are preferred.
10. All local and state requirements for yards and sight distance shall take
precedence for selection and placement of landscaping features, as
applicable.
11. No plantings shall be placed where they may impede or interfere with
existing or proposed sewer, water, natural gas lines, or power lines.
12. The front yard landscaping area may contain any of the following:
(a) Public utility easements and open surface drainage easements that do
not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the required landscaped
area. Such areas should be planted with perennials or groundcover so
as not to interfere with utility connections;
(b) Underground utility connections and transformers, provided that they
do not encroach more than five (5) feet into the required landscaped
area. Such equipment shall be landscaped to soften the visual impact.
13. Wherever appropriate, applicants shall incorporate Low Impact
Development (LID) design practices and technologies in all aspects of the
site’s landscaping.
Section 6.4 Planting Requirements
The purpose of planting requirements is to enhance the long-term survival
prospects of the plant materials used in site landscaping. These standards are also
meant to ensure that the benefits of site landscaping (buffering, aesthetic
enhancement, erosion control, etc.) are realized as early after planting as possible.
The following standards for planting requirements shall apply.
(a) Planting holes for trees shall be at least two to three times the width of the
root ball and shall be no deeper than the root ball.
(b) Shrubs shall have a planting hole three to five times the width of the root
ball and shall not be deeper than the root ball itself.
(c) Evergreen trees shall be fully branched with a minimum 5-foot height at the
time of planting.
Site Plan Review Regulations 36 September 15, 2016
(d) Deciduous trees shall be fully branched and a minimum size of 2 inches in
caliper at the time of planting
(e) Shrubs shall be fully branched with a minimum of 2½ feet height at
planting.
(f) Existing landscaping, trees and planting materials to be retained shall be
protected with a snow fence or other durable method as necessary during
construction to avoid damage to root zones as well as above ground
vegetation.
(g) When appropriate for trees placed within sidewalks, tree grates shall be used
to prevent excessive soil compaction and to add interest to the pavement.
Tree grates shall be fabricated of a strong, durable material, installed flush
with grade, and provide an expandable center opening to allow for
continued tree growth.
(h) Where applicable, tree guards shall be installed to protect the base of the
tree from street activity.
(i) Tree wells over 6 inches deep or other landscape features that have the
potential to present a falling hazard to the public shall have grates, fences or
other protective measures installed.
(j) All trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of
grade.
Section 6.5 Plant Selection
1. All proposed plantings shall be appropriate for the soils, weather and
environmental conditions of the site. Particular attention shall be paid to
tolerance to potential road salt and other deicing treatments.
2. Plant materials shall be of specimen quality conforming to the American
Standards for Nursery Stock and shall be guaranteed for at least two
growing seasons.
3. Plants on the Prohibited Invasive Plant Species List maintained by the NH
Department of Agriculture shall not be planted.
4. Trees shall be selected for growing habits that are appropriate for the
location. Consideration shall be given to crown height and canopy spread at
maturity so as not to interfere with buildings, structures, pedestrian and
bicycle facilities, or other site features.
Site Plan Review Regulations 37 September 15, 2016
Section 6.6 Landscaped Areas
1. Side slopes for all landscaped areas shall not exceed thirty-three (33) percent
(3:1 slope), and shall be appropriately stabilized with vegetation.
2. Within parking areas, landscaped islands shall be provided between adjacent
rows of parking and between groups of parking spaces with the goal of
breaking up large contiguously paved areas.
3. Landscaped islands shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide or as necessary
to provide adequate room for growth and so as not to interfere with access to
vehicles, lines of sight, pedestrian travel, or the long-term health of the
vegetation.
4. Landscaped areas shall consist of a combination of large and small trees,
shrubs, perennial and/or annual flowers, and groundcover.
5. Landscaped areas shall be designed with a variety of plant species that
provide seasonal variety.
6. Landscaping around building entrances, near parking spaces, and along
pedestrian and bicycle ways shall not interfere or block line of sight, restrict
travel, or present a hazard to personal property.
7. Any landscaping located within the safe site distance of a driveway
entryway, as defined by AASHTO standards, shall be no more than 3 feet at
mature height.
8. Areas between trees and shrubs shall be planted with groundcover spaced to
cover the area within 3 years. Areas of exposed bare soil shall be avoided.
Mulch shall not be considered a groundcover.
9. Pedestrian pathways made of permeable materials are encouraged where
landscaping areas are of a size and shape to accommodate pedestrian
passage.
10. Low Impact Development techniques such as rain gardens, bioretention
areas, and tree boxes and other stormwater management landscaping
techniques may be incorporated into landscaped areas and may replace
required landscaping components as approved by the Planning Board.
Section 6.7 Landscaping Along Public Rights of Way
1. Where feasible or as required by the Planning Board, street trees may be
planted along public rights-of-way with the goal of providing a tree-lined
street.
Site Plan Review Regulations 38 September 15, 2016
2. Trees shall be spaced at a minimum of 1 tree per 30 lineal feet or farther
apart if necessary to accommodate the mature crown spread of the tree.
Trees shall not interfere with buildings, overhead utilities, pedestrian travel,
or access to on-street parking spaces.
3. In the Gateway District, the front yard shall include a landscaped buffer strip
with a depth of at least one-third of the distance between the street right-ofway
and any building, and extending across the width of the lot except for
driveways, sidewalks and bicycle paths. The buffer strip shall be in addition
to the street trees required herein, and shall include a combination of trees
and lower-level elements such as shrubs, hedges, fences, planted berms, or
brick or stone walls.
Section 6.8 Perimeter Landscaping
1. Parking areas shall be landscaped on the perimeter in order to soften the
visual impact of the parking area while maintaining clear sight lines.
2. Landscaping between nonresidential uses is intended to provide visual relief
from pavement. It may, however, encourage passage between nonresidential
properties by (a) providing five (5) foot wide pedestrian pathways through
landscaping elements at locations suitable for safe pedestrian circulation and
(b) using landscaping materials that allow a clear sight line between
properties at a height of three (3) feet.
3. A minimum nine (9) foot-wide landscaped buffer, including shade trees,
between the street or accessway pavement and the sidewalk or pedestrian
pathway shall be provided where adequate public right of way exists.
Section 6.9 Screening
1. Where nonresidential uses and/or off-street parking facilities abut a
residential zone the perimeter shall be screened to provide physical and
visual separation between uses.
2. Natural screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs/trees planted in a line to
form a continuous screen and growing to a height of 6 feet within 3 years.
The remaining portion of the screening area shall consist of large and small
trees, grass, flower beds, or other vegetative groundcover planted to fully
cover the ground surface of the area within 3 years.
3. A 6-foot high fence or masonry wall may be substituted for natural
screening if approved by the Planning Board. The wall or fence shall be
placed on the exterior side of any landscaping.
Site Plan Review Regulations 39 September 15, 2016
4. All sites shall incorporate screening measures to prevent the headlights of
vehicles from shining on adjoining residential areas.
5. All mechanical installations and equipment, solid waste collection
equipment, pump stations, and outdoor storage shall be screened or softened
with landscaping that is appropriate for the location.
Section 6.10 Maintenance and Replacement of Landscaping and
Screening
1. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair, and
replacement of all required screening and landscaping materials.
2. All required plant materials shall be tended and maintained in a healthy
growing condition, replaced when necessary, and kept free of refuse and
debris. All required fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair.
3. The property owner will remove and replace dead or diseased plant
materials immediately with the same type, size and quantity of plant
materials as originally installed, unless alternative plantings are requested,
justified, and approved by the Planning Board.
Section 6.11 Irrigation
1. Irrigation should be minimized to the extent possible through use of native
drought tolerant species and the use of landscaping that does not require
permanent irrigation systems.
2. When irrigation is necessary to support the establishment and/or
maintenance of landscaped areas smart controllers shall be used that limit
irrigation during the day and during rain events.
3. Where appropriate, additional water conservation features including trickle
and drip lines, rain barrels, cisterns or other water harvesting elements shall
be used.
4. Applicants are encouraged to use recycled water for irrigation provided the
harvesting and circulation systems and water quality meet the requirements
of the City’s Utility Ordinance and state standards.
5. Irrigation systems shall be installed and operated in accordance with the
City’s Utility Ordinance.
Site Plan Review Regulations 40 September 15, 2016
Section 6.12 Innovative Landscaping Practices
6.12.1 Green Roofs
Applicants are encouraged to use roofing materials that have a Solar Reflective
Index (SRI) of at least 29 (greater for roofs with a slope of 2:12 or more) or install
vegetated roofs.
6.12.2 Solar Orientation
Applicants are encouraged to incorporate landscaping techniques that help reduce
energy consumption for heating and cooling of buildings on the site. Trees should
be planted in order to provide shade on buildings and parking lots in the warm
seasons and to allow solar heat during the cool seasons.
Site Plan Review Regulations 41 September 15, 2016
Article 7 Water Resources Standards
Section 7.1 Low Impact Development (LID)
Applicants shall incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) design practices and
techniques in all aspects of the site’s development.
Section 7.2 Water Quality Protection
1. Water bodies, watercourses, and wetlands shall be preserved in their
existing condition whenever possible.
2. All regulated substances shall be stored, transported, disposed or transferred
in accordance with the rules for Best Management Practices for
Groundwater Protection of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NH DES).
3. The proposed site development and use shall not adversely impact either the
quality or quantity of groundwater available to surrounding properties or to
public water supply systems.
4. For any on-site water system supplying 20,000 gallons per day (gpd) or
more, evidence presented by a qualified hydrologist shall be sufficient to
reasonably conclude that there will be no adverse effect on other public or
private groundwater sources.
5. The development shall meet all applicable federal, state, and City
regulations, statutes, ordinances, and standards regarding protection of water
quality.
Section 7.3 Wellhead Protection Areas
1. The application for Site Plan Review shall indicate whether the proposed
development is located in a wellhead protection or aquifer protection area,
and such determination shall be approved by the Director of the Department
of Public Works.
2. If the proposed development is determined to be located in a wellhead or
aquifer protection area, the Planning Board may:
(a) Require upgradient and downgradient U.S. EPA-type monitoring wells
that are installed under the direction of a NH certified professional
hydrogeologist;
Site Plan Review Regulations 42 September 15, 2016
(b) Require that a first round of pre-construction samples be collected and
analyzed and the results submitted to the Department of Public Works;
(c) Determine that continued monitoring is necessary per the
recommendation of the Department of Public Works;
(d) Require an easement to access the monitoring wells in order to take
future samples;
(e) Require annual sampling of constituents of concern as determined by
the Department of Public Works.
3. Within a wellhead protection area no more than twenty percent (20%) of a
single lot or building site shall be rendered impervious to groundwater
infiltration.
Section 7.4 Stormwater Management
[7.4.1 Basic Criteria]*
1. Adequate provisions shall be made for the collection, treatment and/or
disposal of all stormwater that runs off the site.
2. In addition to the requirements of this Article, all developments subject to
Site Plan Review shall comply with the City’s Regulation of Discharges into
the Stormwater Drainage System Ordinance.
3. The applicant shall submit documentation demonstrating how stormwater
treatment devices shall be maintained.
7.4.2 Best Management Practices
All developments subject to Site Plan Review, regardless of the area of
disturbance, shall use an array of best management practices to reduce and
cleanse stormwater runoff, including but not limited to the following:
1. Where vegetated areas are used to control and treat stormwater, such areas
shall be planted with appropriate non-invasive groundcover, shrubs and/or
other plantings sufficient to prevent soil erosion and to promote proper
treatment of stormwater.
2. Site development shall comply with the requirements of the Flood Plain
District as regulated by the Zoning Ordinance.
* Heading inserted administratively.
Site Plan Review Regulations 43 September 15, 2016
3. Salt storage areas shall be covered in order to ensure protection and prevent
runoff. Salt storage is prohibited within 250 feet of an inland wetland or
within a wellhead protection area unless completely covered and contained
in a structure.
4. Snow storage areas shall be located such that no direct discharges to
receiving waters are possible from the storage site. Runoff from snow
storage areas shall enter treatment areas to remove suspended solids and
other contaminants before being discharged to receiving waters or
preferably be allowed to infiltrate into the groundwater.
5. Every effort shall be made to retain stormwater on the site using the natural
or existing flow patterns of the site.
6. Efforts shall be made to utilize methods that intercept, treat, and infiltrate
runoff throughout the site including, but not limited to, infiltration trenches,
drainfields, dry wells, bioretention areas, level spreaders, filter strips,
wetlands, vegetated swales, gravel wetlands, rain gardens, and tree boxes.
7. Applicants shall demonstrate why on-site infiltration approaches are not
possible or adequate before proposing the use of conventional systems that
rely on collection and conveyance to remove runoff from the site.
8. Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate of runoff
so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff for the 2, 10, 25, and 50-
year, 24-hour storm event.
9. The applicant shall demonstrate that on- and off-site downstream channel or
system capacity is sufficient to carry the stormwater run-off volume and
flow without adverse effects, such as flooding and erosion of stream banks
and shoreland areas.
10. Where runoff cannot be contained within the site, priority shall be given to
preserving natural or existing drainage systems including perennial and
intermittent streams, wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches for conveyance
of runoff leaving the project area.
11. For a storm event of ½ inch or less, the applicant shall demonstrate that
stormwater management practices will remove contaminants from the
stormwater runoff that leaves the site. The use of oil and grit traps in
manholes, on-site vegetated waterways, and vegetated buffer strips along
waterways and drainage swales, and the reduction in use of deicing salts and
fertilizers may be required by the Planning Board.
Site Plan Review Regulations 44 September 15, 2016
12. Design of the on-site stormwater drainage systems shall provide for the
disposal of stormwater without damage to streets and accessways, adjacent
properties, downstream properties, soils and vegetation and without ponding
or flooding except in areas designed for such stormwater storage.
13. The design of the on-site stormwater drainage systems shall not increase or
impede existing flows.
14. Whenever practical, native vegetation (not including invasive species) shall
be retained, protected or supplemented. Any removal of vegetation shall be
done in a manner that minimizes soil erosion.
15. Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed prior
to any soil disturbance.
16. The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed areas
remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
17. Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area. Sediment
in stormwater runoff water shall be trapped and retained within the project
area using approved measures. Wetland areas and surface waters shall be
protected from sediment.
18. Runoff shall be diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried
non-erosively through the project area. Integrity of downstream drainage
systems shall be maintained.
19. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after
final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas
resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently
stabilized within 30 days unless conditions dictate otherwise.
20. All projects of such magnitude as to require a stormwater permit from the
NH DES shall comply with the standards of the NH DES with respect to the
export of total suspended solids and/or nutrients such as phosphorous and
nitrogen. If the project does not require a stormwater permit from the NH
DES, it shall be designed to minimize the export of phosphorous from the
site to the extent reasonable with the proposed use and the characteristics of
the site.
21. Off-site disposal and transport of stormwater runoff shall not overburden the
City’s storm drainage system. If the system is inadequate to handle the
disposal and transport, the applicant may upgrade the system at no cost to
the City. All improvements shall comply with the requirements of the City’s
Ordinance for Regulation of Discharges into Storm Water Drainage System.
Site Plan Review Regulations 45 September 15, 2016
22. Soil compaction on site shall be minimized by using the smallest (lightest)
equipment possible and minimizing travel over areas that will be
revegetated or used to infiltrate stormwater (e.g., bioretention areas).
23. When it is not possible to minimize soil compaction due to site limitations,
post construction mitigation measures shall be taken to maximize infiltration
rates on soils as suitable for the uses intended.
7.4.3 Impervious Surfaces
1. All applications shall minimize the area of impervious surfaces, and address
the potential negative impact of impervious surfaces on surface and
groundwater resources.
2. Maximum effective impervious surface cover that contributes to stormwater
leaving the site shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible.
Applicants shall provide a calculation of the maximum effective impervious
surface as a percentage of the site.
3. For purposes of these regulations, the total impervious area of a lot or site is
defined as the total area of impervious parking lots, accessways, driveways,
roof area, decks, paved walkways, sidewalks, and any concrete, stone, brick,
asphalt or compacted gravel surface.
4. Impervious surfaces may be disconnected from the stormwater drainage
network to reduce the total effective impervious surface cover through such
techniques as infiltration or sheet flow over pervious area.
7.4.4 Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan
1. The applicant shall submit a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Plan.
2. The plan shall be in compliance with the EPA Phase II Stormwater Rules, as
amended.
3. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plans shall meet the
following requirements and / or show the following information:
(a) Design calculations for all temporary and permanent stormwater best
management practice (BMP) measures.
(b) A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all BMPs,
and a mechanism for this to continue in perpetuity.
Site Plan Review Regulations 46 September 15, 2016
(c) Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for
continued maintenance.
(d) Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge,
and velocity of present and future runoff.
(e) When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition peak
discharge the soil cover complex method shall be used to compute the
runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the structure.
4. The Planning Board shall approve the Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control Plan if it complies with the requirements and objectives of these
regulations. Such approval shall be a component of the overall subdivision
or site plan approval. If disapproved, the Planning Board shall furnish the
applicant with a list of plan deficiencies and procedures for filing a revised
plan.
5. Any Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan prepared under
these regulations may be reviewed by a qualified professional consultant, as
determined to be appropriate by the Planning Board.
6. The Stormwater and Erosion Control Plan shall include proposed
alternatives to or minimizing of salt applications for snow and ice removal.
7.4.5 Responsibility for Installation and Construction
1. The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction,
inspection and disposition of all stormwater management and erosion
control measures required by the provisions of these regulations.
2. Installation of stormwater management and erosion control measures shall
be overseen by a qualified engineer and the Planning Board may require
independent review and oversight.
Site Plan Review Regulations 47 September 15, 2016
Article 8 Utilities Standards
Section 8.1 General Provisions.
1. The development shall be provided with all utilities to adequately meet the
anticipated use of the project.
2. All new and relocated wires, conduits, and cables shall be located
underground.
3. All electrical and mechanical devices including transformers,
telecommunications devices, equipment switching boxes, generators, and
other utility cabinets shall be located within buildings when possible or
hidden from street and pedestrian areas with landscaping or architectural
screens when located outside according to the requirements of Article 6.
4. Temporary overhead power and telephone lines are permitted during
construction only.
5. Utility equipment for private development shall not be built in public rights
of way.
Section 8.2 Water Supply and Distribution System
1. Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible or required because of
groundwater pollution problems, the development shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system, including a connection for each legally
subdivided lot in accordance with the City Utility Ordinance.
2. Adequacy of public water supply will be determined using existing DPW
hydraulic models and studies.
3. Fire hydrants shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of a building
(distance measured as usable, not as straight line).
4. Fire hydrants shall be served by a minimum 8 inch main.
5. Fire hydrant flow tests shall yield flow determined adequate for the project
by the TAC.
6. The size, flow rate, and pressure of water mains serving the project shall
comply with the City Utility Ordinance.
Site Plan Review Regulations 48 September 15, 2016
Section 8.3 Sanitary Sewers
All sewage disposal systems shall be designed, constructed and operated in
conformance with the NH DES requirements in a manner that will prevent the
spread of disease and illness; prevent the pollution of the municipality’s brooks,
streams, ponds, lakes, and groundwater table; and assure an adequate supply of
potable and palatable water for human consumption.
8.3.1 Sewerage System
Existing sewer mains or lines into which the project will connect shall be capable
of transporting estimated sewage generated in accordance with the City’s Sewer
Use Ordinance.
8.3.2 On-site Sewage Disposal System Design
In cases where connection to City sewer systems is not required, on-site sewage
disposal systems shall meet NH DES rules and regulations. If required, the City
may also conduct an independent review of the on-site disposal system design.
8.3.3 Design and Installation
1. All waste disposal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the rules, regulations and design criteria adopted by the NH DES and
with the City’s Utility Construction Manual.
2. Where an on-site sewage disposal system is proposed, the application shall
list the types of uses for which the proposed system is designed.
8.3.4 Fats, Oil and Grease Controls
Measures for the treatment and disposal of fats, oils and greases shall conform to
the City’s Sewer Use Ordinance.
Section 8.4 Other Utilities
Preliminary approval from the applicable utility company for all other utility
services including but not limited to electric, telephone, cable TV, and gas shall
be secured prior to approval by TAC. Approvals shall be documented on site
plans as appropriate.
Site Plan Review Regulations 49 September 15, 2016
Section 8.5 Oversize and Off-Site Improvements
The Planning Board may require that utilities for the proposed site plan be
designed oversized, and/or with additional conduits or extensions provided within
the public right-of-way, to serve nearby land that is an integral part of the
neighborhood service or drainage area.
Site Plan Review Regulations 50 September 15, 2016
Article 9 On-Site Waste Storage and Disposal Standards
Section 9.1 Waste Accumulation
Except as otherwise allowed by City ordinances, owners and managers of every
property shall be responsible for maintaining all open areas free of improperly
stored solid or liquid waste accumulations.
Section 9.2 Storage Containers
1. Every property shall be supplied with adequate solid, semi-liquid, and liquid
waste storage containers. These containers shall be provided by the owner of
the property, construction company or by contract with a commercial hauler.
2. All solid waste storage containers shall be resistant to insect or animal entry.
Liquid waste may only be stored in tanks designed for the particular waste
type.
3. Containers will be constructed with rust and impact resistant materials and
will be equipped with tight-fighting covers. Containers shall have an
appropriate child safe design and be secure from unauthorized access after
business hours (locked). The property owner is responsible for maintaining
containers in a neat, clean, sanitary, and leak-free condition.
4. All containers for regulated substances shall meet all applicable federal,
state, and local standards.
Section 9.3 Location and Disposal
1. The owner of a property shall insure that the contents of all waste containers
are to be emptied or removed for disposal as necessary to prevent nuisance
odors and public safety hazards.
2. An appropriate location shall be provided for permanent placement of waste
and recycling containers.
3. An appropriate location for temporary placement of waste and recycling
containers for collection purposes shall be indicated on all site plans. Such
locations shall provide for the safe, accessible and convenient placement of
storage containers that do not interfere or impede daily operations and uses
on the site or neighboring properties. Such locations shall provide adequate
accommodation for access by waste collection and disposal vehicles so as
not to damage sidewalks or other City property.
Site Plan Review Regulations 51 September 15, 2016
4. Dumpsters and other large exterior waste containers shall be located at
service entrances and at the rear of buildings.
5. Dumpster or other waste container pads shall be a minimum of 20 feet from
any property line or yard.
6. Dumpster or other waste container pads shall be a minimum of 20 feet from
any inlet for stormwater collection.
7. The effluent from any stormwater pipe that drains the area where a dumpster
or other waste storage container is located shall traverse a minimum of 50
feet of vegetated area before reaching the banks of the watercourse itself.
8. When a dumpster or other waste storage container pad is adjacent to a
watercourse, a minimum landscaped area of 50 feet shall be maintained
between the pad and the bank of the watercourse.
9. Recycling shall comply with the City’s Solid Waste, Yard Waste and
Recycling Ordinance.
10. Permanent and temporary storage locations for all waste and recycling
containers shall provide access for waste removal vehicles without damage
to sidewalks or other City property.
Section 9.4 Flammable and Combustible Liquids.
All flammable and combustible liquids shall be contained and stored in
accordance with the National Fire Protection Association’s standards and the
International Fire Code. Location of all flammable, combustible and hazardous
material storage shall be provided to the Fire Department along with a copy of all
required Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) prior to Fire Department approval.
Section 9.5 Screening
Screening of on-site waste storage and disposal equipment shall be provided as
required in Article 6, of these regulations.
Site Plan Review Regulations 52 September 15, 2016
Article 10 Outdoor Lighting
Section 10.1 General Provisions
All projects submitted for Site Plan Review shall provide dark sky friendly
outdoor lighting according to these regulations in order to:
(a) Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for night-time safety, utility,
security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce;
(b) Minimize glare, obtrusive light, and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor
lighting that is misdirected, excessive, or unnecessary;
(c) Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.
Section 10.2 Compliance with Zoning Ordinance
All projects shall comply with the outdoor lighting dark sky friendly standards
provided in the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 10.3 Lighting Plan
1. When a proposed project includes outdoor lighting, the Site Plan shall
include a lighting plan which shall show:
(a) The location on the site where outdoor lighting fixtures (both pole and
mounted) will be installed.
(b) Scaled plans indicating the location of outdoor lighting fixtures on the
site, the height of each fixture, the types of outdoor lighting proposed,
and the level of wattage and initial lumens for all light sources.
(c) A description of the outdoor lighting fixtures including but not limited
to manufacturer’s catalog descriptions and drawings. The required
plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the
Planning Board to readily determine compliance with the requirements
of this regulation.
(d) A photometric (iso-lux) plan indicating levels of illumination, in foot
candles, at ground level.
2. The maintained horizontal illuminance standards set by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) shall be observed.
Site Plan Review Regulations 53 September 15, 2016
3. Should any outdoor light fixture, or the type of light source therein, be
changed after the building permit has been issued an amended site plan
approval shall be required.
Section 10.4 Lamps
1. Lamp types shall be selected for optimum color rendering as measured by
their color rendering index (CRI), as listed by the lamp manufacturer.
2. Lamps with a color rendering index lower than 50 are not permitted. This
requirement shall not apply to decorative lighting which may include
colored lamps, such as holiday lighting.
3. Commercial lighting shall meet minimum IESNA illumination levels while
not exceeding IESNA uniformity ratios and average illuminance
recommendations.
Site Plan Review Regulations 54 September 15, 2016
Article 11 Radio Communications Standards
Section 11.1 Site Survey
1. When necessary to provide emergency response communication to the site
and at the request of the police or fire department, the applicant shall have a
site survey conducted by a radio communications carrier approved by the
City’s Communications Division. The radio communications carrier must be
familiar and conversant with the police and fire radio configuration.
2. If the site survey indicates that it is necessary to install a signal repeater
either on or near the proposed project, those costs shall be the responsibility
of the property owner.
3. The property owner shall be responsible to pay for the site survey whether
or not the survey indicates a repeater is necessary.
4. The owner shall coordinate with the supervisor of radio communications for
the City.
Site Plan Review Regulations 55 September 15, 2016
Attachment A: Digital As-Built Plan Requirements
1. The digital plan must show the same features as the hardcopy plan, including,
but not limited to, structures, utilities, property lines, and survey monuments.
Text items, such as titles and dimensions, are allowed but not required.
2. The file format must be either AutoCAD DWG, AutoCAD DXF, or an ESRI
format. The plan must be in a single digital file with no external reference
(“XREF”).
3. The plan must be created in model space, with drawing units of U.S. survey
feet. The north rotation must be 0°. New Hampshire state plane coordinates,
NAD83 (1996), are preferred.
4. The features must be in the CAD layers and a list of layers shall be provided.
Features that do not have a layer specified in this list must be in a separate,
unique layer and identified in accompanying documentation. The City will
provide a template CAD file upon request.
5. When creating line features that would represent polygons in a GIS, such as
property lines and building footprints, the CAD user must snap end points of
lines together and must make sure polygons close. All line features must be of a
continuous line-type, such that each individual line/pipe feature (i.e. each
segment) is only broken at the ends where a node/structure is located. Straight
lines must be represented by only the beginning and ending x- and y-coordinate
points.
6. All point features shall be entered using standard point/node symbols.
7. When choosing reference features, the applicant must begin at the top of the list.
For example, manhole covers may only be used if no hydrants or valves are
available. The reference features should be as far from each other as practical. If
suitable features are not available within 750 feet (by survey traverse) of the
project area, then the applicant shall, at the discretion of the Planning Director,
either use alternative features or omit the features. The following reference
features are allowed: survey control monuments with horizontal accuracy of at
least FGDC Second Order, Class II, including City monuments; fire hydrant
spindles, water main valves, and sewer force main valves; sewer or drain
manhole cover centers; catch basin centers.
8. The digital plan must be accompanied by electronic documentation, such as a
text file, containing the following information: the name of the applicant and the
preparer of the plan; the name and version of the CAD software used to create
the plan; the project address and/or parcel number.
CITY OF PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUBDIVISION
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Adopted by Portsmouth Planning Board: March 14, 1985
Last Revision: September 15, 2016

Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) i
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PURPOSE...................................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION I - AUTHORITY........................................................................................................ 2
SECTION II - DEFINITIONS..................................................................................................... 2
SECTION III - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION AND LOT LINE CHANGE............... 4
A. Preapplication Review ........................................................................................................ 4
B. Review by Technical Advisory Committee........................................................................ 5
C. Applicant's Responsibilities................................................................................................ 6
D. Planning Board Procedures................................................................................................. 7
E. Approval Expiration and Extension.................................................................................... 8
F. Certification of Final Approval........................................................................................... 9
G. Post-Approval Procedures .................................................................................................. 9
SECTION IV - REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT........................................ 10
SECTION V - REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL PLAT.......................................................... 12
SECTION VI - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS...................................................................... 14
1. Basic Requirements .......................................................................................................... 14
2. Lots ................................................................................................................................... 14
3. Streets................................................................................................................................ 15
4. Curbing ............................................................................................................................. 18
5. Driveways ......................................................................................................................... 18
6. Drainage Improvements.................................................................................................... 18
7. Municipal Water Service .................................................................................................. 18
8. Municipal Sewer Service .................................................................................................. 19
9. Installation of Utilities ...................................................................................................... 19
10. On-Site Water Supply....................................................................................................... 20
11. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems ................................................................................... 20
12. Open Space ....................................................................................................................... 20
13. Flood Hazard Areas .......................................................................................................... 21
14. Erosion and Sedimentation Control .................................................................................. 22
15. Easements ......................................................................................................................... 23
16. Monuments ....................................................................................................................... 24
17. Benchmarks....................................................................................................................... 24
18. House Numbers................................................................................................................. 24
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) ii
SECTION VII - DESIGN STANDARDS ................................................................................. 25
1. Streets................................................................................................................................ 25
2. Storm Water Sewers and Other Drainage Appurtenances................................................ 27
3. Sanitary Sewers................................................................................................................. 28
4. Water Mains and Fire Hydrants........................................................................................ 29
SECTION VIII - FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS .............................................................. 31
A. Submission Requirements................................................................................................. 31
B. Specifications.................................................................................................................... 31
SECTION IX - DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL.................. 32
1. Improvements and Installation Bonds .............................................................................. 32
2. Maintenance Bonds........................................................................................................... 32
SECTION X – WAIVER OF REGULATIONS....................................................................... 32
SECTION XI – AMENDMENTS.............................................................................................. 33
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 1
PURPOSE
Consistent with the purpose of the State enabling legislation (RSA 36-21), these regulations are
intended to insure the orderly development of the City of Portsmouth by providing that
subdivisions are served with adequate utilities and safe, convenient access and with a desirable
and attractive living environment. Furthermore, it is the intent of the Planning Board to promote
the utilization of sound development standards which are directed toward providing realistic and
feasible costs both for the initial project development as well as for continued maintenance of all
of the project's public systems by the City.
Among the objectives of the subdivision regulations are:
1. A proper distribution of the population which is compatible with adjacent uses while
providing for the harmonious development of the municipality and its environs.
2. The avoidance of overcrowding of population, blighted areas and congestion of vehicular
traffic.
3. The avoidance of development which impedes the function of the natural drainage system
and flood areas.
4. The proper location and width of streets, open spaces, recreational areas and public lands.
5. The use of established engineering standards for the installation of improvements in the
provision of water, sewer, storm drainage and other utility services, and also the proper
grading and construction practices of streets.
6. The provision of adequate space for traffic circulation and parking; for access of
emergency apparatus; and for control of the number, spacing, type and design of access
points to existing and future streets.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 2
SECTION I - AUTHORITY
The Portsmouth Planning Board prescribes the following rules and regulations to control the
subdivision of land pursuant RSA 674:35 et seq. – Regulation of Subdivision of Land and the
City of Portsmouth Ordinances, Chapter 11, Article IV – Subdivision of Land.
SECTION II - DEFINITIONS
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in the Rules and Regulations shall carry
their customary meaning.
Abutter: Any person who owns land within two hundred (200) of the boundaries of the land
under consideration.
Alley: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the
side or rear of those properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Applicant: The owner of record of the land for which subdivision is proposed. The holder of an
option or agreement to purchase the subject property shall be co-listed as an applicant.
Board: The Planning Board of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
Building: Any structure whether temporary, semi-permanent, or permanent, designed or intended
for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property.
Cul-de-sac: A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe
and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Development: Any change in a lot by the property owner or agent presumably to increase the
value of the lot.
Driveway: A private road intended to provide vehicular access from a public way onto a single
lot.
Easement: Authorization by a property owner for any type of use by another for a specified
purpose of any designated part of his property.
Flood Hazard Zone: That portion of land which has one percent (1%) chance of flooding in any
given year, as designated on Flood insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration, if available, or on Flood Hazard Boundary Maps issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration otherwise.
Frontage: A continuous portion of a boundary of a lot which abuts a street, ordinarily regarded as
the front of the lot. When a lot is bounded by more than one street, any one of them , but only
one, may be designed as the frontage street by the owner, provided that the street meets the
frontage requirement and the principal permitted building on the lot is numbered on such street.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 3
Lot: A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land in one ownership with
definite boundaries ascertainable by recorded deed or plan which is available for use as a
building site or for any other definite purpose.
Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the
Planning Board for approval.
Resubdivision: A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any
street layout on such plat or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; also a change in
any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
Right-of-way: A part of a lot provided by the property owner for use by a second party. Rightsof-
way involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use on a
subdivision plat.
Screening: Either (A) a strip of at least ten (10) feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent
natural growth) shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet high at the time of planting of an evergreen
type that will grow to a year round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3) years;
or (B) an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet height. Screening
of either type shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
Street: A right-of-way which has been dedicated or intended for public travel or a private way
offering the principal means of access to more than one lot. Also included are terms such as
avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, highway, viaduct, freeway, court, way, and drive.
Subdivision: “Subdivision” means the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more
lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development. It includes resubdivision and,
when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory
subdivided. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts
among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision under this title. (Revised 3/14/85)
Wetland: An area with soils having poor drainage where the water table is at or near the ground
surface for at least seven months of the year. Vegetation present which are characteristic of wet
areas shall serve as above ground indications of wetlands.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 4
SECTION III - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION AND LOT LINE CHANGE
A. Preapplication Review
1. Preapplication Review – General
a. An applicant may request to meet with the Planning Board for preliminary
nonbinding discussions of a proposal as authorized by RSA 676:4, II, and as
further provided herein. An applicant may request to meet with the Board for
either Preliminary Conceptual Consultation or Design Review, or both. The
preliminary conceptual consultation phase is mandatory for certain applications as
stated in Section III.A.2 below.
b. Discussions in the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation and Design Review
Phases shall not bind either the applicant or the Board. Statements made by
Planning Board members during either phase shall not be a basis for disqualifying
said members or invalidating any action subsequently taken by the Board.
c. Preliminary review shall be separate and apart from formal consideration of an
application for subdivision approval, and the time limits for acting on a proposal
shall not apply until a formal application has been submitted and has been
determined by the Planning Board to be complete.
2. Preliminary Conceptual Consultation Phase [see RSA 676:4,II(a)]
a. The applicant may request a meeting with the Planning Board to discuss a
proposal in conceptual form. The preliminary conceptual consultation phase is
mandatory for any application that includes the subdivision of more than 5 acres
of land or the creation of more than 5 lots, and shall precede referral and review to
the Technical Advisory Committee.
b. A request for preliminary conceptual consultation shall be submitted to the
Planning Department at least 21 days prior to the date of a scheduled meeting of
the Board, and shall be accompanied by 12 copies of any plans, sketches and
other documents or exhibits to be discussed with the Board, along with digital
copies of said documents and exhibits in Portable Document Format (PDF).
c. Preliminary conceptual consultation may occur only at formal meetings of the
Planning Board. However, such discussions shall not be the subject of a public
hearing, and formal notice of abutters and the public shall not be required.
d. Preliminary conceptual consultation shall be directed at review of the basic
concept of the proposal and suggestions that might be of assistance in resolving
problems with meeting requirements during final consideration. The Board and
the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 5
such as the desirability of the proposed development type, scale, intensity and
layout under the Master Plan.
3. Design Review Phase [see RSA 676:4,II(b)]
a. The applicant may request to meet with the Board for nonbinding discussions of a
potential application that involve more specific design and engineering details
than in the preliminary conceptual consultation phase.
b. A request for design review shall be submitted to the Planning Department at least
21 days prior to the date of a scheduled meeting of the Board, and shall be
accompanied by 12 copies of all plans and exhibits, along with digital copies of
said documents and exhibits in Portable Document Format (PDF).
c. The request for design review shall include enough of the information listed in
Section IV – Requirements for Preliminary Plat so that the Board is able to review
the project. Detailed engineering of infrastructure and utilities are not required at
the design review phase, but the information listed in Section IV should be
displayed in sufficient detail to enable the Board to understand the proposed
project and identify potential issues and concerns.
d. At a regular meeting of the Planning Board, the Board shall determine if the
request for design review includes sufficient information to allow the Board to
understand the project and identify potential issues and concerns, and shall vote
on whether to accept the request for design review and to schedule a public
hearing. If the Board determines that the request does not describe the proposed
project in sufficient detail, it shall notify the applicant of the specific deficiencies
that need to be addressed.
e. Design review discussions shall take place in a public hearing at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, after notice to abutters, holders of
conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, and the
general public as required by State statute.
f. At any public meeting of the Planning Board, the Board may determine that the
design review process of an application has ended and shall inform the applicant
in writing within 10 days of such determination.
B. Review by Technical Advisory Committee
1. The Site Plan Review Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) established in Section 2.2.1
of the Site Plan Review Regulations shall review any application for subdivision approval
prior to Planning Board review if it contains any of the following:
a. Creation of a new lot;
b. Construction of a new public or private street;
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 6
c. Widening or realignment of an existing public or private street;
d. Construction of public or private water, sewer or stormwater facilities serving
more than one lot;
e. Establishment of an easement over one lot for water, sewer or stormwater
facilities to serve a different lot; or
f. Provision of a common driveway or access easement;
2. In addition to the applications that are required to be reviewed by TAC as provided
above, the Planning Board may refer any application for subdivision approval to TAC
where it determines that such review is advisable.
3. The procedure for TAC review of subdivision applications shall be the same as for site
plan review.
C. Applicant's Responsibilities
1. The applicant is invited to discuss the plans for subdivision with the Planning Department
on an informal basis prior to formal application.
2. When review by TAC is required under Section III.B.1, the applicant shall submit a
completed application on a form entitled “Subdivision Application” along with 12 copies
of the preliminary or final plat and supporting documents and studies. The application
shall be submitted by the deadline established by the Planning Department for submission
of applications for site plan approval, and in any case not later than 31 days prior to the
meeting at which the application will be accepted. After review of the application by the
TAC, the applicant shall submit 12 copies of the application to the Planning Board.
3. When review by TAC is not required under Section III.B.1, the applicant shall submit to
the Planning Board an application in writing on a form entitled “Subdivision Application”,
along with 12 copies of the preliminary or final plat and supporting documents and
studies, not later than 21 calendar days prior to the meeting at which the application will
be accepted.
4. All application documents, plans, supporting documentation and other materials shall
also be provided in digital Portable Document Format (PDF) on compact disc, DVD or
flash drive. Digital files shall be complete and exact copies of the corresponding paper
submittals (e.g., plans shall be at the same scale and sheet size as the paper copies).
Applicants may submit additional digital files to assist in presentations at public hearings,
but such additional digital files shall not be considered part of the application unless
corresponding paper documents are also provided.
5. At the time of submission of the application and preliminary or final plans, the applicant
shall pay a fee as set by City Ordinance.
All postage costs for abutter notices and proportionate share of legal advertising shall be
paid prior to the Public Hearing.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 7
6. Where subsequent Public Hearings for a project are required for Preliminary Subdivision
Approval and/or Final Subdivision Approval, the postage costs for abutter notices and a
proportionate share of legal advertising shall be paid prior to the Public Hearing.
7. If an application is withdrawn prior to a Public Hearing, the applicant will be allowed to
resubmit the application before the next regularly scheduled Board meeting in
conformance with Section III.B.2. and be held responsible for the costs of postage,
abutter notices, and a proportionate share of legal advertising only. Where the application
is not resubmitted in accordance with Section III.B.2. it will then be considered as a new
application and all costs shall be as if the application is being submitted for the first time.
8. The applicant or an authorized representative should appear at the hearing held by the
Board on the proposed subdivision to explain the plan and to answer questions which
may be asked by Board members.
9. Preliminary Approval shall expire unless a mylar and twelve (12) copies of the final plat
(see Section V for final plat requirements) are submitted to the Planning Board within
one (1) year from the date that preliminary approval is granted. The Board may, for good
cause shown, extend such period by as much as one (1) year if requested and acted upon,
prior to the expiration date. No other extensions may be requested.
10. The applicant shall also submit payment for the Registrar of Deeds to cover the current
cost of filing of plats. The application for “Approval of Subdivision of Land” shall
itemize such charges.
D. Planning Board Procedures
1. Upon receipt of a formal application and preliminary plans, the Board shall place on its
agenda for consideration any plat submitted to it within thirty (30) days. No plat shall be
approved or disapproved by the Board without affording a public hearing thereon. Such
hearing shall be duly advertised and the applicant and abutters shall be notified of the
time and place of such hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
At the Board meeting, the Board shall act to deny any application which is not in
compliance with Section IV or V as appropriate.
2. Following a hearing on the subdivision plan, the Board shall approve, conditionally
approve, deny or table the proposed subdivision plans. Approval of a preliminary plat
shall become null and void after one (1) year unless a final plat is submitted to the Board
or the Board grants an extension of time.
3. The Board shall notify the applicant, in writing, within twenty (20) working days, as to its
decision. If the Board denies the preliminary plans, the Planning Board Chairman shall
provide to the applicant, in writing, the reasons for the denial.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 8
4. The Board shall act to approve or disapprove a preliminary plat within ninety (90) days
after acceptance of the application, unless the applicant waives this requirement or the
City Council, upon request by the Board, grants an extension not to exceed an additional
ninety (90) days. Upon failure of the Board to approve or disapprove the application, the
applicant may obtain from the City Council an order directing the Board to act within
fifteen (15) days. Failure of the Board to act upon such order of the City Council shall
constitute grounds for appeal to the Superior Court, upon petition of the applicant, to
issue an order approving the application if the Court determines that the proposal
complies with existing subdivision regulations, zoning, and other ordinances. If the Court
determines that failure to act within the time specified was the fault of the Board and was
not justified, the Court may order the Board to pay the applicant's reasonable costs,
including attorney's fees, incurred in securing such order.
5. Upon submission of a final plat, the Board shall approve or disapprove the final plat.
6. Once the final plat has been approved by the Board and the Chair’s signature is affixed
thereon, it shall be retained by the Planning Department and filed by that Department
with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds within twenty (20) working days,
provided that all appropriate fees have been paid by the applicant. The applicant shall
have the required site plans pre-approved by the Registry of Deeds prior to submitting
mylars to the Planning Department for signature and recording.
7. The Planning Board Chair and the Vice-Chair are authorized to sign at their discretion
plats which show a lot line change provided:
a. there is no increase in the number of lots;
b. the resultant lot dimensions and area are in conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance and these Subdivision Rules and Regulations; and
c. direct abutters have been given notice of the lot line change and have not
requested to be heard.
Nothing shall compel the Chair or Vice-Chair to sign a plat for a Lot Line Change when
in their opinion the public interest would be better served through a review by the full
Board.
E. Approval Expiration and Extension
1. All stipulations of subdivision approval, including recording of the plat as required by the
Planning Department, shall be completed within 6 months of the date of approval by the
Planning Board.
2. The Planning Director may grant an extension of up to 6 months if he determines that the
applicant has been unable to complete a stipulation due to circumstances beyond the
applicant’s control.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 9
3. The applicant may apply to the Planning Board for an extension of the time for
completion, which shall not exceed 18 months from the original date of Planning Board
approval of the subdivision.
4. If all stipulations have not been completed or the plan has not been recorded within the
time required under paragraph 1 above, or within an extended time under paragraph 2 or
3 above (if applicable), the Planning Board’s approval shall be deemed null and void.
F. Certification of Final Approval
1. Where the Planning Board has granted subdivision approval subject to conditions, such
approval shall become final upon certification by the Planning Director that the applicant
has satisfactorily complied with the conditions imposed.
2. Within 14 days of a final subdivision approval, the Planning Director shall forward to the
Assessor a digital copy of the approved plan and a copy of the certification of final
approval..
G. Post-Approval Procedures
1. Administrative Approval of Minor Plan Amendments
After approval of the final plat by the Planning Board, the owner may request, in writing,
approval of minor amendments. The Planning Director may approve the amendment in
writing or may require review by the TAC or the Planning Board. The amended plat shall
filed in the Registry of Deeds. Such amended approval shall not extend the time period
for completing stipulations of the original approval.
2. Minor Field Modifications to Required Improvements
If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department that
unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the design of the
required improvement, the Public Works Department may authorize modifications
provided that the modifications do not amount to a waiver or substantial alteration of the
function of any improvements required by the Board.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 10
SECTION IV - REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT
Whenever the preliminary plat includes more than two proposed lots, new streets, utility mains,
pumping stations, or any other major improvement, the plat must be prepared and certified by an
engineer registered in New Hampshire. The following items shall be included on the preliminary
plat:
1. Name and address of record owner, any option holders, descriptive name of subdivision,
and name of person who prepared the plat.
2. Names and addresses of all adjoining property owners.
3. North point, date, and bar scale.
4. Zoning classification(s).
5. The scale of the layout, not to be smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch and
where possible, shall be compatible with the scale of the City's tax assessor maps. The
plat shall also include a location map to be drawn at a scale of 1" = 1,000' showing the
property being subdivided and its relation to the surrounding area within a radius of
2,000'. Said location map shall delineate all streets and other major physical features that
may either affect or be affected by the proposed development.
6. The location and approximate dimensions of all existing and proposed property lines
including the entire area proposed to be subdivided, the areas of all proposed lots, and
any adjacent parcels in the same ownership.
7. Dimensions and area of any and all property to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other public purpose.
8. Location, names, and present widths of all adjacent streets, with a designation as to
whether public or private and approximate location of existing utilities to be used. Curbs
and sidewalks shall be shown.
9. Location of significant physical features, including bodies of water, watercourses,
wetlands, railroads, important vegetation, stone walls and soils types that may influence
the design of the subdivision.
10. Proposed locations widths and other dimensions of all new streets and utilities including
water mains, storm and sanitary sewer mains, catch basins and culverts, street lights, fire
hydrants, sewerage pump stations, etc. When required by the Board, the plat shall be
accompanied by profiles of proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable
distance beyond the subject land; also grades and sizes of proposed utilities.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 11
11. For subdivisions involving greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, the preliminary
plat shall include base flood elevation date (i.e. elevation of the flood floor hazard zone
boundary).
12. For subdivisions of five (5) lots or more, or at the discretion of the Board otherwise, the
preliminary plat shall show contours at intervals no greater than two (2) feet. Contours
shall be shown in dotted lines for existing natural surface and in solid lines for proposed
final grade, together with the final grade elevations shown in figures at all lot corners. If
existing grades are not to be changed, then the contours in these areas shall be solid lines.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 12
SECTION V - REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL PLAT
The final plat shall be drawn on mylar by a registered professional engineer or by a registered
land surveyor. the size of the final plat shall not exceed 22" x 34". The plat shall include the
following information or meet the following standards:
1. Name and address of record owner, any option holder, engineer or surveyor, and
descriptive name of subdivision.
2. Names and addresses of all abutting property owners within two hundred (200) feet,
locations of building within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel, and any new house
numbers within the subdivision.
3. North point, date, dates of any revisions, and bar scale.
4. Zoning classification and minimum yard dimensions required.
5. The scale of the layout shall not be smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch. The
plat shall also include a location map at a scale of 1" = 1,000' showing the property being
subdivided and its relation to the surrounding area within a radius of 2,000 feet. Said
location map shall delineate all streets and other major physical features that may either
affect or be affected by the proposed development.
6. Dimensions and areas of all lots and any and all property to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public purpose. Dimensions shall include radii and
length of all arcs and calculated bearing for all straight lines.
7. Location, names and present widths of all adjacent streets (including curbs and
sidewalks) with a designation as to whether public or private.
8. Location of significant physical features, including bodies of water, watercourses,
wetlands, railroads, important vegetation, stonewalls, and soil types.
9. Proposed locations and profiles of all proposed streets and utilities, including water
mains, storm and sanitary sewer mains, catchbasins and culverts, together with typical
cross sections. Profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 1" = 50' and a vertical scale
of 1"=5', showing existing centerline grade, existing left and right sideline grades, and
proposed centerline grade.
10. Dates and permit numbers of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from
which approval is required by Federal or State law.
11. For subdivisions involving greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, the final plat shall
show hazard zones and shall include elevation data for flood hazard zones.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 13
12. For subdivisions of five (5) lots or more, or at the discretion of the Board otherwise, the
final plat shall show contours at intervals no greater than two (2) feet. Contours shall be
shown in dotted lines for existing natural surface and in solid lines for proposed final
grades, together with the final grade elevations shown in figures at all lot corners. If
existing grades are not to be changed, then the contours in these areas shall be solid lines.
13. Location of all permanent monuments.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 14
SECTION VI - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The following shall be considered as minimum requirements and will be varied by the Board
only under the conditions and circumstances set forth in these regulations.
1. Basic Requirements
A. Conformity to Official Plan or Map
The subdivision shall be in harmony with the Master Plan and/or Official map of the
City.
B. Hazards
The land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely without
danger to health or peril from fire, flood, soil failure, or other hazard.
C. Relation to Topography
The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall bear a logical relationship to the
topography of the property, and all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the
building sites as possible at or about the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography.
D. Planned Unit Development
The Planning Board may approve a planned unit development provided such
development is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Portsmouth, Article 7
– Flexible Development, Sections 10.710 and 10.720.
2. Lots
A. Lot Arrangement
In all quadrangular lots, and so far as practicable all other lots, the side lines shall be at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. An arrangement placing
lots at right angles to one another shall be avoided where practicable.
B. Lot Sizes
Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Portsmouth. Corner lots shall have at least 10% extra width to permit appropriate
building setback from the orientation to both streets.
C. Commercial and Industrial Lots
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 15
Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes
shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by
the type of use and development planned.
3. Streets
A. Relation to Adjoining Street System
Insofar as the Master Plan or official map does not indicate the size, location, direction
and extent of a street, and subject to the regulations hereinafter specified regarding
definite minimum widths, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of the principal streets existing in the adjoining subdivisions, or of their
proper projection when adjoining property is not subdivided, and shall be of a width at
least as great as that of such existing streets. (A) Where, in the opinion of the Board,
topographical conditions make such continuance or conformity impracticable, or (B) in
cases where the Board itself adopts a plan or plat of a neighborhood or area of which the
subdivision is a part and this plan or plat provides coordination with the street system of
the City different from that of said continuations or projections of existing streets and the
subdivider's plat conforms to such neighborhood or area plat or plan of Board, the Board
may approve the Subdivider's plat.
Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of the
prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street
system of the part submitted shall be considered in the light of the adjustments and
connections with the street system of the part not submitted.
Where a tract is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the Board may require an
arrangement of lots and streets such as to permit a later resubdivision in conformity with
the street requirements specified in these regulations.
B. Street Rights-of-Way
The minimum right-of-way for main thoroughfares shall be as shown on the City's
Master Plan or Official Map and shall, when not indicated on such Master Plan or
Official Map, be not less than sixty (60) feet; for residential streets, fifty (50) feet. These
widths shall be measured from lot line to lot line.
C. Access
There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to the streets, except where the control
of such strips is definitely placed in the City under conditions approved by the Board.
The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot, by means of either public
street or way or permanent easement, with satisfactory access to an existing public
highway or to a thoroughfare as shown on an Official Map or Master Plan.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 16
D. Parallel Service Roads
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the Planning Board
may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a
distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening lands as for park purposes in
residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate district. Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
graded and future grade separations.
E. Street Intersection Angles
A street shall intersect another as nearly to a ninety degree angle as possible.
F. Merging Streets
New streets which merge into existing streets may be at an angle of less than sixty (60)
degrees, provided there is an adequate amount of a nearly parallel approach to the
existing street, by the new street.
G. Street Deflections and Vertical Alignment
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten
(10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight
distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet for minor and collector streets, and of
such greater radii as the Planning Board shall determine for special cases. Vertical
alignment of streets shall be subject to approval by the Public Works Department.
H. Marginal Access Streets
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or arterial street, the Planning Board
may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
now access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
I. Cul-de-Sacs
Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end with a drive-around roadway having a
minimum radius for the outside curbs of at least fifty (50) feet, and a street property line
radius of sixty (60) feet. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall generally be five
hundred (500) feet unless otherwise approved by the Board. The Planning Board may
require the dedication of an easement of twenty (20) feet in width from the cul-de sac to
the next adjoining street to provide for utilities. No water lines serving the street shall be
deadended, where feasible.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 17
J. Rounding Street Corners
Whenever necessary to permit the construction of curbs having a minimum radius of
twenty-five (25) feet at street corners without curtailing the sidewalk to less than normal
width, the property line at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back
sufficiently to permit such construction. Normally, the radius on the property line shall be
not less than ten (10) feet. Larger radii may be required by the Board, when, in its
opinion, such design is advisable.
K. Street Name Signs
(1) At all intersections street signs shall be provided and installed by the developer in
conformity with the specifications of the Public Works Department.
(2) Until such time as each street is accepted by the City as a public way, the sign posts at
the intersections of such street with any other street shall have affixed thereto a sign
designating such street as a private way.
L. Street Names
Street names of all proposed streets shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
No proposed street name shall duplicate the names of existing streets irrespective of the
use of the suffix “street”, “boulevard”, “drive”, or “court”. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name. Street names shall generally be chosen from a
list of possible names adopted by the Planning Board.
M. Block Lengths
Intersecting streets shall be so laid out that blocks between street lines shall be not more
than eight hundred (800) feet in length. In blocks over six hundred (600) feet in length,
the Board may require, at or near the middle of the block, a public walk not less than
fifteen (15) feet in width for foot traffic.
N. Block Widths
The width of blocks shall generally be such as to allow two tiers of lots.
O. Grade of Streets
Street grades shall not exceed six percent (6%) for all streets nor be less than one percent
(1%).
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 18
P. Grass Strips
All areas between the exterior street lines which are not occupied by approved sidewalks
shall be rolled, loamed and seeded in accordance with the specifications of the Public
Works Department.
4. Curbing
All curves at street intersections and all curves having a radius not greater than one
hundred and twenty-five (125) feet shall have the gutter line curbed with new granite
curbing if required by the Public Works Department.
The type of curbing will generally be uniform on opposite side of the street and shall
meet specifications set forth by the Public Works Department.
5. Driveways
All permits required for driveways and other accesses onto a State highway shall be
obtained from the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways prior to
final approval of the subdivision. Any permits required for driveways onto local streets
shall be obtained from Public Works Department prior to final approval of the
subdivision. The Planning Board shall attempt to assure that the location of all driveways
and accesses do not endanger safety or impede reasonable traffic flow.
6. Drainage Improvements
The Planning Board may require the subdivider to provide engineering studies on the
effect of such subdivision on the existing downstream drainage facilities outside the
subdivision boundaries. Where it is determined by the Public Works Department that the
additional run-off incident to the development of the subdivision will over load an
existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Board may require the provision of
water retarding facilities, flowage easement, or other improvements to alleviate said
problem.
7. Municipal Water Service
All subdivisions shall provide municipal water service when available or required by the
Planning Board. Installation of all water mains is subject to the approval of the Water
Department. When City water is available and/or required the system shall be designed
by a qualified engineer. Each system shall be designed to handle the expected flows
(domestic & fire) for present and future development within the subdivision. Number and
location of all fire hydrants shall be determined by the Fire Department.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 19
8. Municipal Sewer Service
All subdivisions shall provide municipal sewer service when available or required by the
Planning Board. Installation of all sewer mains is subject to the approval of the Water
Department.
In subdivisions connecting to the municipal sewer system, each lot in the subdivision
shall be provided at the property line with a connection to the public sanitary sewer
system. An adequate sanitary sewer shall be designed by a professional engineer
registered in New Hampshire to handle all of the present and future development
incorporated in a subdivision. All new sewer systems shall conform to the Sewer
Ordinance of the City of Portsmouth. The applicant shall obtain approval for the system
from New Hampshire Supply and Pollution Control Commission where applicable, prior
to final approval of the subdivision.
9. Installation of Utilities
A. All Districts:
All electric, telephone, and other utility distribution lines shall be installed underground
per specifications of the public utility companies involved, and there shall be provided by
the developer such easements as are required for transformer units. Both the landscaping
and the location of all utility distribution lines and any such transformer areas shall be as
approved by the Planning Board and shall be in accord with the following requirements:
1. Detailed plans for all utility transmission lines and transformer areas within the
subdivision shall be supplied to and accepted by the Public Works Department
prior to the filing of an application for Final Subdivision Approval from the
Planning Board.
2. All such plans shall have been designed and approved by the appropriate utility
company or, if not designed by the utility company, that the company has
approved the design being submitted.
3. In conjunction with the filing of the application for Final Subdivision Approval,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that all necessary easements
or licenses, which are required from the City, have been requested and are being
considered by the Department of Public Works.
B. Indicator Tape
Indicator tape shall be installed in all residential, commercial, and industrial areas over all
underground utility mains and services. Metallic type shall be utilized over non-metallic
materials.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 20
10. On-Site Water Supply
In subdivisions not designed to be served by municipal water service, the provision of onsite
water supply shall conform to Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission
criteria and be subject to approval by the Planning Board. It shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider to provide adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is
adequate to permit the installation and operation of both individual on-site water supply
and sewage disposal systems.
11. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems
No subdivision of land will be approved where it creates a lot that will not meet the
minimum standards imposed by the State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control Commission and requirements listed below unless connected to a municipal
sewer system.
All subsurface sewage disposal systems must be designed by a professional engineer
registered in New Hampshire and constructed in accordance with the most recent edition
of the manual on “Guide for the Successful Design of Small Sewage Disposal Systems”
as published by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission.
Each proposed lot shall have a test pit on the proposed site for the leaching bed on each
proposed lot. The Planning Board may request that the City Engineer verify any test pits.
Approval for each lot's test pit shall be obtained from New Hampshire Water Supply and
Pollution Control Commission and from the Public Works Department prior to final
approval of the subdivision.
12. Open Space
A. Natural Features
The subdivision shall, whenever possible, preserve in their natural condition important
natural features. The Planning Board may request an advisory opinion from the
Portsmouth Conservation Commission in the determination of the value of natural
features and the boundaries of such natural systems. Such areas include large or unique
trees or groves, water courses or important wetland areas. Natural features that provide
buffers between lots, or sections, of a subdivision should be preserved to enhance
privacy, and esthetic value.
B. Buffer Strips
The Planning Board may require the designation of buffer strips of at least fifty (50) feet
width around surface water, wetlands, or other natural features which may be adversely
affected by erosion or stormwater runoff. The Planning Board may require a vegetative
buffer to provide screening where non residential developments abut a residential zone.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 21
C. Parks
Where a small park or other neighborhood recreational open space shown on an official
map or on a plan made and adopted by the Board is located in whole or in part in the
applicant's subdivision, the Board may require the dedication or reservation of such open
space within the subdivision for park, playground or other recreational purposes, in those
cases in which the Board deems such requirements to be reasonable.
The Board shall also require of the developer that he supply and plant such trees and
shrubbery as are deemed compatible to the environmental design of the neighborhood. It
shall also be stipulated by covenant upon the plan that such open spaces shall not contain
signs other than street directional or place-name signs and that upon approval of the final
plans and plantings, the maintenance of said landscaped areas shall be the responsibility
of the community.
D. Tree Planting
The planting of shade trees within all developed lots where residential, commercial, or
industrial development is to take place, shall be required of the developer who shall
supply planting plans in triplicate to the Planning Board and Public Works Department.
The planting plans of shade trees within proposed or accepted rights-of-way must be
submitted to the Public Works Department and the Chairman of the Portsmouth
Conservation Commission and receive their approval before planting of street trees is
begun.
13. Flood Hazard Areas
Subdivisions involving land designed as flood hazard areas shall be reviewed to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding and shall meet
the following requirements:
A. Permits
Prior to preliminary approval, the Planning Board shall review the proposed development
to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those government agencies
from which approval is required by Federal and State law including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
B. Minimization of Flood Damage
Sufficient evidence (construction drawing, grading and land treatment plans) shall be
submitted so as to allow the Planning Board to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 22
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
are located, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and,
(4) New and replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site site systems)
are located, designed, and constructed to minimize infiltration and avoid
impairment.
C. Elevation and Flood-Proofing Records
The subdivider shall obtain and maintain records of elevations and floor-proofing levels
for all new are substantially improved structures, whether or not such structures contain a
basement.
D. Alteration of Watercourses
The State Wetlands Board shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and copies of such notifications shall be submitted to the National Flood
Insurance Program. The flood carrying capacity shall be maintained within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse.
14. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done in such a way that
will minimize soil erosion. Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected, and supplemented. Temporary vegetation or mulching may be required by the
Board where considered necessary.
Where determined necessary by the Planning Board, the applicant shall prepare a plan for
minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation during construction and operation of the
proposed development. This plan shall consist of:
(1) Drawings showing the natural drainageways on the site and surrounding area;
(2) The various measures proposed for the control of erosion and sediment and their
relative location;
(3) Specifications, construction details and calculations for each proposed soil erosion
and sediment control measure; and,
(4) A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the
measures and the sequence and time of exposure of each area, prior to the
completion of effective measures.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 23
In reviewing such a plan, the Planning Board shall consider objectives including, but not
limited to , the following:
(1) The disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum;
(2) Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased run-off caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development;
(3) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped and retained on the project area;
(4) Off-site surface water shall either be diverted around or conduced safely through
the project area; and,
(5) Disturbed areas shall be protected from erosion during winter months.
15. Easements
A. Utilities
Except where alleys of not less than twenty (20) feet are provided for the purpose, the
Board may require easements, not exceeding ten (10) feet, on each side of all rear lot
lines, and on side lot lines where necessary or, in the opinion of the Board, advisable, for
poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains or other
utility lines. Easement of the same or greater width may be required along the lines of or
across lots where necessary for the extension of the existing or planned utilities.
If in the opinion of the Board the most suitable and reasonable locations for any of the
utilities, such as sewers, storm drains, water and gas pipes and electric pole lines and
conduits, which are likely to be required within a subdivision, either for the service
thereof or for service for areas in the surrounding territory, do not lie wholly in the
streets, including alleys if any, shown on the plat, the Board may require, insofar as
reasonable, provision to be made for the location of such utilities on routes elsewhere
than within said streets, either by the dedication of public interest in the proper location
of said utilities.
B. Drainage
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, the
Planning Board may require a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of at least
(20) feet in width.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 24
16. Monuments
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points of curves in streets, and at
such intermediate points as shall be required by the Public Works Department. The
monuments shall be of such material, size, and length as may be fixed as a standard by, or
approved by, the Public Works Department.
17. Benchmarks
A permanent reinforced concrete marker shall be placed at the edge of each road
boundary at their terminus of the subdivision as reference for all locations and elevations
and every 2,500 (twenty-five hundred) feet within the subdivision or at other locations
specified by the Public Works Department. All benchmarks shall be in reference to a
U.S.G.S. survey.
18. House Numbers
All structures and dwellings (but not accessory buildings) shall be numbered by the
developer in accordance with City Ordinance, Chapter 11, Article V, Section 11-502.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 25
SECTION VII - DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Streets
The laying out and construction of all streets within subdivisions shall be in conformity
with those ordinances of the City of Portsmouth pertaining to such development and in
addition shall meet the following construction and material specifications. Where not
specified below, street construction shall follow the practices outlined in the latest edition
of the State of New Hampshire Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. Streets shall conform to the cross-sections attached to this section.
A. Clearing
The entire area of each or way shall be cleared and cleaned of all stumps, brush, roots,
boulders, like material and all trees not intended for preservation, and will not be used for
fill. Ledge occurring anywhere in the full cross-section of the roadway must be cleared to
a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches below the finished surface. Ledge occurring in
pipe tenches must be cleared so as to have a gravel cushion of at least one (1) foot below
and both sides of the pipe.
B. Excavation
All loam, soft clay, and other yielding material shall be removed or stripped from the
roadway area to a depth of no less than twenty (20) inches below the finished grade,
and/or to a depth that may be required by the Director of Public Works.
C. Rough Grade and Preparation of Sub-Grade
The excavated area shall be back-filled to the subgrade and shoulder elevation with
suitable backfill, rough graded and compacted to sub-grade and shoulder elevations. The
sub-grade shall be shaped to a true surface conforming to the proposed cross section of
the road and thoroughly compacted before applying the gravel.
D. Base Course
The base course area shall be deemed to include travel way and shoulder areas and shall
consist of a course of bank-run gravel of twelve (12) inch minimum depth, unless the
Director of Public Works determines that ground conditions warrant greater depth for
either course.
The base course shall not be constructed during freezing weather or on a wet or frozen
sub-grade. Blading and rolling shall be required to provide a smooth, even and uniformly
compacted course true to cross-section and grade. A minimum slope of the finished base
course shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot or as may be required on curves or on
super elevations. At all times during construction, the sub-grade and all ditches shall be
constructed and maintained so that the bed will be effectively drained to prevent erosion.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 26
All compaction shall be at ninety-five percent (95%) density in accordance with
AASHTO T 99.
E. Street Paving
Street paving shall be accomplished by placing a minimum of two (2) courses of hot
asphalt concrete which shall be placed with a self-propelled spreader and in accordance
with the specifications and conditions stated in the State of New Hampshire Department
of Public Works and Highways standard specifications for road and bridge construction,
adopted and approved, latest edition.
If a significant time interval occurs between the successive passes of the paving machine,
the contractor must use a joint heater to insure a better bond. No paving will be done
between November 15 and April 15. In all cases, the temperature of the day must be forty
(40) degrees and rising before asphaltic concrete mixture (Type 1) can be applied.
F. Side Slopes
Side slopes shall not exceed one (1) foot vertical rise per every two (2) feet horizontal
length without retaining or other special considerations. Erosion prevention measures
might be required until permanent growth is established.
G. Approval and Specifications
All material shall be secured from sources approved by the Director of Public Works.
Samples of all materials to be used in the project shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Works upon request.
All materials shall conform to the latest edition of the State of New Hampshire
Department of Public Works and Highways Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction or to City requirements if more stringent.
H. Curbing
(1) Granite Curbs
Granite curbs where specified on the typical cross-sections and where required by
the Director of Public Works shall conform to the following nominal dimensions
and shall not have rust stains: straight granite curb, 5" x 18” x 48" minimum
length; slope granite curb 4 ½" x 13" x 48" minimum length. Curb shall be
bedded on and surrounded by a minimum 6" layer of gravel. Complete
compaction shall occur in all areas and under the entire length of curb.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 27
I. Sidewalks
The sub-base for a sidewalk shall be at least twelve inches (12") of bank-run gravel,
thoroughly compacted. All stones larger than three inches (3") in diameter shall be
removed. Bituminous concrete shall be laid in two (2) courses; namely base course and
top course. Base course shall consist of one and one-half inches (1½") of binder after
rolling. In no case shall the surface be laid until the sub-base has been inspected and
approved. Concrete sidewalks shall not be less than four inches (4") in thickness
reinforced by 6 x 6 - 6 x 6 wire mesh, placed on the same base.
J. Inspection and Methods
The Department of Public Works shall regularly be notified to inspect all road and utility
construction and materials used.
2. Storm Water Sewers and Other Drainage Appurtenances
All areas of a subdivision shall be graded to prevent flooding of structures and roads or
eroding of property. Storm sewers and other drainage appurtenances shall be constructed
throughout the entire subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins, and
be connected to an adequate outfall. The storm drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system and shall be in accordance with drainage laws
of the State of New Hampshire. Included in the overall design shall be any work
necessary in order to provide adequate and satisfactory drainage along the side of any
existing street which is adjacent to the subdivision. The plans and specifications for the
disposing of storm water and the construction thereof shall be approved by the Public
Works Director. Manholes will be required upon request, to be located between
catchbasins at all points where there is a change of grade, change of alignment, or an
intersection, and shall not be spaced greater than 300 feet apart.
A. Design
(1) Proper sizing of culverts, pipes, etc. shall be acceptable established engineering practice.
(2) Design storm frequency:
a. Major streams, rivers, bridges, culverts 50 year storm or flood of record
b. Minor brook culverts 15 year storm
c. Storm sewers 10 year storm
(3) A sample set of the calculations used in sizing the various pipes and a list of the variables
used must be submitted to the Public Works Director. Failure to include this information
could result in a delay of the review process.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 28
B. Standards of Construction
(1) All improvements shall meet the specifications of AASHTO (American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials) and the N.H. Standards Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction in regards to material and strength requirements.
(2) Drain catch basins or manholes shall have a minimum of 3-foot stumps. All drain
manhole covers shall be heavy duty, of 30-inch diameter, and identified as “drain”.
(3) Minimum size pipe for drains and culverts shall be twelve (12) inches in diameter.
(4) All pipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe of sufficient strength for the given application.
Drainage pipes shall have a minimum of three (3) feet of cover where ever possible.
(5) Culvert Headwalls/Endwalls when required shall be either concrete or mortar rubble
masonry.
3. Sanitary Sewers
A. Design
In subdivisions connecting to municipal sewer system, the construction of the sewer
system shall conform to the approved plans and specifications and all work must be
properly inspected and approved by the Public Works Department. In general, the design
of municipal sewer lines shall follow the guidelines presented in the Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9.
A manhole shall be installed at each change of alignment on the pipe and/or beginning or
end, as well as at each change of grade at intervals not to exceed three hundred (300) feet.
Manhole frames and covers shall be of heavy duty type. Manholes shall be watertight.
B. Lift Stations
The Department of Public Works shall provide typical lift station plans. Data shall be
provided by a registered engineer for estimating design flows before equipment selection.
Final approval of the type of station shall be specified by the Department of Public
Works. All manuals pertaining to said lift station (i.e. operation, service guaranty) shall
be turned over to the City upon acceptance. The decision to accept any sewer lift station
is entirely a city option, and shall be based on the recommendations of the City Engineer,
Director of Public Works, and the Planning Board. General requirements for lift stations
include, but not limited to: fencing of the installation, a permanent above ground building
for stand-by-power, flow recording equipment, maintenance supplies and tools, etc., and
an approved primary screening device or communicator devices located in the wet well.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 29
C. Materials
Materials selected for sewer construction shall be of the following types:
Pipe - Reinforced concrete, not recommended; asbestos-cement-Class 3300
minimum; ductile iron, force mains and heavy loads; PVC, schedule 40 minimum
with cement joints is not allowed.
Manholes - May be precast concrete section construction with approved joint
sealing system between sections and for incoming and outgoing pipes. Manhole
covers shall be heavy duty type (N.H. Standard 30" diameter), identified as
“sewer”.
Sewer Services - At main to be wyes. If tapped, must use cast iron sewer saddles
(of approved design).
D. Construction Standards
Construction standards shall be clearly emphasized in the specifications and attention
shall be directed to the bedding material and backfill requirements. Suitable compaction
under, around and above of pipes will be required. All lateral connections shall be made
through the use of wyes installed during initial construction. All manholes shall be made
watertight and have brick inverts. All joints between pipes and between manhole section
shall be of and adequate locking type to prevent water seepage in or out of the system.
All pipes shall be sized and have proper bearing material under them. All trenches shall
be opened by the developer for inspection before and after pipe is bedded and laid. When
asbestos cement pipe is used, wyes shall be supplied in the main. All joints shall be tight
fitting and sealed. Inspections shall be completed in the normal work day within a
twenty-four (24) hour period after notification. Minimum slope of a sanitary sewer shall
be established to maintain a minimum average velocity of two (2) feet per second.
4. Water Mains and Fire Hydrants
A. Connections to Lots
When City water is supplied, each lot shall have a separate connection brought to the lot
line, equipped with an outside stop, and capped until ready to use. All house service lines
shall be connected to the main by the use of tapped couplings. The developer shall
provide ties for the end of the service line and the outside stop to the Director of Public
Works for each lot in the development (also the same for sewer laterals).
B. Design and Construction
Water mains, services, fire hydrants, and other appurtenances shall be designed,
constructed, and installed according to Portsmouth Water Department Standards.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 30
C. Materials
All materials shall meet the requirements or specifications set forth by the Portsmouth
Water Department.
D. Notification Prior to Construction
The Director of Public Works shall be notified at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any
construction involving water mains. All new pipes shall be inspected and tested in
accordance with Portsmouth Water Department requirements.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 31
SECTION VIII - FINAL PLAN REQUIREMENTS
A. Submission Requirements
In order to facilitate the on-going development and maintenance of the City’s Geographic
Information Systems, these regulations require applicants to submit, in addition to a
recordable mylar, a digital format the final plan including but not limited to, subdivision
plan, lot line relocation plan or lot line verification plan, that conforms to City
specifications.
1. Waiver of the requirement to submit a plan in a digital format may be granted by
a two-thirds vote of the full membership of the Planning Board.
B. Specifications
Electronic Data: Acceptance of the digital version of the final plan shall be based on the
following:
1. Data format shall include digital parcel lines parcel areas, public easements,
utility easements and when buildings outlines are surveyed these shall be included
as well.
2. Data shall be submitted on a CD or DVD. Media shall be in a format compatible
with AutoCAD or ESRI software, i.e. DWG, DXF, shapefile, personal
geodatabase, or ARC/INFO export format (E00).
3. Files shall be geo-referenced to New Hampshire State Plane Coordinates and shall
be expressed in feet.
4. All submitted disks shall be labeled with the following information:
i. Project Name;
ii. Applicant Name(s);
iii. Data File Names;
iv. Property Owner Name;
v. Tax Map and Lot Number;
vi. Date (month, day and year).
5. If, additional plan review should be required; the applicant shall complete
outstanding requirements and provide the City with updated plans.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 32
SECTION IX - DEVELOPMENT PREREQUISITE TO FINAL APPROVAL
1. Improvements and Installation Bonds
The Board will consider approval of the final plat for record only after monuments have
been installed in accordance with the specifications given hereunder and after there shall
have been filed with the Board:
A certificate from the Director of Public Works that all streets shown on the plat have
been graded and approved, and all sewerage, water utilities, curbing, and street markers
have been installed in accordance with the City specifications and all lands dedicated as
open areas or public land and a duly completed and executed bond issued by a surety
company authorized to do business in the State of New Hampshire, certified by the City
Attorney as valid and enforceable by the City Attorney and in the amount and with surety
satisfactory to the Board, securing the making installation of these improvements,
utilities, and facilities within the period fixed by the Board; or
A certified check, drawn on an approved bank and available to the City and adequate for
the completion of these improvements utilities and facilities.
Said bond or certified check shall be in the amount representing one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost for the completion of the streets and the installation of the sewer and
water utilities and facilities according to the specifications given hereunto. Upon
inspection of a partial completion of a subdivision, the City Manager may authorize, in
writing, a pro-rated reduction in the certified check or performance bond; but in no case
shall more than fifty percent (50%) of said performance bond or said certified check be
released until the entire subdivision has been completed to the satisfaction of the Board
and written approval by said Board has been executed.
2. Maintenance Bonds
The Board will consider approval of the final plat for record only after there shall have
been filed with the Board, a surety bond or certified check covering maintenance of roads
and other improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of completion, in an
amount not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of said cost of improvements. If repair
or unusual maintenance is needed or additional improvements required, then such costs
as are necessary shall be drawn against said surety.
SECTION X – WAIVER OF REGULATIONS
1. The Planning Board may waive any provision of these Regulations by a vote of six
members, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the spirit and
intent of the Master Plan or these Regulations.
2. In granting a waiver, the Planning Board may require such conditions as will in its
judgment secure the objectives of these Rules and Regulations.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 33
SECTION XI – AMENDMENTS
The Planning Board may amend these Rules and Regulations as it deems necessary or
advisable at any meeting by a majority vote of the full membership of the Board. Such
action shall follow a public hearing for which notice has been given at least 10
calendar days before the hearing in accordance with RSA 675:7.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 34
INDUSTRIAL STREET MINIMUM STANDARDS
(Not To Scale)
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 35
COMMERCIAL STREET MINIMUM STANDARDS
(Not To Scale)
Subdivision Rules and Regulations (rev. September 2016) 36
RESIDENTIAL STREET MINIMUM STANDARDS
(Not To Scale)
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 11
CHAPTER 11
SIDEWALKS, SEWERS, LAYOUT OF STREETS, SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Article I Sidewalks 11.101 - 11.105
Article II Sewers 11.201 - 11.216
Article III Layout and Construction of Streets 11.301 - 11.309
Article IV Subdivision of Land 11.401 - 11.407
Article V Street Names and Numbers 11.501 - 11.502
Article VI Referrals to Planning Board 11.601 - 11.602
Article VII Subdivision Regulations 11.701 - 11.704
Article VIII Site Plan Review 11.801
ARTICLE I: SIDEWALKS
Section 11.101: STATE LAW ADOPTED
The provisions of Chapter 252 N.H. RSA are hereby adopted and declared to be in force in the
City of Portsmouth.
Section 11.102: PETITIONS
All petitions for new sidewalks shall be presented to the City Council and shall be made on
blanks prepared and furnished by the Department of Public Works which blanks shall contain the
provisions of said Part 22, Chapter 188, so far as it relates to sidewalks and the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Section 11.103: FORM
All petitions shall be signed by the owner of the property and shall contain a description of the
premises, the street and number, the assessor's lot and plan number, and the kind of sidewalk
desired.
Section 11.104: CONSTRUCTION
All sidewalks in the City shall be laid upon the grade, width and slope established by the
Department of Public Works, and constructed as said department shall provide.
Section 11.105: PAYMENT
As soon as a petition shall be filed, the Superintendent of Public Works shall estimate the cost
thereof and shall then notify the petitioner, who shall, before any action is taken on said petition,
pay the City one-half of such estimated cost. If the actual cost of the work shall exceed the
estimate, then the petitioner shall pay one-half of such excess; and if it shall be less than the
estimated cost, then one-half of such difference shall be returned to the petitioner.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 11
ARTICLE II: SEWERS
Section 11.201: ENABLING LEGISLATION
All design, construction, maintenance and improvement of storm and sanitary sewers within the
corporate limits of the City shall be as approved by the City Council and in accordance with and
consonance with that legislation of the State of New Hampshire as presented in Chapters 147
and 252 of the N.H. RSA, 1955 and section 406 of this Ordinance.
Section 11.202: DEFINITIONS
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
Ordinance shall be as follows:
1. "BOD" (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in 5 days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
2. "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
3. "City Engineer" shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Portsmouth or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
4. "Drain Layer" shall mean a person licensed by the Department of Public Works as
a layer of drains.
5. "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
6. "House Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning 8
feet outside the outer face of the building wall. For the purposes of this
Ordinance the terms "Building Drain" and "Building Sewer" shall be synonymous
with the terms "House Drain" and "House Sewer" as defined in Section 15.101 of
the Plumbing Code.
7. "House Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal including that portion of the line on public
property.
8. "Hearing Board" shall mean the Board appointed according to provisions of
Article XI.
9. "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
10. "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 11
11. "Person" shall mean an individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
12. "PH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogenions in
grams per liter of solution.
13. "Plumbing Inspector" shall mean the person employed by the City of Portsmouth
to inspect plumbing or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
14. "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
15. "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
16. "Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
17. "Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residence,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
18. "Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
19. "Sewage Works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
20. "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
21. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
22. "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than 5 times the average 24 hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
23. "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed as "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
24. "Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
25. "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 11
Section 11.203: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of Portsmouth, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within said City of Portsmouth or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of
this Ordinance.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, recreation or
other purposes is hereby required to install thereon suitable toilet facilities and provided
said property abuts upon any street, alley or right of way in which there is located a
public sewer and further provided that said premises are located within 150 feet of the
property line abutting said street, alley or right of way, the owner shall connect said
facilities with the public sewer.
Section 11.204: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
A. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 11.203, paragraph D, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner
shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Plumbing Inspector. The application for
such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall
supplement by any, plans, specifications, percolation test results and other information as
are deemed necessary by the Plumbing Inspector. A permit and inspection fee to be
determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording and paid at the
time the application is filed. (Amended 3/18/2002).
C. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector. He shall be
allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the applicant
for the permit shall notify the Plumbing Inspector when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered, the inspection shall be
made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Plumbing Inspector.
D. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall
comply with all regulations of the N.H. Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission.
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface
facilities where the percolation test results indicate poor drainage conditions exist. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 11
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 11.204, Paragraph D, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Ordinance and any septic tanks,
cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled
with suitable material.
F. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
G. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
H. When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer of any house, building or
property used for human occupancy located within 150 feet of the property line abutting
the street, alley or right of way in which the sewer main is laid, shall be connected to the
sewer within 60 days and the private sewage system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank run gravel.
Section 11.205: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
A. Only licensed Drain Layers shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof the Drain Layer must first
obtain a signed permit from the Department of Public Works.
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
1. The residential and commercial service; and
2. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the City Engineer. A
permit and inspection fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or
similar wording for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the
City at the time the application is filed. (Amended 3/18/2002).
C. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
The owner shall be obligated to pay all costs and expenses of operation, repairs, and
maintenance and of reconstruction (if needed) of the building sewer including the
connection to the public sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except
where one building stands at rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one application and approved by the City Engineer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
found, on examination and test by the City Engineer, to meet all requirements of this
Ordinance.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 11
F. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods
to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and back filling the trench,
shall be noted on exhibit A of the permit application, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations
of the City. In the absence of a code of provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and
W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. The entire line when completed shall be
gas tight and watertight.
G. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
shall be lifted by a means approved by the City Engineer and discharges to the building
sewer.
H. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundations drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface run-off or ground water to a building sewer or
building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The method of connection to the building sewer into the public sewer shall be acceptable
to the City Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedure set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual Practice No. 9. All
such connections shall be made gas tight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedure and materials must be approved by the City Engineer before
installation.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City Engineer when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the City Engineer or his
representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the City. Prior to any excavating on any public property, a
trenching permit must be obtained from the Department of Public Works.
Section 11.206: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or polluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the City Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged on approval of the City Engineer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer,
or natural outlet.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 11
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described
waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas;
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two
mg/l as CN in the wastes is discharged to the public sewer.
3. Any waters or wastes having a PH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage,
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the City Engineer that
such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the City Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F (65 degrees
C);
2. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32 - 150 degrees F;
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation
of any garbage grinder equipment with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp
metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Engineer;
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, mercury, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such a degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City
Engineer for such materials;
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 11
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste, or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the City Engineer, as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters;
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life, or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the City Engineer in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations;
8. Any waters or wastes having a PH in excess of 9.5;
9. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on sewage treatment works;
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined herein.
10. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent can not
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
E. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Paragraph D of this Section, and which in the judgement of the City Engineer, may have
a deleterious effect upon the sewage, works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City
Engineer may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes not
covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Paragraph J. of
this Section.
If the City Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the City Engineer, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws.
F. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Engineer, and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 11
G. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense.
H. When required by the City Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with
such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the City Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this Ordinances shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published
by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfall of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analysis are
obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls whereas PH's are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
J. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character maybe accepted by the City for
treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern.
Section 11.207: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
No authorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or temper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the
charge of disorderly conduct.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 11
Section 11.208: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
A. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. The City Engineer or his representative shall have the
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 11.208,
Paragraph A above, the City Engineer or duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City and the City shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as
required in Section 1.206, Paragraph H.
C. The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion
of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
Section 11.209: PENALTIES
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Ordinance except Section 11.207
shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in
Section 11.209, Paragraph A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall become liable to the
City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by reasons of such violation.
Section 11.210: VALIDITY
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed.
B. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not
affect the validity of any other part of this Ordinance, which can be given effect without
such invalid part or parts.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 11
Section 11.211: LIMITS OF LIABILITY
The approval of permit applications or the acceptance of any sewer construction by any of the
City's appointed officials does not indicate nor should it be construed as to mean acceptance of
any liability by the City of Portsmouth or any of its employees for claims which may arise due to
errors, oversights, inferior material, poor workmanship or damages incurred in connection with
construction of building sewers or private sewage disposal systems as set forth in Section 11.204
and Section 11.205 of this Ordinance.
Section 11.212: ORDINANCE IN FORCE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording
and publication as provided by law.
Section 11.213: HEARING BOARD
A. A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of differences between the
City Engineer and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the
provisions of this Ordinance by the City Engineer. Cases not resolved by arbitration will
be referred to the City Council for resolution. Cases arbitrarily resolved adverse to the
City Engineer may be referred to the City Council by the City Manager.
B. One member of the Board shall be a civil or sanitary engineer;
One member shall be a licensed drain layer;
One member shall be a lawyer;
Two members shall be residents of the City of Portsmouth.
No member will be elected officials or employees of the City of Portsmouth and no
member will act upon a case in which he or his employer is an active participant.
Section 11.214: PERMIT SYSTEM
It is accepted practice for those political entities using the Permit System to call for three classes
of permits:
A. For the installation of private sewage disposal facilities;
B. For the residential and commercial building sewers; and
C. For industrial sewer connections.
Section 11.215: CHANGE IN VOLUME/CHARACTER
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the Superintendent
of Public Works at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 11
Section 11.216: SEWER USER CHARGES/RECORDS/HOOK-UP
A. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their
discharges as the Superintendent of Public Works or duly authorized employees of the
City may reasonably require including installation use and maintenance of monitoring
equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent of Public Works. Such records shall be made available upon request by
the Board to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
B. The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes which is connected to a public sewer shall pay a sewer user
charge. The sewer user charge shall be established by the City from time to time to defray
the cost of management, maintenance, operation and repair, including replacement, of the
municipal waste water system. Sewer user charges shall be based upon water use
whenever possible. No allowance shall be made for watering lawns or watering gardens,
except for customers who have installed at their cost an approved irrigation system and a
second water meter, meeting the specifications determined by the Water Department to
measure water use which is reasonably calculated not to be discharged into the sewer
system. Where such second meters have been installed, a separate account will be
established and no sewer charges will be applied to this usage. A monthly service fee
shall be charged for each irrigation meter in addition to the consumption charge, said fee
to be determined by the City Council during its annual budget process.
Users of the City of Portsmouth’s water system may request a permit for the installation
of an irrigation system and irrigation meter. An application must be completed and
submitted to the Water Department for the installation of an irrigation system and
irrigation meter prior to the issuance of an irrigation permit. The Water Department may
deny the issuance of a permit for an irrigation system or irrigation meter when the
existing water main does not provide sufficient water volume/pressure to support the
demands of an irrigation system without causing unacceptably low water pressure for
other customers on the same water main.
Irrigation service lines and meters shall be installed not more than four feet from the
prime meter and shall be installed parallel to the prime meter. Sewer charges shall not
apply to water amounts measured by irrigation meters. Shut off valves are required
ahead and behind the irrigation meter and must be within one foot of the meter. A back
flow preventer (approved by the City) to protect against contamination of the water
system must be installed behind the irrigation meter.
Only a landscape irrigation system designed and installed by an Environmental
Protection Agency Watersense Certified Irrigator in accordance with the criteria set
forth in this section shall be deemed to be in compliance with subparagraph (a) of this
section. The Certified Irrigator must certify in writing to the Water Division that the
landscape irrigation system has been designed and installed in accordance with
subparagraph (a) of this section. This certification shall be provided to the Water
Division at the time of requesting final inspection of the system.
(a) Automatic irrigation systems shall:
(1) Be maintained in compliance with the provisions of this section;
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 11
(2) Be rendered inoperative by or at the direction of the irrigation system owner or
operator pending repairs if damaged in a manner that results in leakage or
excessive discharge of water from broken components;
(3) Include rain sensors to be installed and maintained on all irrigation systems
equipped with automatic irrigation controllers and set to render the irrigation
system inoperative at ¼ inch of moisture or more;
(4) Include freeze sensors to be installed and maintained on all irrigation systems
equipped with automatic irrigation controllers, which will render the system
inoperative at 35 degrees Fahrenheit or higher lower;
(5) Be designed so that spray or rotary heads are at least four (4) inches inside from
any curbing, sidewalk, fencing, or building;
(6) Be designed so that heads spray only towards pervious surface or landscaped
area;
(7) Be designed to include a zonal irrigation system; and
(8) Be designed to include a master valve.
(b) Operation of irrigation systems or devices.
From April 1 to September 30, landscape irrigation utilizing water, in whole or in part,
obtained from the City water system, is prohibited except during the times between
6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. The City Manager, or his or her designee, may further restrict
landscape irrigation to specified days of the week or otherwise restrict the irrigation
schedule as circumstances dictate.
If records of metered water use are not available or do not reasonable reflect the quantity
of waste discharged into the sewage system, the sewer user charge shall be based upon
estimated water use or on actual measurement of the volume of waste discharged into the
sewer system. Sewer surcharges shall be levied upon users whose waste characteristics
are found to be above normal strength. For the purpose of evaluating waste
characteristics, the terms of the Report on the Proposed Rates and Charges for Sewer
Services by the City of Portsmouth, prepared by Coffin and Richardson, dated June 15,
1976, are incorporated herein by reference.
C. Owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated within the City and not connected into a public
sewer, if found to be in violation of Section 11.203, Paragraph C or Section 11.204,
Paragraph H of this Ordinance shall pay sewer user charges as if connected to a public
sewer.
D. In the event that the owner or owners of a business which is commercial or industrial can
clearly define and separate a portion of the potable water entering the business
establishment which is totally consumed in process, the owner or owners may, at their
own expense, install and maintain an A.W.W.A. approved water meter in the line
supplying the portion of the water consumed in process. This meter shall be considered
to be a deduct meter; the volume of water flowing through the deduct meter shall be
subtracted from the volume measured by the primary water metering device located on
the premises for the purpose of computing the sewer fee charge.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 11
ARTICLE III: LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS
Section 11.301: ENABLING LEGISLATION
All layout, improvement, construction, and the acceptance and dedication of streets by the City
Council and within the corporate limits of the City, shall be in accordance and in conformity
with the legislation of the State of New Hampshire as presented in Chapter 36, Sections 1-26,
N.H. RSA 1955 and Section 406 of this Ordinance which regulates procedure and defines those
provisions which pertain to the development and adoption of an official community map and the
regulation of sub-divisions.
Section 11.302: DEFINITIONS
A. "Street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however
otherwise designated. It shall at all times and according to its classification also mean a
mall, park or parking area. The various street classifications shall be considered as
follows:
1. "Arterial Streets" and highways are those which are primarily for the fast or heavy
traffic.
2. "Collector Streets" are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major
systems or arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development, neighborhood or city district and streets for
circulation within such areas and districts.
3. "Minor Streets" are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
4. "Marginal Access Streets" are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
5. "Alleys and Courts" are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting a streets.
6. "Street improvement" as used herein shall mean complete sectional reconstruction
of existing streets, the laying out and construction of new streets within
subdivision developments and/or the laying out and construction of new streets
within the City's limits.
Section 11.303: REQUESTS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCEPTANCE
All requests for street improvements and acceptance shall be presented to the Planning Board for
review and recommendation before final action and acceptance by the City Council.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 11
Section 11.304: PLANS
All requests for street acceptance or improvement shall be accompanied by record plans
sufficient in scope and accurate in detail so as to allow plans upon review by the Planning Board
and approval by the City Council to be incorporated within and made a part of the City's official
map. Such plans must be certified by a registered engineer. Standard typical cross-sections of
roadway, sidewalk, and grading shall be provided as required by the Department of Public
Works. All profiles shall be as approved by the Department of Public Works and all elevations
shall be based upon a datum plane also so approved.
Section 11.305: SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks with a minimum width of not less than 5 feet shall be constructed on each side of all
streets except when otherwise recommended by subdivision regulations approved by the
Planning Department.
Section 11.306: MONUMENTS
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, and at
other intermediate points as shall be required by the Superintendent of Public Works and
Highways. Such monuments shall be of granite or reinforced concrete 4 feet in length with a 3/8
drill hole on the top to indicate the point. The tops shall be set flush with the finished right of
way line grade.
Section 11.307: STREET WIDTHS
The minimum width for all streets shall be shown on the City's Master Plan or Official Map and
shall when not so indicated be not less than as follows:
Arterial; State and Municipal Requirements
Business Collector 60 feet
Business Minor 50 feet
Residential Collector 50 feet
Residential Minor 50 feet
Marginal Access 50 feet
These widths shall be measured from lot line to lot line. In cases where the topography, physical
conditions or area use make a street of the required minimum width impractical, the Planning
Board may request a modification of the above requirements. Special use streets within
municipal recreational areas may be so designed in widths as to be applicable to the use of the
area.
Section 11.308: MAINTENANCE BOND
There shall be posted in amount satisfactory to the City Manager and the Public Works
Department and for a period of not less than 1 year from the date of acceptance, a maintenance
bond to be provided by that person/s, company, or corporation who by contact or for
development purposes constructs or improves a street area within the City's limits.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 11
Section 11.309: PREREQUISITES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL
The Planning Board will review for recommendation of approval and acceptance only those
street improvements which have been qualified by the City Manager and Superintendent of
Public Works as meeting the standards and specifications contained herein. A certificate from
the Superintendent of Public Works as to the satisfactory construction of such street
improvements and the correct installation of all drainage sewer and water facilities shall be
included with all recommendations for street acceptance as are presented to the City Council.
Section 11.310 and Section 11.311 (Deleted 04/19/2010)
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 11
ARTICLE IV: SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Section 11.401: AUTHORITY OF PLANNING BOARD TO APPROVE PLATS
The Planning Board is hereby authorized and empowered to approve or disapprove plats
showing new streets, roads, highways, alleys, or the widening thereof, or parks.
Section 11.402: FILING OF CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY
The City Clerk shall forthwith file with the Registrar of Deeds of Rockingham County a
certificate showing that the Planning Board has been so authorized, setting forth the date of such
authorization.
Section 11.403: APPROVAL OF STREET OR HIGHWAY PLAT BY PLANNING
BOARD
No plat showing the layout of any street or highway upon private property or of building lots in
connection with such streets and highways within the municipality shall hereafter be filed or
recorded in the office of the Registrar of Deeds until it shall have been approved by the Planning
Board, and until such approval shall have been endorsed in writing on the plat. After such plat is
approved and filed, and the streets and parks shown thereon accepted by the City Council these
shall become part of the official map of the municipality and dedicated to the municipality by the
owner of the plat. The filing or recording of a plat without such approval shall be void.
Section 11.404: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
The Planning Board shall adopt such other regulations and standards other than those herein
described governing the subdivisions of land within the municipality as will provide against such
scattered and premature, subdivisions of land as would involve danger and injury to health,
safety, or prosperity by reason of lack of water supply, drainage, transportation or public funds
for the supply of such services.
Section 11.405: EFFECT OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL BY PLANNING BOARD
Approval of a final plat by the Planning Board shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an
acceptance of the municipality of the dedication of any street or other ground or open space
shown on the plat until the City Council shall have accepted the streets shown on the plat.
Section 11.406: POWER OF THE MUNICIPALITY
A. The municipality shall not hereafter accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave or light
any street or lay or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections, or other
facilities or utilities in any street, within any portion of the municipality unless such
street:
1. Shall have been accepted or opened as, or shall otherwise have received the legal
status of a public street prior to the conferring of platting jurisdiction upon the
Planning Board, or unless such street;
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 11
2. Correspond to its location and lines with a street shown on the official map or
with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board or with
a street on a street plat made by or adopted by the Board. The City Council may,
however, accept, locate and construct any street not shown on or not
corresponding with a street on the official map or an approved subdivision plat,
providing the petition for accepting, locating, and construction of such street be
first submitted to the Planning Board for its approval and, if approved by the
Board, be approved by a majority vote of the entire membership of the City
Council, or if disapproved by not less than two-thirds of the entire membership of
the City Council. A street approved in approved street as fully as though it had
been originally shown on the official map, or on a subdivision plat approved by
the Planning Board, or had been originally platted by the Planning Board.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected on any lot within any part of the municipality nor
shall a building permit be issued therefor unless the street giving access to the lot upon
which such building is proposed to be place;
1. shall have been accepted or opened as or shall otherwise have received the legal
status of a public street prior to the granting of platting jurisdiction to the
Planning Board; or unless such street
2. correspond in its location and lines with a street shown on the official map or with
a street on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board or with a street on a
street plat made and adopted by the Planning Board, or with a street located and
accepted by the City Council, after submission to the Planning Board, and in case
of said Planning Board's disapproval by the favorable vote of 2/3 of the entire
membership of the City Council.
Wherever the enforcement of the provisions of this paragraph would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, and where the circumstances of the case do not require the buildings,
structure or part thereof to be related to the existing or proposed streets, the applicant for such
permit may appeal from the decision of the Building Inspector to the Board of Adjustment. In
passing on such appeal, after public hearing, the Board of Adjustment may make any reasonable
exception and shall have the power to authorize or issue a permit, subject to such conditions as it
may impose, where the issuance of the permit would not tend to distort the official map or
increase the difficulty of carrying out the master plan which it is based.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 11
Section 11.407: PENALTY FOR SALE BEFORE PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL
AND RECORDING AND FILING OF PLAT
Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision,
transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to, or exhibition of,
or by other use of, a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Planning
Board and recorded or filed in the office of the Registrar of Deeds shall forfeit and pay a penalty
of not more than $100.00 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to
be sold, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties.
Upon receipt of valid proof of such violation, the City Attorney shall take immediate steps to
enforce the penalty provisions of this Ordinance. All such penalties must be discharged by
payment to the municipality before any plat can be approved by the Planning Board. In cases
where enforcement of this Ordinance would, in the opinion of the applicant, involve practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship, an appeal for desirable relief, which would not substantially
deviate from the purposes and intent of this Ordinance, may be filed by the applicant with the
Board of Adjustment.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 11
ARTICLE V: STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS
Section 11.501: STREET NAMES
A. The naming of all public streets and rights of way which are to receive or have received
legal status by acceptance shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board and all
existing public street and right of way now of legal status and as such are shown upon the
tax maps, may be renamed by the Planning Board as it determines necessary for the
welfare or convenience of the public. Such renaming may be considered upon the motion
of the Planning Board or upon petition by the owners or occupants of such land as may
be located upon said public streets and rights of way and such determination shall be
made by the Planning Board after due public hearing of the matter.
B. No existing or proposed street name shall duplicate the name or names of other proposed
or existing streets irrespective of the use of the suffix, "Street", "Avenue", "Boulevard",
"Drive", "Place", "Way", "Court", or the like. The extension of an existing street shall
have the same name as the existing street.
Section 11.502: HOUSE NUMBERS
A. The Public Works Department shall make all measurements necessary to determine
numbers to be assigned to all structures and dwellings but not accessory buildings now or
to be upon accepted and approved streets. Such numbers upon determination shall
become matters of public record and shall so be filed within the office of the Assessor.
Even numbers shall be assigned to all structures on the right side of a public street and
right of way and odd numbers to structures located upon the left side of said street or
way.
B. The beginning of a street shall be that end which intersects a street of primary status and
so far as possible shall be that end closest in distance to Market Square. Right and left
shall be relative to a person's position when standing at the beginning of said street and
facing out of town.
C. The numbers of structures as assigned shall be the quotient as obtained in dividing the
distance from a structure's street entrance to the beginning of the street by a factor of 10
with such results being modified to obtain the required even or odd numbers. Where a
structure is located within a rear lot and access to said structure cannot qualify as a
legally accepted street then the centerline of such access way as serves as the structure's
main entrance shall be assigned to the entire premises. All measurements shall be
centerline measurements and shall start at the beginning of the street at its intersection
with the curb line of the primary street.
D. A mobile home park shall be assigned a number in the same manner and by the same
method as used for the assignment of a number to a rear lot structure. Roadside cabins,
motels and such other highway structures devoted to tourist and/or transient trade shall be
assigned but one number and in the same manner as would be used for any main entrance
measurement.
E. Where separate ownership exists between common wall construction within the central
business district or within a district zoned for business such section of single ownership
whose main front entrance is upon a public street may be assigned to a single and
consecutive number.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 11
F. Any building or structure for which a number has been designated shall have such
number affixed thereto in such manner so as to be plainly visible from the street, which
abuts the main entrance to the property.
G. The owner of any building or structure who shall fail to affix such number within 30 days
written notice from the Public Works Department shall be fined not more than $25.00 for
each day that such number is not affixed.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 11
ARTICLE VI: REFERRALS TO PLANNING BOARD (Added 12/21/2009)
Section 11.601: INTENT
The intent of this Article is to ensure that proposed municipal actions relating to land acquisition,
disposition or use, and to the laying out, construction or discontinuance of public streets, are
considered in the context of the City’s comprehensive planning.
Section 11.602: REFERRAL AND REPORT
A. The following matters shall be referred to the Planning Board in writing at least thirty
(30) days before final action is taken:
(1) Any acquisition or disposition of municipal real property, including fee transfers,
easements and licenses;
(2) Any plan for the construction, alteration, relocation, acceptance or discontinuance
of a public way.
B. No final action on a matter listed herein shall be taken until either the Planning Board
has reported to the City Council thereon in writing or sixty (60) days have elapsed
since the referral without such report.
C. The failure to refer a matter listed herein to the Planning Board shall not affect the
legal validity or force of any action related thereto if the Planning Board waives such
referral.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 11
ARTICLE VII: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 11.701: SUBDIVISION OF LAND
The subdivision of all land in the City of Portsmouth shall be regulated by the subdivision
regulations adopted by the Portsmouth Planning Board and duly recorded with the Registry of
Deeds. Copies of these regulations may be obtained from the Planning Director of the City of
Portsmouth.
Section 11.702: CONFLICT
Where a conflict exists between the ordinance regulations of the City of Portsmouth and the
Subdivision Regulations passed by the Planning Board of the City of Portsmouth, the more
stringent regulation shall be enforced.
Section 11.703: PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or of the Subdivision Regulations of the City
of Portsmouth shall be fined not more than $100.00, but not less than $25.00. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 11.704: HEARING NOTICE
In any case in which the Planning Board is required to give notice pursuant to RSA 36:23, the
Planning Board shall notify, in addition to the persons specified in RSA 36:23, all persons
owning property within 300 feet of the property for which subdivision approval is sought.
Failure to give notice beyond that required by statute shall not confer upon any person, rights of
appeal or protest.
Additional notices required by this Ordinance shall be given in the same manner as the statutory
notices.
The requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to cases within the Central Business District.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 11
ARTICLE VIII: SITE PLAN REVIEW
Section 11.801: AUTHORITY
Pursuant to authority granted in RSA 674:43 as it may be from time to time amended, the
Portsmouth Planning Board is hereby granted authority to review and approve or disapprove site
plans for the development of tracts for non-residential uses and for multi-family dwelling units
containing three (3) or more dwelling units when completed. This authority to review site plans
shall exist whether or not the proposed development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of
the site. (Amended 12/21/2009)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 12
CHAPTER 12
Part I
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, 2015
(Adopted 12/02/2019)
The International Building Code, 2015 IBC Edition as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., and provisions of national codes model codes or standards referred to within the
IBC unless specifically excuded by this Chapter, is hereby adopted as Chapter 12, Part I of the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire subject to the following amendments,
additions and deletions:
SECTION 101 GENERAL
Insert in blank space:
101.1 Title. “the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire”
Change subsections to read as follows:
101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, shall apply to the
installation of gas piping from the point of delivery to gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point
of delivery to the inlet connections of the appliances and the installation and operation of
residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. Wherever this Code
references the International Fuel Gas Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the
National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54 as listed in Chapter 35.
Edit subsection as follows:
101.4.34 Plumbing.
Delete the last sentence in the subsection:
The provisions of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage
disposal systems.
Change subsection to read as follows:
101.4.4 Property maintenance. The City of Portsmouth does not adopt the International
Property Maintenance Code and any reference to it in this Code shall not direct the reader to its
contents or requirements.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 12
SECTION 105 PERMITS
Add the following text to end of subsection:
105.1 Required. “New construction and general renovation work requires the issuance of a
building permit. General renovation is defined as work which changes the overall size of a
building or portions thereof or which involves the creation of rooms or spaces, which did not
previously exist. Expansion of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire protection
systems is also considered general renovation. Types of work, which may be so classified, are:
1. Additions of any size.
2. Enlarging existing structures, rooms or spaces.
3. Creating new rooms or spaces within a structure.
4. Structural changes or structural repairs.
5. Dormers.
6. Renovations to kitchens and bathrooms.
7. Demolition of all or part of a structure.
8. Changing exits or any components of the means of egress in any way.
9. New structures including sheds, gazebos, pools (above and below ground),
decks, garages, carports, tents, awnings, etc.
10. Above or below grade flammable and combustible liquid tank removal or
installation shall require separate mechanical and gas permitting.
11. Changes in Use or Occupancy.
12. Electrical work.
13. Plumbing or mechanical work.
14. Fire sprinkler or fire alarm systems
Licensed trade persons shall secure permits for electrical, plumbing and fuel gas work when
required under New Hampshire law.”
Delete the following subsections without substitution:
105.1.1 Annual permits.
105.1.2 Annual permit records.
Change subsections to read as follows:
105.2 Work exempt from permits. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this Code or any laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be
required for the following:
Building:
2. Ordinary repairs as defined in Section 105.2.2 provided such repairs do not exceed
$3,000 in construction value.
3. Any painting or wall papering; and tiling when not part of a kitchen or bath remodel.
4. Fences not over 6 (six) feet high or not in the Historic District.
5. Sidewalks, driveways or patios constructed on grade with earth products.
6. Prefabricated (including air inflated) swimming pools, accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy which are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are
entirely above grade.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 12
7. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to dwellings and which are erected
or assembled from a kit.
8. Moveable cases and counters (typical in retail occupancies).
9. Cabinets, countertops and similar finish work when total construction value does not
exceed $3,000, including labor and materials.
10. Re-roofing including repairs to existing roof sheathing without regard to cost. (See
also Section 105.2.2, Exception 1.) Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the IBC, Section 1507, Requirements for Roof
Coverings and Chapter 15. Reroofing shall be compliant with the requirements of the
IBC, Section 1510.
11. All roofing and re-roofing within the Historic district requires prior approval and
permitting even if the cost is less than $3,000.00.
Electrical:
Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles in single family dwellings, or in facilities employing full time maintenance
personnel, provided the work is performed or supervised by a licensed electrician
employed by the facility owner. (See NH RSA 319-C)
Radio and television transmitting stations: No change to printed code text.
Temporary testing systems: No change to printed code text.
Gas:
1. Portable heating appliances for 1 & 2 family occupancies.
2. No change to printed code text.
Mechanical:
1. Portable heating appliances for 1 & 2 family occupancies.
2. through 7. No changes to printed code text.
Plumbing: No change to printed code text.
105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary
repairs to structures. Ordinary repairs are defined as work which is associated with the normal
maintenance of a property and which affects only the surface or finish characteristics of a
structure. Types of work, which may be so classified, are:
1. Painting and wallpapering, no matter what the cost. ($3,000 exception does not
apply.)
2. Replacing or repairing flooring or carpeting in-kind.
3. Replacing or repairing interior trim.
4. Replacing or repairing cabinets in-kind.
5. Replacing or repairing countertops in-kind.
6. Reroofing no matter what the cost. ($3,000 exception does not apply and roof
covering shall be applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
IBC, Chapter 15. Note – This provision does not apply to structures located in
the Historic District.)
7. Repointing masonry.
8. Replacing in kind or repairing components of fire protection systems.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 12
In general, for a work element to be considered a repair or replacement, the item, which is being
repaired, must already exist. The above items are intended to represent individual replacement or
repair work. When one or more of the above items are included in general renovations to
structures, then all such items will be included in the construction cost and a permit is required.
Ordinary repairs do not include the cutting, removing or altering of any structural beam, joist,
rafter or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements. Ordinary repairs also do
not include additions to, alterations of, replacement or relocation of any fire protection system,
water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety.
Exceptions: (i.e. permit is required.)
1. Repairs or renovations made to the exterior facade of structures in the Historic District
shall require a building permit application review by the Planning Department. When it is
determined that Historic District Commission approval is required, then a building permit
shall also be required. This shall include reroofing that changes the roof material.
2. When the total cost of ordinary repair work exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000).
(i.e., a permit is required when repair value is more than $3,000 including
materialsandlabor. Homeowner/property owner labor value to be included.)
Delete subsection without substitution:
105.2.3 Public service agencies.
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
105.3.1 Action on application. “Permits shall not be issued when there is found to be
outstanding, non-inspected permit(s) already issued against a given property or when there are
known non-conformances on the property. Only when said permit(s) is (are) closed out and/or
the non-conformances corrected, shall a new permit be issued.”
Change subsection to read as follows:
105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit shall be deemed to have
been abandoned one year after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit has been issued, except that the building official may grant one (1)
extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there is reasonable cause and only when
requested in writing prior to the application expiration date.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
105.3.3 By whom application is made. Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of
the building or structure or by the authorized agent of either, or by the authorized contractor,
registered design professional, employed by the owner, in connection with the proposed work.
The full names and addresses of the owner, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner
is a corporate body it shall be stated on the application. When the applicant is not the owner, it is
assumed by the City that the owner is aware of the proposed work being applied for and that the
applicant takes full responsibility for the information represented.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 12
Change subsection to read as follows:
105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within one year after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended
or abandoned for a period of one year after the time of commencing the work. The building
official may grant one (1), extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there is
reasonable cause and only when requested in writing prior to the permit expiration date. Said
extension will only be authorized when it does not conflict with any Federal, State or Local laws
or ordinances. For a permit to be considered active, periodic inspections must be requested and
work progress documented by inspections. Work elements shall be items associated with the
building permit scope of work.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
105.5.1 Minimum progress required to keep permit active. After an extension has been
granted under Section 105.5, work shall begin within the next twelve (12) month period and,
shall have progressed such that a full foundation has been constructed and inspected in that same
twelve (12) months. If the scope of work does not include a foundation, then within the same
(first) twelve month period, framing shall be complete and inspected to a weather tight condition.
When work involves a foundation, framing to a weather tight condition shall be complete and
inspected within the next (second) twelve (12) month period. If the scope of work does not
involve either a foundation or weather tight framing, work progress shall be at a final inspection
stage within twenty-four (24) months from the date of granting the permit extension under
Section 105.5. Failure to achieve these milestones, shall cause the permit to become invalid.
Change subsection to read as follows:
105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit field copy shall be posted in a window or other
suitable location on site, such that said permit is visible from the primary city street. Where such
posting is impractable the building permit field copy shall be available on site for public viewing
upon request. The building permit field copy may be removed once the certificate of occupancy
has been issued or upon expiration of the building permit.
Delete the following section without substitution:
SECTION 106 FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS
SECTION 107 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
Add new sentences to end of subsection:
107.2.1 Fire protection system shop drawings. “Plans, specifications, flow calculations and
drawings for the installation of fire protection systems shall be submitted to the Inspection
Department, along with an application for said work. The Inspection Department will coordinate
with the Fire and Public Works Departments in the review of the design material submitted.
Permits shall be issued for fire protection systems which have been approved by the Fire and
Public worksDepartment officials. Shop drawings shall contain all information required by the
referenced standards in the IBC, Chapter 9.”
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 12
Change subsection to read as follows:
107.3.1 Approval of construction documents. The building official shall review and approve
all submitted docuements. The permit holder is responsible for complying with the comments
and notes added during the permit review process. Approved plans and documents shall be
maintained as part of the official permit construction documents.
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
107.3.3 Phased approval. “A phased building permit shall not be issued until such time as the
permit application is approved by the City Planning Department and all necessary bonds are
posted.”
Add new subsection to read as follows:
107.3.5 Outside Plan Review Services. When a project is determined by the building official to
be of a scope which exceeds available staff time or expertise, the option to utilize a third party
plan review agency shall be exercised. The building official shall determine the scope of review,
the agency or qualified firm to conduct the review; and shall direct the permit applicant to submit
all plans, specifications and required calculations to the selected agency or firm.
The design professional of record shall work directly with the third party plan review agency or
firm to resolve all code deficiencies or omissions on the design documents. The outside plan
review agency or firm shall copy all correspondence relevant to the plan review process to the
building official. When the plan review process is complete the outside review agency or firm
shall certify in writing to the building official that, to the best of their knowledge and belief, the
project design documents conform to the adopted construction codes. One set of agency
approved design documents shall be forwarded to the building official. The building official, on a
case by case basis, may require additional drawing/specification sets or partial sets. All required
copies shall be provided to the building official at no charge.
The contractual agreement for the third party review service shall be between the permit
applicant and the outside plan review agency or firm. The permit applicant shall pay all fees
associated with the third party plan review process directly to the outside plan review agency or
firm. The applicable building permit fee(s), paid by the permit applicant to the City of
Portsmouth, shall be adjusted based on the fee schedule as determined by the adoption of fees by
budget resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, of the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, NH. For the purposes of this section, the applicable
building permit shall mean any building, electric, plumbing, mechanical or fire protection system
permit issued against the design documents that have been reviewed by the outside plan review
agency or firm.
SECTION 108 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
Change subsection to read as follows:
108.1 General. Pursuant to the approval by the City's Planning Department, the building official
may issue a permit for temporary structures or uses. Such permit will be limited to the
regulations set forth in the City's Zoning Ordinance and this Code. Any temporary structure shall
be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building
official is authorized to grant one (1), 180 day extension for demonstrated cause.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 12
SECTION 109 FEES
Change subsection to read as follows:
109.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article
XVI or similar wording, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, NH.
Flat Rate Permits are: Siding, buried tank removal or installation, sheds, replacement
windows, temporary structures, pad mounted generators, fences (in Historic District),
change-in-use/occupancy with no construction.
Change subsection to read as follows:
109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who is found to have
demolished, constructed, altered, removed, or changed the use of a building or structure without
the benefit of a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or change in use permit shall, upon
issuance of said permit(s), be assessed a fee as determined by the adoption of fees by budget
resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, of the Ordinances of
the City of Portsmouth, NH.
Change subsection to read as follows:
109.6 Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
2. Not more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit
issued in accordance with this Code.
3. Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for
which a plan review fee has been paid, is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review
effort has been expended.
The building official shall only authorize a fee refund when a written request is filed by the
original permittee not later than one year after the date of fee payment. Refunds shall not be
issued on permits that have expired under the conditions of Section 105.5.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
109.7 City construction projects. Fees shall not be assessed for work associated with projects
undertaken by the City of Portsmouth. These projects may also include contract work done by
private contracting firms hired directly by the City. This exemption shall not apply to projects
done by the State Department of Public Works, Pease Development Authority, State Port
Authority or the Portsmouth Housing Authority.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 12
SECTION 110 INSPECTIONS
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
110.5 Inspection requests. “The permit holder shall allow a minimum of two work days (48
hours) from the time the building official is notified to the time the inspection is scheduled.”
Add new subsection to read as follows:
110.7 Reinspection fee. If, upon being called for any inspection, the work is not in compliance
with this Code, written notice (including the specific code sections) will be provided clearly
identifying the deficiencies. The permit holder shall be responsible for correcting the item(s) and
for notifying the building official to reinspect said deficiencies. If when called to reinspect these
deficiencies, all is correct, no further action will be taken. However, if during the first
reinspection, the originally deficient work has not been corrected, there will be a reinspection fee
assessed as determined by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, which must be paid at the Inspection Office before a
third inspection will be made. For each subsequent reinspection of the same deficiency or
deficiencies, a like procedure and fee shall be assessed.
During any inspection, the building official may find new item(s), not previously discovered, to
be nonconforming. These item(s) will be noted on the building official's report, and will require
reinspections. Reinspection fees will not be assessed for items newly found or for their first
reinspection. However, said fees shall be assessed for these items if a third inspection is
required. The same procedures as outlined above shall govern. Failure to pay any reinspection
fees shall be just cause to revoke the permit under which the work was being done. Furthermore,
no future permits will be issued to any person who owes the City of Portsmouth said reinspection
fees, until all outstanding fees are paid.
SECTION 111 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Add new sentences to beginning of subsection:
111.1 Use and occupancy. “A certificate of occupancy/completion shall be issued upon request,
for work associated with a valid building permit and under the criteria set forth in Sections 111.2
and 111.3 of this code. Certificates are not required for work outlined in Section 105.2.”
Edit subsection as follows:
111.2 Certificate issued.
Add new item 13 to read as follows:
13. The city zoning map and lot numbers associated with the street address.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
111.5 Fee for Certificate of Use and Occupancy. There shall be a fee assessed as determined
by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article XVI, assessed to the holder of a permit for the issuance of a Certificate of Use and
Occupancy when the following condition exists: When, during the final inspection phase, the
building official is required to make a third inspection on a nonconforming item or items; then
this third inspection, and any subsequent inspections for the same item(s) will cause the above
mentioned fee to be assessed. The fee shall be repetitive for each new inspection and will be
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 12
paid prior to the building official making said inspections. This procedure shall apply to
building, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, and fire inspections, independently. The specific
procedure for implementing this subsection is outlined in Section 109.7 of these amendments.
SECTION 114 VIOLATIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions prescribed by RSA 155-A:8. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. Reference State RSA's 155-A:8, 625:8 I(c), 651:2 IV(a) and 676:17 for further
penalty provisions.
SECTION 115 STOP WORK ORDER
Change subsection to read as follows:
115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to the fines outlined in Section
114.4 of these amendments.
Delete the Entire Section 421 Live/Work Units without substitution.
SECTION 421 LIVE/WORK UNITS
SECTION 502 DEFINITIONS
Add new sentence to end of definition:
GRADE PLANE. “Grade points shall be taken at 5 foot intervals around the building
perimeter.”
SECTION 503 GENERAL HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS
General note pertaining to Table 503:
Table 503 as published in this Code has been replaced with Table 503 as published by the State
of New Hampshire Building Code Review Board.
Section 506 amendments by the State of New Hampshire Building Code Review Board:
SECTION 506 BUILDING AREA
Change subsections to read as follows:
506.1 General. The provisions of this section shall modify the area limitations of the amended
Table 503 as herein specified.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 12
506.3 Frontage increase. Where a building or structure has more than 25 percent of the
building perimeter fronting on a street or other unoccupied space, the area limitations specified in
Table 503 shall be increased 2 percent for each 1 percent of such excess frontage. The
unoccupied space shall be on the same lot or dedicated for public use, shall not be less than 30
eet (9144 mm) in width and shall have access from a street or posted fire lane not less than 18
feet (5486 mm) in width.
506.3.1 Automatic sprinkler system increase. Where a building is equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the area
limitations specified in Table 503 shall be increased 200 percent for one-and two-story buildings
and 100 percent for buildings more than two stories in height.
Exceptions:
1. The automatic sprinkler system increase shall not apply buildings with an occupancy
of Group H-1.
2. The automatic sprinkler system increase shall not apply to any fire area with an
occupancy of Group H-2 or H-3.
Change subsection to read as follows:
506.4 Multistory buildings. The area limitations for buildings two stories in height shall be the
same as the area limitations provided in Table 503 for one story buildings. In buildings over two
stories in height, the area limitations of Table 503 for one story buildings shall be reduced as
specified in Table 506.4.
Table 506.4 Reduction of Area Limitations
No. of
Stories
Types of
Construction
1A 1B All Others
1 None None None
2 None None None
3 None 5% 20%
4 None 10% 20%
5 None 15% 30%
6 None 20% 40%
7 None 25% 50%
8 None 30% 60%
9 None 35% 70%
10 None 40% 80%
End of State of New Hampshire Building Code Review Board amendments
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 12
SECTION 507 UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS
Change subsection to read as follows:
507.4 Sprinklered, one story. The area of a one-story, Group A-4, B, F, M or S building, of
Type I or II construction, shall not be limited when the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is surrounded and adjoined
by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18,288 mm) in width.
Exceptions:
Exceptions 1 and 2 remain unchanged.
Edit first section in subsection as follows:
507.3.1 Mixed occupancy buildings with A-1 and A-2 of Type I and II.
Change subsection to read as follows:
507.5 Two story buildings. The area of a two story, Group B, F, M or S building, of Type I or II
construction, shall not be limited when the building is equipped throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is surrounded and adjoined by public
ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18,288 mm) in width.
SECTION 706 FIRE WALLS
Change subsection to read as follows:
706.1.1 Party walls. Any wall located on a property line between adjacent buildings which is
used or adapted for joint service between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall in
accordance with Section 706 and shall create separate buildings.
Exceptions to remain unchanged.
Edit subsection as follows:
706.8 Openings.
Delete Exception 1 without substitution:
Edit Exception 2 as follows:
2. Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet where both buildings are equipped
throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 and the wall is not a party wall.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 12
SECTION 716 OPENING PROTECTIVES
Add new sentences to end of subsection. Exceptions remain unchanged:
716.5.9 Door closing. “The building or fire official shall approve the type of closing device to be
used and when magnetic hold-open devices shall be required based on the occupancy
classification, door use and location within the building. In Group E Occupancies and in Group B
educational occupancies, magnetic hold-open devices shall be installed on all fire doors leading
into enclosed exit stairs.”
SECTION 901 GENERAL
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
[F] 901.4 Threads. “Hand line hose threads for 2-1/2” diameter hose shall be National Standard
thread. Hand line hose threads for 1-1/2” or 1-3/4” diameter hose shall be Iron Pipe thread.”
SECTION 903 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
[Refer to City Ordinance, Chapter 5, Fire Department and Prevention Regulations]
[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and
structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 or as
required by NFPA 101 as listed in Chapter 35.
SECTION 907 FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
[Refer to City Ordinance, Chapter 5, Fire Department and Prevention Regulations]
SECTION 917 FIRE SERVICE BUILDING ACCESS
917 General. Where required by Chapter 9, IBC, key storage access boxes shall be installed at
buildings in the required quantities, and in the required locations as specified by the fire code
official.
SECTION 1001 ADMINISTRATION
Add new sentences to end of subsection:
1001.1 General. “The building official shall utilize the exit criteria and building fire safety
system provisions of the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, as adopted by the New Hampshire State
Fire Marshal’s office, when evaluating the adequacy of means of egress in new or existing
buildings. When there are conflicts between this Code and NFPA 101, the building and fire
officials shall make the final exit and fire safety system criteria determination.”
SECTION 1003 GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS
Change Exception 1 in subsection to read as follows:
1003.5 Elevation change.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 12
Exception 1: A single step with a maximum riser height of 7 inches (178 mm) is
permitted for buildings of any occupancy at exterior means of egress doors which are not
required to be accessible by Chapter 11 of the IBC.
SECTION 1013 EXIT SIGNS
Change subsection to read as follows with exception remaining unchanged:
1013.3 Illumination. Exit signs shall be internally illuminated with the primary power source
from the building electric system. Exit signs shall also be provided with a battery backup power
source or from the building emergency power supply system if so equipped. Self-illuminated
(nuclear) exit signs are not an approved source of illumination.
Change subsection to read as follows:
1013.6 Externally illuminated exit signs. When approved by the building official, externally
illuminated exit signs shall comply with Sections 1011.5.1 through 1011.5.3.
SECTION 1030 EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE
Change exception 1 in subsection to read as follows:
1030.1 General.
Exception 1: In buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
Add new exception to read as follows:
SECTION 1109 OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES
Add new subsection to read as follows:
1109.5.3 Occupancies with limited occupants. In any occupancy classification with a design
occupant load of less than 50 persons, a single point of use water cooler may be substituted for
the required drinking fountain. The access approach clearances at the cooler shall be maintained
based on the dimensions stipulated in ICC/ANSI A117.1.
SECTION 1208 INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS
Add new exception 5 to subsection to read as follows:
1208.2 Minimum ceiling heights.
Exception 5: Within dwelling units, the minimum ceiling height above lavatories and
water closets shall be 6 foot 8 inches (6’-8”), as measured vertically from the ceiling to
the floor at the operating handle end of the fixture. The minimum ceiling height above
bathtubs and shower stalls shall be 6 foot 8 inches (6’-8”), as measured vertically from
the ceiling to the floor or tub bottom at the operating handle end of the fixture and shall
be maintained for a 30 inch by 30 inch clear area from the walls adjacent to the operating
handles.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 12
SECTION 1612 FLOOD LOADS
Insert in two blank spaces:
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. “The City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire”; and
“Sep 30, 2002”
SECTION 1705 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
Change subsections to read as follows:
1705.2.4 Cold-formed steel trusses. Special inspections shall be required for all light gauge
metal roof or floor truss installations. The special inspection shall verify and document the proper
installation of all required bracing, both temporary and permanent, and any special connection
details required by either the design professional or the truss manufacturer.
1705.5.2 Metal-plate-connected wood trusses. Special inspections shall be required for all
metal-plated-wood roof or floor truss installations. The special inspection shall verify and
document the proper installation of all required bracing, both temporary and permanent, and any
special connection details required by either the design professional or the truss manufacturer.
Add new subsections to read as follows:
1705.17 Fire-resistant penetrations and joints. In buildings of four or more stories above
grade plane, special inspections for through-penetrations, membrane penetration firestops, fireresistant
joint systems, and perimeter fire barrier systems that are testd and listed in accordance
with Sections 714.3.1.2, 714.3.1.1.2, 715.3 and 715.4 shall be in accordance with Section
1704.17.1 or 1704.17.2
1705.17.1 Penetration firestops. Inspections of penetration firestop systems that are
tested and listed in accordance with Sections 713.3.12. and 713.4.1.1.2 shall be conducted
by an approved inspection agency in accordance with ASTM E 2174.
1705.17.2 Fire-resistant joint systems. Inspection of fire-resistant joint systems that are
tested and listed in accordance with Sections 714.3.1.2 and 714.4.2 shall be conducted by
an approved inspection agency in accordance with ASTM E 2393.
SECTION 1809 SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS
Amend Item 1 of subsection to read as follows:
1809.5 Frost protection. 1. Extending to 4 feet (1219 mm), as measured to the bottom of the
footing from the adjoining finish grade.
SECTION 2701 GENERAL
[Refer to National Electrical Code, City Ordinance Chapter 15 Part IV]
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 12
SECTION 2705 APPENDIX K
2705.1 General. Refer to Appendix K for additional administrative provisions for enforcement
of the National Electric Code, NFPA 70.
SECTION [M] 2801 GENERAL
Change subsection to read as follows:
[M] 2801.1 Scope. Mechanical appliances, equipment and systems shall be designed,
constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with the International Mechanical Code; the
National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54 and Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment, NFPA 31. Refer
to Chapter 15, Part II of the City Ordinances (Mechanical Code), for required qualifications of
persons installing fuel gas piping.
SECTION [P] 2901 GENERAL
[Refer to City Ordinance, Chapter 15 Part I International Plumbing Code]
SECTION 3107 SIGNS
Add new subsection to read as follows
3107.2 Zoning ordinance. The City's Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 10 of the City's Ordinances,
regulates all signs., permanent signs, sign size, letter size and sign illumination. Refer to that
document for all sign criteria.
SECTION 3304 SITE WORK
Add new subsection to read as follows:
3304.2 Site access and hydrant operation. When roads are created or extended during the
construction of new developments and subdivisions, adequate site access for emergency vehicles
shall be maintained at all times during construction. The fire department will be the determining
agency when evaluating the adequacy of site access. As construction progresses, water hydrants
required by the site plan shall be installed, activated, tested and maintained with adequate hydrant
access as determined by the fire department. The City of Portsmouth reserves the right to “call”
the site bond at any time during construction, when the owner refuses to provide adequate access,
as deemed necessary by the fire department, for the protection of life and property.
SECTION 3306 PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS
Add new subsection to read as follows:
3306.10 Hazardous excavations. All open excavations left unattended, when deemed a hazard
by the building official, shall be guarded or fenced in accordance with the criteria in Sections
1013.2. and 1013.3. The hazard judgment shall be based on public accessibility to the
excavation, time period left open, falling hazard, and the pooling of surface or ground water at
the bottom of the excavation. All appeals to the building official’s order shall be made in writing
and will follow the appeals process in Section 113.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 12
General note pertaining to Chapter 34:
The State of New Hampshire Building Code Review Board has adopted the 2015 Edition of the
International Existing Building Code (IEBC) as published by the International Code Council. All
IBC Chapter 34 code users shall utilize the technical provisions of the IEBC in lieu of the
provisions of Chapter 34 of the IBC. The follow amemdments to Chapter 35 of the IBC apply:
SECTION 3401 GENERAL
Change subsection to read as follows:
3401.3 Compliance with other codes. Alterations, repairs, additions and changes in occupancy
to existing structures shall comply with the provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and
changes in occupancy in the International Fire Code, National Fuel Gas Code (NFPA 54),
International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Residential Code
and the National Electric Code (NFPA 70).
SECTION 3409 HISTORIC BUILDINGS
Change subsection to read as follows:
3409.1 Historic buildings. The provisions of this Code relating to the construction, repair,
alteration, enlargement, restoration and movement of buildings or structures shall not be
mandatory for historic buildings or structures classified or qualify for classification on the
National Register of Historic Places as listed by the National Park Services, Interagency
Resources Division; when such buildings are judged by the building official to be safe and in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, repair,
alteration, enlargement, restoration and relocation. All such approvals shall be based on the
applicant's complete submission of professional architectural and engineering plans and
specifications bearing the professional seal of the designer of record.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
3409.3 Historic District. The City of Portsmouth has delineated a special Zoning Overlay
Historic District, which regulates all work done to the exterior facade of structures within said
district. All such work requires a City Building Permit. Refer to the City Zoning Ordinance for
specific details.
SECTION 3411.0 ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
Change subsection to read as follows:
3411.9 Historic buildings. These provisions shall apply to buildings and facilities designated as
historic structures as defined in Section 3409.1 of these Code amendments, that undergo
alterations or a change in occupancy, unless technically infeasible. Where compliance with the
requirements for accessible routes, ramps, entrances or toilet facilities would threaten or destroy
the historic significance of the building or facility, as determined by the authority having
jurisdiction, the alternative requirements of Section 3409.9.1 through 3409.9.4 for that element
shall be permitted.
SECTION 3412 COMPLIANCE ALTERNATIVES
Insert in blank space:
3412.2 Applicability. "the effective date of the adoption of this Code"
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 12
CHAPTER 35 REFERENCED STANDARDS
Insert the following Codes and Standards:
New Hampshire State Building Code
Department of Safety
33 Hazen Drive Drive
Concord, NH 03305
(603) 271-7965
New Hampshire Architectural Barrier Free Design Code
Governor’s Commission on Disability
121 South Fruit Street, Suite 101
Concord, NH 03301-8518
(603) 271-2773
1-800-852-3405 (NH)
New Hampshire Energy Code
Public Utilities Commission
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 10
Concord, NH 03301-2429
(603) 271-2431
New Hampshire Elevator and Accessibility Lift Law, RSA 157-B
NH Department of Labor
Boiler & Elevator Division
PO Box 2076
Concord, NH 03302-2076
(603) 271-2585
Insert in the NFPA section the following referenced Codes and Standards:
54-15 National Fuel Gas Code 101.4.1, 2801.1, 3401.3
70-17 National Electric Code 101.4.1, 2701.1
101-09 Life Safety Code (Or as Adopted by the SFM) 903.2, 907.2, 1003.2,
1008.5.2
Amend in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
Change 13-07 to 13-13 Design & Installation of Sprinkler Systems
Change 13D-07 to 13D-13 Design & Installation of Sprinkler Systems in 1 & 2 Family
Dwellings
Change 13R-07 to 13R-13 Design & Installation of Sprinkler Systems in
Residential Occupancies 4 Stories in Height or Less
Change 72-07 to 72-13 National Fire Alarm Code
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 12
APPENDIX A - EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS
Appendix A is not adopted as part of this ordinance. Refer to the City of Portsmouth Human
Resource Department employee job descriptions for employee qualifications.
APPENDIX B - BOARD OF APPEALS
Appendix B is adopted as part of this ordinance subject to the following amendments:
SECTION B 101 GENERAL
Change subsection to read as follows:
B101.2.2 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of five individuals, one from each of
the following professions or disciplines:
1. Registered design professional that is a registered architect.
2. Registered design professional that is a registered civil or structural engineer.
3. Registered design professional that is a registered mechanical engineer; or a
licensed master plumber with at least ten years experience in building plumbing and/or
HVAC systems.
4. Registered design professional that is a registered electrical engineer; or a
licensed master electrician with at least ten years experience in building electrical
systems.
5. A building contractor with at least ten years experience in construction.
APPENDIX C - AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS
Appendix C is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX D THROUGH APPENDIX J
Appendix D through J are not adopted as part of this ordinance.
APPENDIX K – ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Appendix K is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX L-M
Appendix L and M are not adopted as part of this ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 12
CITY ORDINANCE - CHAPTER 12
Part II
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2015
(Adopted 12/02/2019)
The International Residential Code, 2015 Edition (IRC) as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as Chapter 12, Part II of the Ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth, New Hampshire subject to the following amendments, additions and deletions:
SECTION R101 SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
Insert in blank space:
R101.1 Title. “the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire”
SECTION R102 APPLICABILITY
Add new subsections to read as follows:
R102.4.3 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electric Code, NFPA 70 shall apply to the
installation of electrical systems including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. Wherever this Code references the
International Electric Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Electric
Code, NFPA 70 as adopted by the State of New Hampshire. The City of Portsmouth does not
adopted Article 80, Administration and Enforcement, of NFPA 70.
R102.4.4 Gas. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, shall apply to the
installation of gas piping from the point of delivery to gas appliances and related accessories as
covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point
of delivery to the inlet connections of the appliances and the installation and operation of
residential gas appliances and related accessories. Wherever this Code references the
International Fuel Gas Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Fuel Gas
Code, NFPA 54.
R101.4.5 Plumbing. The City of Portsmouth does not adopt the International Sewage Disposal
Code and any reference to it in this Code shall not direct the reader to its contents or
requirements.
R102.4.6 Property maintenance. The City of Portsmouth does not adopt the International
Property Maintenance Code and any reference to it in this Code shall not direct the reader to its
contents or requirements.
SECTION R105 PERMITS
Add the following text to end of subsection:
R105.10 Required. “New construction and general renovation work requires the issuance of a
building permit. General renovation is defined as work which changes the overall size of a
building or portions thereof or which involves the creation of rooms or spaces, which did not
previously exist. Expansion of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire protection
systems is also considered general renovation. Types of work, which may be so classified, are:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 12
1. Additions of any size.
2. Enlarging existing structures, rooms or spaces.
3. Creating new rooms or spaces within a structure.
4. Structural changes or repairs.
5. Dormers.
6. Demolition of all or part of a structure.
7. Changing exits or exit components in any way.
8. New structures including sheds, gazebos, pools (above and below ground),
decks, garages, carports, tents, awnings, etc.
9. Above or below grade flammable and combustible liquid tank removal or
installation shall require separate mechanical and gas permitting.
10. Changes-in-Use or Occupancy.
11. Electrical work.
12. Plumbing or mechanical work.
13. Fire sprinkler systems
14. Fire alarm systems.
“NH licensed trade persons shall secure permits for electrical, plumbing and gas piping work
when required under New Hampshire law.”
Change subsections to read as follows:
R105.2 Work exempt from permits. Exemption from permit requirements of this Code shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this Code or any laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be
required for the following:
Building:
1. Ordinary repairs as defined in Section R105.2.2 provided such repairs do not exceed
$3,000 in construction value including materials and labor.
2. Fences not over 6 feet high or not in the Historic District.
3. Sidewalks, driveways or patios constructed on grade.
4. Prefabricated (including air inflated) swimming pools which are less than 18 inches
deep and are entirely above grade.
5. Swings and other playground equipment.
6. Cabinets, countertops and similar finish work when total construction value does not
exceed $3,000.
7. Re-roofing including repairs to existing roof sheathing without regard to cost. (See
also Section R105.2.2, Exception 1.) Re-roofing and Roof coverings shall be applied
in accordance with IRC, Chapter 9.
8. All roofing and re-roofing within the Historic District requires prior approval and
permitting even if the cost is less than $3,000.00.
Electrical:
A permit is not required for minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the
connection of portable electrical equipment to permanent receptacles. Contact the
electrical inspector for specific questions concerning the need for a permit.
R105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary
repairs to structures. Ordinary repairs are defined as work which is associated with the normal
maintenance of a property and which affects only the surface or finish characteristics of a
structure. Types of work, which may be so classified, are:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 12
1. Painting and wallpapering. no matter what the cost. ($3,000 exception 2 below
does not apply.)
2. Replacing or repairing flooring or carpeting in-kind..
3. Replacing or repairing interior trim.
4. Replacing or repairing cabinets in-kind.
5. Replacing or repairing countertops in-kind.
6. Reroofing no matter what the cost. ($3,000 exception 2 below does not apply.)
(Note: This provision does not apply if the structure is located within the Historic
District.)
7. Repointing masonry unless located in the Historic District.
8. Replacing in kind or repairing components of fire protection systems.
In general, for a work element to be considered a repair or replacement, the item, which is being
repaired, must already exist. The above items are intended to represent individual replacement or
repair work. When one or more of the above items are included in general renovations to
structures, then all such items will be included in the construction cost.
Ordinary repairs do not include the cutting, removing or altering of any structural beam, joist,
rafter or bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements. Ordinary repairs also do
not include additions to, alterations of, replacement or relocation of any fire protection system,
water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety.
Exceptions: (i.e. permit is required.)
1. Repairs or renovations made to the exterior facade of structures in the Historic District
shall require a building permit application review by the Planning Department. When it is
determined that Historic District Commission approval is required, then a building permit
shall also be required. This shall include reroofing that changes the roof material.
2. When the total cost of ordinary repair work exceeds three thousand dollars ($3,000).
(i.e., a permit is required when repair value is more than $3,000)
Delete subsection without substitution:
R105.2.3 Public service agencies.
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R105.3.1 Action on application. “Permits shall not be issued when there is found to be
outstanding, non-inspected permit(s) already issued against a given property or when there are
known non-conformances on the property. Only when said permit(s) is (are) closed out and/or
the non-conformances corrected, shall a new permit be issued.”
Change subsection to read as follows:
R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit shall be deemed to have
been abandoned one year after the date of filing, unless such application has been diligently
prosecuted or a permit has been issued, except that the building official may grant one (1)
extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there is reasonable cause and only when
requested in writing prior to the application expiration date.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 12
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R105.3.3 By whom application is made. Application for a permit shall be made by the owner
or the authorized agent, or by the authorized contractor, registered design professional, employed
by the owner, in connection with the proposed work. The full names and addresses of the owner,
lessee, applicant and of the responsible officers, if the owner is a corporate body shall be stated
on the application. When the applicant is not the owner, it is assumed by the City that the owner
is aware of the proposed work being applied for and that the applicant takes full responsibility for
the information represented.
Change subsection to read as follows:
R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within one year after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended
or abandoned for a period of one year after the time of commencing the work. The building
official may grant one (1) extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there is
reasonable cause and only when requested in writing prior to the permit expiration date. Said
extension will only be authorized when it does not conflict with any Federal, State or Local laws
or ordinances. For a permit to be considered active, periodic inspections must be requested and
work progress documented by inspections, within any twelve month period. Work elements shall
be items associated with the building permit scope of work.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R105.5.1 Minimum progress required to keep permit active. After an extension has been
granted under Section R105.5, work shall begin and within the next twelve (12) month period
shall progress such that a full foundation has been constructed and inspected. If the scope of
work does not include a foundation, then within the same (first) twelve month period, framing
shall be complete to a weather tight condition and inspected. When work involves a foundation,
framing to a weather tight condition shall be complete and inspected within the next (second)
twelve (12) month period. If the scope of work does not involve either a foundation or weather
tight framing, work progress shall be at a final inspection stage within twenty-four (24) months
from the date of granting the permit extension under Section 105.5. Failure to achieve these
milestones, shall cause the permit to become invalid.
Change subsection to read as follows:
R105.7 Placement of permit. The building permit shall be posted in a window or other suitable
location on site, such that said permit is visible from the primary city street which the permit is
issued to. Where such posting is impractable the building permit shall be available on site for
public viewing upon request. The building permit may be removed once the certificate of
occupancy has been issued or upon expiration of the building permit.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R105.10 Qualifications of persons doing trade work. Electrical, plumbing and mechanical
work is allowed to be done by resident homeowners engaged in said trade work and conducted
within the single-family dwelling in which they reside. Gas piping shall be done by a licensed
plumber or another qualified person or agency, individual, firm, corporation or company that
either in person or through a representative, is engaged in and is responsible for (a) the
installation or replacement of gas piping or (b) the connection, installation, repair or servicing of
gas equipment; and who is experienced in such work and is familiar with all the precautions
required. For plumbing work refer to State RSA 329-A:13 and for electrical work refer to State
RSA 319-C. All trade work require city permits.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 12
SECTION R106 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
Change subsection to read as follows:
R106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. The building official shall review and approve
all submitted documents. The permit holder is responsible for complying with the comments and
notes added during the permit review process as part of the official permit construction
documents.
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R106.3.3 Phased approval. “A phased building permit shall not be issued until such time as the
permit application is approved by the City Planning Department and all necessary bonds are
posted.”
SECTION R107 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
Change subsection to read as follows:
R107.1 General. Pursuant to the approval by the City's Planning Department, the building
official may issue a permit for temporary structures or uses. Such permit will be limited to the
regulations set forth in the City's Zoning Ordinance and this Code. Any temporary structure shall
be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building
official is authorized to grant one (1), 180 day extension for demonstrated cause.
SECTION R108 FEES
Change subsection to read as follows:
R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Fees shall be determined by the adoption of fees by budget
resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or similar wording, of
the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, NH.
Flat rate type permits are: Siding, buried tank removal or installation, sheds, pad
mountd generators, replacement windows, temporary structures, fences (in Historic
District), change-in-use/occupancy with no construction.
Change subsection to read as follows:
R108.5 Refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
2. Not more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit
issued in accordance with this Code.
3. Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for
which a plan review fee has been paid, is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review
effort has been expended.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 12
The building official shall only authorize a fee refund when a written request is filed by the
original permittee not later than one year after the date of fee payment. Refunds shall not be
issued on permits that have expired under the conditions of Section 105.5.
Change subsection to read as follows:
R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who is found to have
demolished, constructed, altered, removed, or changed the use of a building or structure without
the benefit of a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or change-in-use permit shall, upon
issuance of said permit(s), be assessed a fee as determined by the adoption of fees by budget
resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI of the Ordinances of
the City of Portsmouth, NH.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R108.7 City construction projects. Fees shall not be assessed for work associated with projects
undertaken by the City of Portsmouth. These projects may also include contract work done by
private contracting firms hired directly by the City. This exemption shall not apply to projects
done by the State Department of Public Works, Pease Development Authority, State Port
Authority or the Portsmouth Housing Authority.
SECTION R109 INSPECTIONS
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R109.3 Inspection requests. “Furthermore, the permit holder(s) shall allow a minimum of two
work days (48 hours) from the time the building official is notified to the time the inspection is
scheduled.”
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R109.5 Reinspection fee. If, upon being called for any inspection, the work is not in compliance
with this Code, written notice (including the specific code section) will be provided clearly
identifying the dificiencies. The permit holder shall be responsible for correcting the item(s) and
for notifying the building official to reinspect said deficiencies. If when called to reinspect these
deficiencies, all is correct, no further action will be taken. However, if during the first
reinspection, the work in question has not been corrected, there will be a reinspection fee
assessed as determined by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, which must be paid at the Inspection Office before a
third inspection will be made. For each subsequent reinspection of the same deficiency or
deficiencies, a like procedure and fee shall be assessed.
During any inspection, the building official may find new item(s), not previously discovered, to
be nonconforming. These item(s) will be noted on the building official's report, and will require
reinspections. Reinspection fees will not be assessed for items newly found or for their first
reinspection. However, said fees shall be assessed for these items if a third inspection is
required. The same procedures as outlined above shall govern. Failure to pay any reinspection
fees shall be just cause to revoke the permit under which the work was being done. Furthermore,
no future permits will be issued to any person who owes the City of Portsmouth said reinspection
fees, until all outstanding fees are paid.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 12
SECTION R110 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Add new sentence to beginning of subsection:
R110.1 Use and occupancy. “A certificate of occupancy/completion shall be issued upon
request, for work associated with a valid building permit and under the criteria set forth in
Sections R110.3 and R110.4 of this code.”
Edit subsection as follows:
R110.3 Certificate issued.
Add new item to read as follows:
10. The City zoning map and lot numbers associated with the street address.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R110.6 Fee for Certificate of Use and Occupancy. There shall be a fee assessed as determined
by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article XVI, assessed to the holder of a permit for the issuance of a Certificate of Use and
Occupancy when the following condition exists: When, during the final inspection phase, the
building official is required to make a third inspection on a nonconforming item or items; then
this third inspection, and any subsequent inspections for the same item(s) will cause the above
mentioned fee to be assessed. The fee shall be repetitive for each new inspection and will be
paid prior to the building official making said inspections. This procedure shall apply to
building, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, and fire inspections, independently. The specific
procedure for implementing this subsection is outlined in Section R109.5 of this Code.
SECTION R113 VIOLATIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a
building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions prescribed by RSA 155-A:8. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. Reference State RSA's 155-A:8, 625:8 I(c), 651:2 IV(a) and 676:17 for further
penalty provisions.
SECTION R114 STOP WORK ORDER
Change subsection to read as follows:
R114.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to the fines outlined
in Section R113.4 of these amendments.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 12
SECTION R301 DESIGN CRITERIA
Insert in blank spaces in Table R301.2(1):
Ground snow load: 50 pounds per square foot (PSF)
Wind speed: 100 miles per hour (MPH)
Seismic Design Category: C
Weathering: Severe
Frost Line Depth: 4 feet to bottom of footing.
Termite: Slight to Moderate
Winter Design Temp.: (-)3 degree days
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes
Flood Hazard: Flood Insurance Rate Map May 17, 2005
Air Freezing Index: 1000
Mean Annual Temperature: 47 degrees F
SECTION R302 FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
Amend Exception 1 in subsection to read as follows:
R302.3 Two-family dwellings.
Exception 1: A fire-resistance rating of ½ hour shall be permitted in two-family
dwellings protected throughout with an automatic fire sprinkle system in accordance with
NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D as listed in Chapter 44.
SECTION R310 EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
R310.1 Emergency escape and rescue openings required.
All Emergency Escape and Rescue openings on new construction shall meet the requirements
outlined in IRC, Section R310. However, Emergency Escape and Rescue openings for structures
located within the Historic District will be reviewed on a case by case basis. Change of
occupancy shall be considered new construction.
Add new exception 2 to read as follows:
Exception 2: Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required when the entire
structure is protected throughout with an automatic fire suppression system conforming to
Section 290, NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D as listed in Chapter 44.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 12
Change section to read as follows:
SECTION R313 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Change subsection to read as follows:
R313.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for townhouses
shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13R as listed in Chapter 44.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R313.1.2 Fire sprinkler system alarm monitoring. Townhouse fire sprinkler systems shall be
monitored by water flow, supervisory and trouble conditions and shall automatically transmit
signals to an approved central station, remote supervising station or proprietary supervising
station as defined in NFPA 72 and shall sound an audible and visual signal on the building
exterior in a publicly visible location.
Exception. When approved by the fire official, townhouse fire sprinkler systems shall sound an
audible notification within the dwelling and unit and an audible and visual signal on the building
exterior in a publicly visible location and not require off site monitoring.
Delete subsection without substitution:
R313.2 One and two family dwellings automatic fire systems.
SECTION R314 SMOKE ALARMS
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R314.6 Power source. Smoke alarms shall be supplied by a branch circuit that also supplies
lighting loads serving habitable spaces. Smoke alarm circuit(s) shall be clearly labeled in the
electric panel. The branch overcurrent protective device supplying the smoke alarms shall be
clearly labeled “Smoke Alarms” in a manner that distinguishes it from other overcurrent
protective devices.
SECTION R315 CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS
Change section to read as follows:
R315.2.3 Where required in existing dwellings. In existing dwellings within which fuel-fired
appliances are present or which have attached garages and where alterations, repairs or additions
that require a building permit are being undertaken or when additional sleeping rooms are being
created; carbon monoxide alarms shall be installed in locations as required in Section 315.2.
R315.5 Power source. Single-station carbon monoxide alarms shall be hard wired to the
building’s electric system in the same manner as required in Section R314 for smoke alarms.
Carbon monoxide alarm devices may be individually powered or may be interconnected between
devices when the device listing allows for interconnection. Carbon monoxide alarm devices may
be combination devices such that they serve both the buildings smoke alarm and carbon
monoxide alarmrequirements. When combination units are used, they shall be interconnected and
shall be capable of sounding different alarm signals for either a smoke or a carbon monoxide
condition.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 12
SECTION R501 GENERAL
Add new subsection to read as follows:
R501.3 Fire protection of floors. Floor assemblies, not required elsewhere in this code to be
fire-resistance rated, shall be provided with a minimum of ½-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard
membrane, 5/8-inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside of
the floor framing members.
Exceptions:
1. Floor assemblies located directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R.
2. Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended for storage or fuelfired
appliances.
3. Portions of floor assemblies can be unprotected when complying with the following:
3.1 The aggregate area of the unprotected portions shall not exceed 80 square feet per
story
3.2 Fire blocking in accordance with Section R302.11.1 shall be installed along the
perimeter of the unprotected portion to separate the unprotected portion from the
remainder of the floor assembly.
4. Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber or structural composite lumber equal
to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8 mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or
other approved floor assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire performance.
SECTION R1001 MASONRY FIREPLACES
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R1001.1 General. “The Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning
Appliances, NFPA 211, is also allowed by this code to be used for the design and installation of
masonry fireplaces.”
SECTION R1003 MASONRY CHIMNEYS
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
R1003.1 Definitions. “The Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning
Appliances, NFPA 211 is also allowed by this code to be used for the design and installation of
masonry chimneys.”
SECTION M1201 GENERAL
Add new subsection to read as follows:
M1201.3 Additional codes and standards. In addition to the requirements of Chapters 12
through 24 of this Code; the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of new
mechanical systems and new gas delivery systems shall also be in accordance with the
International Mechanical Code (IMC) as adopted and amended by the City of Portsmouth. The
Portsmouth Mechanical Code is found in Chapter 15, Part 2 of the City Ordinances. When there
is a conflict between this code and the IMC in the design or installation of mechanical systems,
the requirements of the IMC shall take precedence.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 12
Delete entire chapter and replace with the following:
CHAPTER 24 FUEL GAS
Change subsection to read as follows:
G2401.1 Application. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, shall apply to
the installation of new gas piping and gas appliances. These requirements apply to gas piping
systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of the appliances and the
installation and operation of residential gas appliances and related accessories.
SECTION P2501 GENERAL
Add new subsection to read as follows:
P2501.3 Additional codes and standards. In addition to the requirements of Chapters 25
through 32 of this Code; the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of new
plumbing systems and fixtures shall also be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code
(IPC) as adopted and amended by the City of Portsmouth. The Portsmouth Plumbing Code is
found in Chapter 15, Part 1 of the City Ordinances. When there is a conflict between this Code
and the IPC in the design or installation of plumbing systems, the requirements of the IPC shall
take precedence.
SECTION E3401 GENERAL
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
E3401.1 Applicability. “The State of New Hampshire adopts new editions of NFPA 70 on a
three year cycle. The edition that is State adopted at the time of a new electrical installation shall
govern the requirements of that installation.”
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 30 Chapter 12
CHAPTER 35 REFERENCED STANDARDS
Insert the following Codes and Standards:
New Hampshire State Building Code
Department of Safety
33 Hazen Drive Drive
Concord, NH 03305
(603) 271-7965
New Hampshire Architectural Barrier Free Design Code
Governor’s Commission on Disability
121 South Fruit Street, Suite 101
Concord, NH 03301-8518
(603) 271-2773
1-800-852-3405 (NH)
New Hampshire Energy Code
Public Utilities Commission
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 10
Concord, NH 03301-2429
(603) 271-2431
New Hampshire Elevator and Accessibility Lift Law, RSA 157-B
NH Department of Labor
Boiler & Elevator Division
PO Box 2076
Concord, NH 03302-2076
(603) 271-2585
Insert in the NFPA section the following referenced Codes and Standards:
13D-13 Design & Installation of Sprinkler Systems in 1 & 2 Family Dwellings R 302,3,
R310.1
13R-13 Design & Installation of Sprinkler Systems in
Residential Occupancies 4 Stories in Height or Less R310.1, R313.1.1,
54-15 National Fuel Gas Code R102.4.2, G2501.1
211-13 Chimneys, Fireplaces, R1001.1, R1003.1
Vents, and Solid
Fuel-Burning Appliances
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 31 Chapter 12
Amend in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
Change: 70-08 to 70-11 National Electric Code R102.4.1, E3401.1
Change: 72-07 to 72-13 National Fire Alarm Code R313.1.2
APPENDIX A THROUGH APPENDIX F
Appendix A through Appendix F are not adopted as part of this ordinance.
SEE 2015 INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
APPENDIX H THROUGH APPENDIX L
Appendix H through Appendix L are not adopted as part of this ordinance.
APPENDIX M – HOME DAY CARE – R-3 OCCUPANCY
Appendix M is adopted as part of this ordinance as amended below:
Edit subsection as follows:
AM103.1.1 Exits access prohibited.
Add new exception 2 to read as follows:
Exception 2: Exit access passing through an attached garage complying with Section R310.6 of
these code amendments.
Change subsection to read as follows with exception remaining unchanged:
AM103.1.2 Basements. If the basement of a dwelling is to be used in the day-care operation, two
exits are required from the basement regardless of the occupant load. One of the exits may pass
through the dwelling and the other must lead directly to the exterior of the dwelling or lead
though an attached garage that complies with Section R310.6 of these code amendments. Stairs
leading from the basement are not required to be enclosed.
APPENDIX N - VENTING METHODS
APPENDIX O - GRAY WATER RECYCLING SYSTEMS
Appendix N and Appendix O are adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX P – SIZING OF WATER PIPING SYSTEM
Appendix P is not adopted as part of this ordinance.
Not an Official Copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 13
CHAPTER 13
RESERVED
(f/k/a Mobile Home Ordinance
Deleted 01/25/2016 per Ordinance 01-2016
See Chapter 10, Zoning for Manufactured Housing Information)
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 14
CHAPTER 14
HOUSING CODE
Article I Definitions, Certificate of Occupancy, Requirements for
Plumbing, Electrical, etc., Garbage/Rubbish Disposal,
Dangerous Buildings Defined, Standards for Repair/Demolition,
Penalties, Duties of Housing Code Inspector, Building
Commission, Duties of Commission and Authority, Appeal,
Enforcement, Administrative Liability, Duties of Police and Fire
Departments, Separability
14.101 - 14.121
Article II
Demolition
14.201 - 14.206
Article I:
Section 14.101: DEFINITIONS
A. For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are herewith defined as
follows: Words used in the plural number indicate and the singular includes the plural;
The word "building" includes the word "structure" and the word "shall" is mandatory and
not directory.
1. "Abandoned Structures and Buildings" shall mean any abandoned or unused
structures or buildings or portions thereof which because of disaster, lack of
repair, willful abandonment, absence of legal ownership, have been condemned
by the Fire Chief and declared unfit for human habitation and hazardous to the
public welfare by the Health Department.
2. "Automatic Smoke Detecting Device" is a device approved and/or labeled by the
Underwriter's Laboratories (U.L.), Factory Mutual (F.M.) or any similar
nationally recognized testing laboratory designed for the automatic detection of
visible or invisible particles of combustion and capable of generating an audible
alarm signal from detecting such combustion.
3. "Dwelling" shall mean a building or structure used in whole or in part for human
habitation, including all barracks, dormitories, dwelling units, lodging units, and
mobile homes therein and the premises thereof.
4. "Dwelling Unit" shall mean a room or group of rooms designed or used as a place
of occupancy by a person or family for cooking, living and/or sleeping purposes.
5. "Garbage" shall mean the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
6. "Habitable Room" shall mean a room used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating, excluding bathroom, water closet, hall, foyer, cellar
space and storage space.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 14
7. "Lodging Unit" shall mean a rented room or group of rooms, located within a
dwelling, containing no cooking facilities, used for living purposes by a separate
family or group of persons living together or by a person living along, within a
dwelling.
8. "Ordinary Minimum Winter Conditions" shall mean the temperature above 15
degrees F above the lower recorded temperature for the previous 10-year period.
9. "Person" shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or trustee.
10. "Plumbing" shall mean and include all the following supplied facilities and
equipment: water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water/sewer.
11. "Rubbish" shall mean combustible and non-combustible waste material except
garbage and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery, dust, and other similar substances.
Section 14.102: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Every building used in whole or in part as a dwelling for one or more persons shall
conform to the requirements of Sections 14.103 to 14.110 inclusive, irrespective or when
such building may have been constructed, altered or repaired.
The Department of Inspections or its authorized representatives which shall include the
Housing Code Inspector, the Building Inspector, the Electrical Inspector and the
Plumbing Inspector who are hereby empowered and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings located within the City in order that the health and
safety of the occupants of all dwellings and the general public shall be safeguarded.
B. For the purposes of making such inspections, the representatives so named are hereby
authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings and
premises within the City of Portsmouth, N.H.
1. The individual must identify himself and show credentials.
2. The individual must tell the citizen:
a. that he is conducting a systematic inspection of properties; or
b. that a complaint (or complaints) has been made about conditions on the
premises.
3. The citizen has the constitutional right to refuse the inspector the right to inspect
the premises.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 14
4. When the refusal is made, then the inspector must obtain a search warrant from a
magistrate before entry is made for the purpose of inspection.
The above provisions shall be spelled out on the back of the credentials of the inspector.
Any person maintaining a vacant residential unit to let to another for the purpose of persons
residing therein shall promptly notify the Housing Code Inspector of said vacancy, and said
Housing Code Inspector shall promptly make an inspection, and said Certificate of Occupancy
shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the residential unit; and no new Certificate of
Occupancy shall be required within a 12-month period.
Section 14.102A: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED
A. Any person maintaining a residential unit to let to another person for the purpose of
persons residing therein shall first obtain a Certificate of Occupancy from the Housing
Code Inspector, said certificate to be posted in a conspicuous place within the residential
unit.
"Residential Occupancy" means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any
portion thereof by persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided, but who are
not harbored or detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment or are
not involuntarily detained; including among others:
Apartments Hotels
Motels Club Houses
Dormitories Multifamily Houses
Convents Dwellings
Lodging Houses
B. Before said Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued the Housing Code Inspector shall be
satisfied that said residential unit conforms to the requirements of Sections 14.103 to
14.110 inclusive.
C. Certificates issued under this Section shall be valid for a period of 3 years from the date
of issue, unless the residential unit should become vacant during the 3-year period. If the
unit should become vacant during the 3-year period, the Certificate of Occupancy shall
expire and a new Certificate of Occupancy must be obtained before the unit may be let to
another person or persons, except that no certificate shall be required within a 12-month
period. Any certificate may be revoked by the Housing Code Inspector if after inspection
be determined that the residential unit does not meet the requirements of Sections 14.103
to 14.110.
D. No person shall let a residential unit to another person for occupancy without a
Certificate of Occupancy.
E. The cost of said fee to be determined in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI or
similar wording. (Amended 3/18/2002).
F. The Housing Code Inspector shall periodically inspect every occupied residential unit in
the City to insure compliance with this Section.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 14
Section 14.103: SERVICES, EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES FOR PLUMBING
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of
persons living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit having cooking facilities shall have reasonable available a kitchen
sink properly connected to a sewer system and to water lines in accordance with
applicable ordinances. Such water and sewer system shall be approved by the Health
Officer. (Amended 12/4/2006).
B. Each dwelling unit shall have available a room or rooms which afford privacy and such
room or rooms shall be equipped with a flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bath or
shower. All such facilities shall be in good working conditions, properly connected to
water and sewage systems in accordance with applicable ordinances and approved by the
Health Officer. Such facilities above described shall be available in lodging units and
shall not be shared by more than 8 persons living therein. (Amended 12/4/2006).
C. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, and bathtub or shower required by this Code shall be
properly connected to water lines.
D. Water heating facilities contained within dwelling units shall be properly installed and
maintained in safe and good working order and such water heating facilities must be
safety and properly connected to the dwelling's water supply system.
Section 14.104: SERVICES, EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION
AND HEATING
No person shall occupy or let to another person for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for
the purpose of persons living therein, which does not comply with the following:
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight capable or admitting
light and air from the outdoors. The minimum total window or skylight area measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room, 45%
of which shall be openable.
B. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be well lighted and ventilated.
Three foot candles of light (3 lumens per square foot) shall be provided by either natural
or artificial means and shall be available at all times. Such light shall be measured 36
inches from the floor at the center of the room. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall have at least one window or skylight, which can be easily opened.
The total openable window area shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window
area or minimum skylight area as required in subsection 14.104 (A) of this Ordinance.
Such window area requirements of this subsection may be waived provided that there is
installed mechanical ventilation or a system approved by the Health Officer.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 14
C. For illumination every habitable room shall contain at least 2 separate wall type electrical
outlets and/or ceiling fixture, all properly installed and safely connected to a source of
power, and maintained in a safe working condition so that:
1. All exposed electrical wire is insulated and in good working condition.
2. Every switch, outlet, plate, and fixture is properly fastened in position.
3. No short circuit, break or shock hazard exists.
4. No temporary wiring is used except extension cords which run directly from
portable electrical fixtures to convenient outlets, and which does not lie under
rugs or other floor covering, nor extend through doorways, transoms, or similar
openings through structural elements.
D. Every bathroom, water closet compartment, laundry room, furnace room and all interior
stairs shall be adequately lighted.
E. In bathrooms, laundries, kitchens, electric lights shall be controlled by wall switches or
pull chains containing insulating links, and any lamp sockets within reach shall have nonmetallic
shells.
F. All interior passageways or staircases common to two or more dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted at all times.
G. Every occupied dwelling shall contain heating facilities which are properly installed,
vented where necessary and maintained in good working condition, and are capable of
safely and adequately heating every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at
least 65 degrees F under ordinary winter conditions.
Section 14.105: BASEMENT OR BELOW GROUND SURFACE DWELLINGS/
DWELLING UNITS
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit or portion
thereof which does not comply with the following requirement:
A. Before a basement whose floor level is below its immediately average ground level may
be used as a dwelling or dwelling unit, said basement shall be approved by the Health
Officer.
Section 14.106:
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the
purpose of persons living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling foundation, floor, wall, and roof shall be capable of supporting the
structural and other loads required by the building ordinances of the City or other
applicable laws or ordinances.
B. The exterior of every dwelling shall be so drained as to prevent chronic dampness in
walls, ceilings, and floors.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 14
C. Every exterior opening shall be weather-tight and shall be kept in proper working
condition and in good repair.
D. Every inside and outside stairway, porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to sue and capable of supporting the load that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in safe condition and good
repair.
E. Every means of egress from a dwelling unit of lodging unit shall be safe and
unobstructed.
F. Every dwelling shall be weather tight.
G. Every plumbing fixture and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable plumbing ordinances and codes.
H. The floor of every water closet compartment or bathroom shall be so constructed and
maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water. Tile, linoleum, varnished or painted
floors without wide cracks or breaks will meet this requirements.
I. Every provided service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this
Ordinance shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively
and shall be maintained in proper working condition.
J. No service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this Ordinance shall be
removed or shut off or disconnected or discontinued from any occupied dwelling except
for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or
replacements are in progress, during temporary emergencies or when public utility
service suppliers find it necessary to discontinue services because of non-payment by the
occupant or owner, occupant and tenants shall use provided facilities and equipment only
for their proper intended use.
K. No vacated dwelling unit shall again be occupied unless it is clean and sanitary.
L. Except in single family homes, every dwelling unit and every common hallway shall be
protected by an automatic smoke detecting device as defined herein. All automatic
smoke detecting devices should be maintained in operating condition at all times and
shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain, except that the replacement
of batteries in battery operated smoke detectors within dwelling units shall be the
responsibility of the occupant or tenant of each dwelling unit.
Section 14.107: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, OCCUPANTS, OTHERS
A. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of
the dwelling and dwelling unit, which he occupies or controls.
B. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for
the elimination of any unsanitary condition or uncleanliness in the shared or public areas
of the dwelling.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 14
C. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises, and
every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit
shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Not withstanding the foregoing provisions of this sub-section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat proof or
reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, in any dwelling, or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units,
extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling or of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures,
electrical fixtures, heating units and other provided facilities therein in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care and in the
proper use and operation thereof.
E. The owner or operator of every lodging unit shall change supplied bed linen and towels at
least once each week, and prior to letter of any room to any occupant. The owner or
operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all parts of the lodging unit and shall
be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire
structure or building is leased or occupied by him. Cooking on the premises shall be
done only in kitchens or kitchenettes approved by the Health Officer.
Section 14.108: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED
All buildings or structures, which have any or all of the following defects, shall be deemed
"dangerous buildings":
A. Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members, list, lean or buckle to
such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the
middle third of its base.
B. Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage or deterioration
of the supporting member or members, of 50% of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting
enclosing or outside walls or covering.
C. Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the
same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonable safe for the
purpose.
D. Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become
dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the
people of the City of Portsmouth.
E. Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so
utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human
habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
F. Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health,
morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 14
G. Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having
insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communications.
H. Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure
members of the public or property.
I. Those which because of their conditions are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this City.
J. Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of this Building Code of this City,
of any provision of the Fire Prevention Code, or other Ordinances of this City.
Section 14.109: STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION, AND DEMOLITION
The following standards shall be followed in substance the Housing Code Inspector and the
Building Commission in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
A. If the "dangerous building" can reasonably be repaired, so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the terms of this Ordinance it shall be ordered repaired.
B. If the "dangerous building" is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health,
morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants it shall be ordered vacated.
C. In any case where a "dangerous building" is 50% damaged or decayed or deteriorated
from its original value or structure it shall be demolished from its original value or
structure it shall be demolished. And in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this Ordinance, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a "dangerous building" is a fire hazard existing or erected
in violation of the terms of this Ordinance or any Ordinance of the City or statute of the
State of N.H., it shall be demolished.
Section 14.110: PENALTIES EFFECT OF CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or be imprisoned not more than 30 days.
Each day's failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. In any case where a provision of this Ordinance is found to be in conflict with a provision
of a zoning, building, fire safety or health regulations or code of the City of Portsmouth
existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, the provisions which establish the
higher standard for the protection and promotion of the health and safety of the people
shall prevail.
Section 14.111: DANGEROUS BUILDING - NUISANCES
All "dangerous buildings" within the terms of Section 14.109 of this Ordinance are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as hereinbefore and
hereinafter provided.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 14
Section 14.112: DUTIES OF THE HOUSING CODE INSPECTOR
The Housing Code Inspector shall:
A. Inspect or cause to be inspected semi-annually all public buildings, schools, halls,
churches, theatres, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing, or loft buildings for the
purpose of determining whether any condition exist which renders such places a
"dangerous building" within the terms of Section 14.109 of this Ordinance.
B. Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to
the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this
Ordinance.
C. Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the Fire
or Police Departments of this City as probably existing in violation of the terms of this
Ordinance.
D. Report to the Building Commission any buildings complained of and/or found by him to
be existing in violation of the terms of this Ordinance.
E. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Building Commission and testify as to the
condition of "dangerous buildings".
Section 14.113: BUILDING COMMISSION
A Building Commission is hereby established. The Building Commission shall be a Board
consisting of five members, who shall be the head of the Health Department, the head of the Fire
Department, the head of the Planning Department, the Electrical Inspector, and the Plumbing
Inspector. The Building Commission shall annually elect a Chairman from its membership. The
presence of 3 members shall be necessary for a quorum. The minutes of the proceedings of the
Building Commission shall be kept, showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact. The Building Commission may adopt form time to
time, such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to carry into effect the provisions
of this Ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 14
Section 14.114: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING COMMISSION
A. Upon receipt of a petition filed with it by at least 10 residents of the City of Portsmouth
charging that any building is a "dangerous building" or upon receipt of a report of the
Housing Code Inspector as provided for in Section 14.113 (D) hereof shall, if preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner, every mortgagee of record and all parties with interest in such building, including
persons in possession, a complaint stating the charges in that respect. If the person to be
served resides outside the State, service may be made upon him by registered mail and if
there are any unascertained persons having an interest in said building, notice may be
given them by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the City of
Portsmouth, such publication to be at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.
Such complaint shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held at a place therein fixed
not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the
owner, mortgagee and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place
fixed in the complaint; that the rules of evidence prevailing in Courts of Law or Equity
shall not be controlling in hearings before said Commission.
B. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the Housing Code Inspector or the owner,
mortgagee and parties in interest shall off relative to the "dangerous building".
C. Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection B as to
whether or not the building in question is a "dangerous building" within the terms of
Section 14.109 hereof.
D. Issue as order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection C commanding
the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest n
said building.
E. The Building Commission, by its order, shall:
1. If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said building can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the building and the ability of the owner
to assume such cost, require the owner within the time specified in the order, to
repair, alter or improve said building to render it in compliance with Section
14.109 or to vacate and close the building; or
2. If the repair, alteration of the said building or the improvement of the said
building cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
building and the ability of the owner to assume such cost, require the owner
within the time specified in the order to remove or demolish such building.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 14
Section 14.115: APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL
If the owner is aggrieved by an order of the Building Commission, he may appeal to the City
Council within 10 days from the date of the order. Said City Council shall hold a public hearing
upon said appeal, due notice of said hearing first having been given to the Building Commission
and to the owner. The City Council may affirm or revoke the order of the Building Commission
or modify the same in accordance with their findings. If the City Council shall affirm or modify
such order, the Building Commission shall proceed to enforce said order as affirmed or so
modified, in the manner prescribed in Section 14.117.
Section 14.116: COMPLIANCE
If the owner fails to comply with the order made pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance to
repair, alter, improve, or to vacate and close the building, or to remove or demolish the building,
the Building Commission may file a petition in the Superior Court in accordance with the
provisions of Section 4 of Chapter 48:A of the N.H. RSA.
Section 14.117: AUTHORITY OF THE BUILDING COMMISSION
The Building Commission and its delegated officers are authorized to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes of the Ordinances and of
the provisions of Chapter 48 of the N.H. RSA, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
A. To investigate the building conditions in the City of Portsmouth in order to determine
which buildings are "dangerous buildings";
B. To administer affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence;
C. To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations, provided that such
entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession and to obtain an order for this purpose from a court of competent
jurisdiction, in the event entry is denied or rejected;
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as deemed necessary
to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance; and
E. To delegate any of its functions under such Ordinance to such officers as it may
designate.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 14
Section 14.118: ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY
No officer, agent or employee of the City of Portsmouth shall render himself personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in
the discharge of his duties under this Ordinance. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or
employee of the City of Portsmouth as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of his duties under this Ordinance shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
Section 14.119: DUTIES OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
The employees of the Fire Department shall make a report in writing to the Housing Code
Inspector of all buildings or structures which are or may be, or are suspected to be "dangerous
buildings" within the terms of this Ordinance. Such reports must be delivered to the Housing
Code Inspector within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Fire
Department.
Section 14.120: DUTIES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
All employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing to the Housing Code
Inspector of any buildings or structures, which are or may be, or are suspected to be "dangerous
buildings" within the terms of this Ordinance. Such reports must be delivered to the Housing
Code Inspector within 24 hours of the discovery of such buildings by any employee of the Police
Department.
Section 14.121: SEPARABILITY
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this Ordinance shall be
deemed independent of all other provisions herein and it is further the intention of the City
Council that if any provisions of this Ordinance be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof
shall remain valid and enforceable.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 14
ARTICLE II: DEMOLITION
Section 14.201 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to encourage the preservation of buildings and places of historic,
architectural and cultural value.
Section 14.202 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings set forth below,
except when the context requires a different meaning.
Demolition: Razing or destruction, entirely or in part, of a building or structure, whether or not
reconstruction is planned after demolition, or removal of a building or structure in whole or in
part from its present location. For the purpose of this Article, demolition shall not include (a)
interior demolition that does not affect the exterior of the building or structure, or (b) work
necessary to repair or replace exterior finishes such as roofing, siding, trim or windows.
Demolition Review Committee: A committee appointed by the City Council and comprised of
five members as follows: one member of the Historic District Commission, one member of the
Planning Board, one member of the Portsmouth Historical Society, the Chief Building Inspector
or his/her designee, and the Planning Director or his/her designee. Representatives of the
Historic District Commission and Planning Board shall be appointed annually or as necessary.
Code Official: As defined in the zoning ordinance.
Section 14.203 APPLICABILITY
The requirements of this Article shall apply to any demolition except:
(1) Demolition of a building or structure that has been granted a Certificate of
Approval by the Historic District Commission or has been approved for
demolition in association with a project approved, following a public hearing, by
either the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
(2) Demolition of any “dangerous building” that has been ordered to be demolished
pursuant to Chapter 14, Article I, Section 14.109(C).
(3) Minor demolition projects, as determined by the Code Official, that are not
located in the Historic District, including but not limited to chimneys, decks,
porches, steps, small outbuildings or other similar design features.
(4) Removal of partial roof components for vertical expansion such as dormers or
skylights on structures that are not located in the Historic District.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 14
Section 14.204: APPLICATION AND NOTICE
A. APPLICATION: Prior to the commencement of any demolition, the owner(s),
contractor, or agent (hereinafter Applicant) must (a) submit a completed Demolition
Permit Application (hereinafter Application) to the Inspection Department, (b) post a sign
or signs as required by paragraph B below, and (c) publish a legal notice as required by
paragraph B below. Such Application shall include a Demolition Plan that includes a
scaled site plan showing the location of the building(s) and photographs of the existing
structure(s) and, if applicable, elevations of the proposed structure(s).
B. SIGNAGE: The applicant shall post one or more signs on the building to be demolished,
or on the lot where such building is located, so as to be clearly visible from all public
ways. In the event that visibility at the building’s location would be hindered in such a
manner as to obstruct notice of the sign, the applicant will be required to post a sufficient
number of signs as to insure clear visibility. Said sign(s) shall be provided by the
Inspection Department at the time of application for the Permit.
C. LEGAL NOTICE:
(1) If the building to be demolished was constructed more than 50 years prior to the
date of application and the area to be demolished (building footprint or gross floor
area) is greater than 500 square feet, the legal notice shall read as follows:
NOTICE
An application has been submitted to demolish the building (or a portion thereof) located at
______________________. Further information about the proposed demolition is available from
the Inspection Department, City Hall, 1 Junkins Avenue, Portsmouth, NH 03801 (tel. 610-7243).
You may object to the demolition by filing a written objection with the Inspection Department at
the above address.
If no written objection is received in the Inspection Department within 30 days from the date of
this notice, the Demolition Permit will be issued. If a written objection is received within said
period, the Demolition Review Committee will hold a public hearing on the matter within 75
days from the date of this notice. Notice of the public hearing will be published in a newspaper
of general circulation, posted on the City’s website, and given to all parties who have filed
objections to the proposed demolition.
Date of this Notice:
(2) If the building to be demolished was constructed 50 years or less prior to the date of
application, or the area to be demolished (building footprint or gross floor area) is 500
square feet or less, the legal notice shall read as follows:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 14
NOTICE
An application has been submitted to demolish the building (or a portion thereof) located at
______________________. Further information about the proposed demolition is available from
the Inspection Department, City Hall, 1 Junkins Avenue, Portsmouth, NH 03801 (tel. 610-7243).
You may object to the demolition by filing a written objection with the Inspection Department at
the above address.
If no written objection is received in the Inspection Department within 30 days from the date of
this notice, the Demolition Permit will be issued. If a written objection is received within said
period, the Inspector may order an additional delay in issuing the Demolition Permit, up to a
maximum of 90 days from the date of this notice.
Date of this Notice:
(3) In either case, the required sign(s) shall remain posted until the Inspection
Department has issued a demolition permit.
D. PUBLICATION: The applicant shall, within seven (7) days of submitting an
Application, have published the required a legal notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in Portsmouth. All costs which are incurred for publication of the legal notice
are to be paid by the applicant who also will provide copies of the published legal notice
to the Inspection Department prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period
contained in the legal notice. The legal notice shall include the wording required by
Section 14.204.C (1) or (2), as applicable, and shall also contain the address and
description of the building or structure to be demolished and the name and address of the
applicant.
Section 14.205: PROCEDURE
A. If the building to be demolished was constructed more than 50 years prior to the date of
application and the area to be demolished (building footprint or gross floor area) is
greater than 500 square feet, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) If a written objection is not received by the Inspection Department within thirty
(30) days of the date of notice, the Building Inspector shall verify that the notice
requirements in Section 14.204 have been satisfied and the demolition may
proceed.
(2) If a written objection is received by the Inspection Department within thirty (30)
days of the date of notice, the Building Inspector shall have fifteen (15) days to
notify the applicant in writing that the Demolition Plan must be reviewed by the
Demolition Review Committee (hereinafter Committee) before proceeding and
forward the application to each member of the Committee.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 14
(a) The Committee shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days of
notification from the Building Inspector. Notice of the public hearing shall
be given to all parties who have filed objections, posted in two public
places and on the City’s website, and published in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, not including the day
of the hearing or the day of posting.
(b) The Committee shall hear all public testimony on the building’s
significance. The owner or the owner’s representative shall be invited to
attend the hearing.
(c) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Committee shall determine that the
building is “significant” or “not significant” based on whether the building
is of such historic, architectural or cultural value that its removal would be
to the detriment of the public interest.
(d) If the Committee finds the building is “not significant,” no further review
is required.
(e) If the Committee finds the building is “significant,” the following steps
shall be taken:
(i) The Committee shall hold a meeting with the owner or owner’s
representative within fifteen (15) days, or at the applicant’s earliest
convenience, to discuss alternatives to the proposed Demolition
Plan. Public comment shall be accepted by the Committee at the
meeting.
(ii)
After the meeting provided for in paragraph (i) above,
the Committee shall:
a. Approve the Application as submitted; or
b. Approve any alternatives to the Demolition Plan
which have been agreed to by the applicant; or,
c. Determine to delay the issuance of the demolition
permit for up to the maximum time period allowed
by this ordinance.
(iii) Following the completion of documentation as set forth in (ii)
above, no further review is required.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 14
B. If the building to be demolished was constructed 50 years or less prior to the date of
application, or the area to be demolished (building footprint or gross floor area) is 500
square feet or less, the following procedure shall be followed:
(1) If a written objection is not received by the Inspection Department within
thirty (30) days of the date of notice, the Building Inspector shall verify
that the notice requirements in Section 14.204 have been satisfied.
(2) If a written objection is received by the Inspection Department within
thirty (30) days of the date of notice, the Building Inspector shall order an
additional delay period, not to exceed sixty (60) days from the date of
receipt of the written objection(s) in instances where a significant
building, site, or life safety condition is presented in the objection.
However, in no event shall the delay period ordered by the Building
Inspector exceed ninety (90) days from date of notice.
Section 14.206: DEMOLITION PERMIT
Upon completion of the procedure outlined in Section 14.205, the Building Inspector shall issue
a Demolition Permit after the expiration of any delay period ordered pursuant to Section 14.205.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 1 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15
Part I
INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE, 2015
(Adopted 12/02/2019)
The City of Portsmouth adopts the State Building Code, which adopts by reference the
International Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition (IPC) as published by the International Code Council,
Inc. is hereby adopted as Chapter 15, Part I, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, New
Hampshire subject to the following amendments, additions and deletions.
SECTION 101 GENERAL
Insert in blank space:
101.1 Title. “The City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.”
Edit subsection as follows:
101.2 Scope. Delete the second sentence in its entirety. In the last sentence delete reference to the
“International Fuel Gas Code” and replace text with the “National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54”.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
101.5 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
Appendices B, C, D and E are adopted.
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
Add new subsections to read as follows:
102.8.1 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electric Code, NFPA 70 shall apply to the
installation of electrical systems including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. Wherever this Code references the
International Electric Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Electric
Code, NFPA 70 as adopted by the State of New Hampshire. Article 80, Administration and
Enforcement, of NFPA 70 is not adopted by the City of Portsmouth.
102.8.2 Gas. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, shall apply to the
installation of fuel gas piping from the point of delivery (meter) to the gas appliances, equipment,
or related accessories as covered in this Code. Wherever this Code references the International
Fuel Gas Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA
54.
102.8.3 Property maintenance. The City of Portsmouth does not adopt the International
Property Maintenance Code and any reference to it in this Code shall not direct the reader to its
contents or requirements.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 2 Chapter 15
102.8.4 Sewage disposal. The City of Portsmouth does not adopt the International Sewage
Disposal Code and any reference to it in this Code shall not direct the reader to its contents or
requirements. Private sewage disposal systems shall meet the requirements of City ordinances,
State Law and RSA 485-A:29-44.
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF PLUMBING INSPECTION
Change subsection to read as follows:
103.1 General. The Inspection Department’s executive official is the Chief Building Inspector.
There shall be a Plumbing/Mechanical Inspector assigned to this department, and he/she will
report to the Chief Building Inspector. For the purposes of this Code, the Plumbing/Mechanical
Inspector shall be referred to as the code official.
SECTION 106 PERMITS
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.3 Application for permits. Plumbing permits shall be issued on the form provided by the
Building Inspection Department. A separate permit application is not required.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
106.3.1.1 Food establishment documentation. All new and renovated food establishments shall
submit plumbing designs as required in Section 106.3.1.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.4 By whom application is made.
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.5 Permit issuance. The construction documents and other data filled by an applicant for a
permit shall be reviewed by the code official. If the code official finds that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and the
fees specified in Section 106.5 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. Work
shall be done in accordance with the submitted construction documents presented at the time of
permit issuance.
Plumbing permits shall only be issued to current New Hampshire Master Plumbers; resident
owners of single family homes for work in said home and in which the owner currently resides;
and to persons engaged in the installation and servicing of water softeners or swimming pools.
All permits shall be obtained in person by the qualified person taking responsibility for the work.
Plumbing permits shall not be transferable. All work shall be done in accordance with the
submitted construction documents.
The code official shall have the authority to issue a permit for the construction of part of a
plumbing system before the entire construction documents for the whole system have been
submitted, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 3 Chapter 15
with all pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of the partial permit shall proceed at
their own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire plumbing system will be granted.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.5.1 Approved construction documents.
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.5.3 Expiration and extensions. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within one year after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after the time of commencing the work. The
building official may grant one (1), extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there
is reasonable cause and only when requested in writing prior to the permit expiration date. Said
extension will only be authorized when it does not conflict with any local laws or ordinances
governing the construction work. For a permit to be considered active, periodic inspections must
be requested and work progress documented by inspections. Work elements shall be items
associated with the plumbing permit scope of work.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.5.4 Extensions.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
106.5.9 Outstanding permits. Any person or company with outstanding or expired permits, for
work that has been completed and not inspected, may be denied issuance of new permits, until all
prior work has passed all required inspections.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.5.6 Retention of construction documents.
Change subsections to read as follows:
106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on
plumbing systems, equipment, pipes, or fixtures without first obtaining the required permit(s)
shall, upon issuance of said permit(s), be assessed a fee as determined by the adoption of fees by
budget resolution of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI of the
Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, NH.
106.6.2 Fee schedule. Fees shall be determined by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of
the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI of the Ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth, NH. All permit fees shall be payable at the time the permit is issued. No work will
be inspected unless all fees are paid in full. See Section 107.2.5.4 for reinspection fees.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 4 Chapter 15
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
2. Not more than 50% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued
in accordance with this Code.
3. Not more than 50% of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a
plan review fee has been paid, is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been
expended.
The code official shall not authorize the refund of any fee paid, except upon written request filed
by the original permittee not later than one year after the date of fee payment. Refunds shall not
be issued on permits that have expired under the conditions of Section 106.5.3.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
106.6.4 City construction projects. Fees shall not be assessed for work associated with projects
undertaken by the City of Portsmouth. These projects may also include contract work done by
private contracting firms hired directly by the City. This exemption shall not apply to projects
done by the State Department of Public Works, Pease Development Authority, State Port
Authority or the Portsmouth Housing Authority.
SECTION 107 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
Add sentence to end of subsection to read as follows:
107.2 Required inspections and testing. “The permit holder shall allow a minimum of two
work days (48 hours) from the time the inspector is notified to the time the inspection is
scheduled and shall be present during the required inspections.”
Add new subsection to read as follows:
107.2.5.4 Reinspection fees. If, upon being called for any inspection, and the work is not in
compliance with this Code, verbal and written notice (including the specific code sections) will
be provided clearly identifying the deficiencies. The permit holder shall be responsible for
correcting the item(s) and for notifying the code official to reinspect said deficiencies. If when
called to reinspect these deficiencies, all is correct, no further action will be taken. However, if
during the first reinspection, the work in question has not been corrected, there will be a
reinspection fee assessed as determined by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City
Council, in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI which must be paid at the Inspection Office
before a third inspection will be made. For each subsequent reinspection of the same deficiency
or deficiencies, a like procedure and fee shall be assessed.
During any inspection, the code official may find new item(s), not previously discovered, to be
nonconforming. These item(s) will be noted on the code official’s report, and will require
reinspections. Reinspection fees will not be assessed for items newly found or for their first
reinspection. However, said fees shall be assessed for these items if a third inspection is
required. The same procedures as outlined above shall govern. Failure to pay any reinspection
fees shall be just cause to revoke the permit under which the work was being done. Furthermore,
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 5 Chapter 15
no future permits will be issued to any person who owes the City of Portsmouth said reinspection
fees, until all outstanding fees are paid.
SECTION 108 VIOLATIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
plumbing work and a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be
subject to the penalty provisions prescribed by RSA 155-A:8. Each day that the violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. Reference State RSA's 155-A:8, 625:8 I(c), 651:2 IV(a) and
676:17 for further penalty provisions.
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete entire Section 109 and substitute with the following:
109.1 Application for appeals. Refer to City Ordinance Chapter 12, Part 1, Appendix B as
amended (City Building Code), for the procedure to follow when an appeal from the provisions
of this Code is being requested and for the membership and qualifications of the Board of
Appeals.
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Change the following definitions to read as follows:
Hot Water: Water having a temperature range between 111 degrees F (43.9 degrees C) and 130
degrees F (54 degrees C).
Food service establishment: Any fixed or mobile restaurant, temporary food service
establishment, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tearoom, sandwich
shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, industrial food service
establishment, catering kitchen, commissary and any other eating or drinking establishment
where food or beverages are prepared or served; whether private, public, profit or non-profit.
SECTION 305 PROTECTION OF PIPES AND
PLUMBING SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Change subsection to read as follows:
305.4 Freezing. Water, soil and waste pipes shall not be installed outside of a building, in attics
or crawl spaces, concealed in outside walls, or in any other place subject to freezing temperature
unless adequate provisions are made to protect such pipes from freezing by insulation or heat or
both. The Portsmouth Water/Sewer Ordinance requires building water service pipes to be 4 feet
below grade, or adequately insulated to afford the same protection whenever a condition arises
that the 4 feet cannot be attained.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 6 Chapter 15
Change subsection to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall
conform to RSA 485-A relative to minimum depth below finish grade. Building drains that
connect to public sewers shall be a minimum depth of 48 inches(1219 mm) below grade or be
adequately insulated to afford the same protection whenever a condition arises that the 48
inches(1219 mm) cannot be attained.
SECTION 312 TESTS AND INSPECTIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
312.1 Required tests. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections
312.2 through 312.9 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit
holder shall give reasonable advance notice (2 work days) to the code official when the plumbing
work is ready for tests. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspection
and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for
determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. All
plumbing system piping shall be tested with either water or air.
Change first sentence to read as follows:
312.3 Drainage and vent air test. Plastic piping shall not be tested using air unless a fixed 5 psi
(34.5 kPA) relief valve is installed for testing purposes only.
Edit subsection as follows:
312.5 Water supply system test. Delete the words: “or, for piping systems other than plastic” in
the first sentence.
SECTION 403 MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES
Add new exception in subsection to read as follows:
403.3 Required public toilet facilities.
Exception 3: Mercantile occupancies having a public access area less than or equal to 500
square feet.
SECTION 404 ACCESSIBLE PLUMBING FACILITIES
Change subsection to read as follows:
404.1 Where required. Accessible plumbing facilities and fixtures shall be provided in
accordance with the International Building Code and State of New Hampshire Architectural
Barrier Free Design Standards.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 7 Chapter 15
SECTION 405 INSTALLATION OF FIXTURES
Add new subsections to read as follows:
405.3.6 Bathtubs and showers. The clear space in front of a bathtub or shower shall be a
minimum of 30-inches wide and 24-inches deep.
405.3.7 Ceiling height above fixtures. Bathrooms and kitchens sink areas shall have a minimum
ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (6’-8”) at the front clearance areas for fixtures as shown in
Figure 405.3.1. The ceiling height above fixtures shall be such that the fixture is capable of being
used for its intended purpose. A shower or bathtub equipped with a showerhead shall have a
minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (6’-8”) above a minimum area 30 inches by 30 inches
at the showerhead.
Exception: Showers complying with the Exception in Section 417.4 shall have a
minimum ceiling height of 6’-8” above an area 25 inches by 30 inches at the showerhead
SECTION 418 SINKS
Add new subsections to read as follows:
418.4 Service/utility sinks or curbed mop base. Use groups requiring service sinks are found in
Table 403.1. Service sink faucet spouts which accommodate a hose connection shall require
backflow protection as required in Section 608.2. Food service establishments shall have a
service/utility sink or curbed mop base installed on the main food preparation floor level and on
any floor level where food is prepared and where dish or pot washing takes place. This sink shall
be placed close to the kitchen area or as approved by the Health Department.
418.5 Pre-rinse sink. All food service establishment kitchens shall have a pre-rinse sink adjacent
to the automatic dishwasher. The pre-rinse sink shall be adjacent to the 3 compartment pot sink
in kitchens allowed to omit the dishwasher. The pre-rinse sink shall drain to the grease
interceptor.
SECTION 419 URINALS
Change subsection to read as follows:
419.1 Approval. Urinals shall conform to ANSI Z124.9, ASME A112.19.2M, CSA B45.1, or
CSA B45.5. Urinals shall conform to the water consumption requirements of Section 604.4.
Water supplied urinals shall conform to the hydraulic performance requirements of ASME
A112.19.6, CSA B45.1 or CSA B45.5. If a no-water urinal is installed, a water supply line shall
be sized and installed as if a water supplied urinal were being installed. Said supply line shall be
properly capped and may be buried within the building construction at the urinal location.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 8 Chapter 15
SECTION 501 GENERAL
Add new subsection To read as follows:
501.9 Minimum water heater temperatures. Tank type water heaters and indirect fired hot
water storage tanks shall be maintained at a minimum temperature of 140 degrees F (60 degrees
C) and shall be equipped with a temperature controlling device conforming to ASSE 1017 to
limit the maximum hot water temperature to faucets as required by this code.
SECTION 603 WATER SERVICE
Change subsection to read as follows:
603.1 Size of water service pipe. The water service pipe shall be sized to supply water to the
structure in quantities and at the pressures required in this code. The minimum diameter of water
service pipe shall be 1 inch.
SECTION 605 MATERIALS, JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS
Amend Table 605.3 as follows:
Table 605.3 Water service pipe. Delete all materials except type K copper for all pipe up to and
including 3 inches (3") in diameter and cement lined ductile iron for pipe over 3 inches (3") in
diameter.
SECTION 607 HOT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
Add new subsection to read as follows:
607.1.3 Child care and Group E water temperatures. Water for hand washing sinks in child
care and Group E occupancies shall be between 100 degrees F (37 degrees C) and 120 degrees F
(49 degrees C).
SECTION 608 PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
Change subsection to read as follows:
608.14 Portsmouth Water Department backflow prevention criteria. Backflow prevention at
the water meter shall be accordance with Section 608.14.1 through 608.14.1.6, and Section
608.16.5.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
608.14.1 Outdoor enclosures for backflow prevention.
Add new subsections to read as follows:
608.14.1 Multiple tenant spaces. All buildings that have more than three tenants or tenant
spaces being served by one water service shall have two backflow preventers installed in parallel
for uninterrupted service. When the building or tenant space does not have a known tenant, the
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 9 Chapter 15
water service to that building or tenant space shall have a reduced pressure zone backflow
preventer installed on the building side of the water meter.
608.14.1.2 Dual check valve assemblies. All new residential water services of less than or equal
to 1 inch in size shall have at a minimum, a dual check valve backflow prevention assembly
conforming to ASSE 1024 listed in Chapter 13. Said assembly shall be installed on the water
distribution side of the water meter, without a water meter bypass feature. Thermal expansion of
water shall be addressed per Section 607.3.2.
608.14.1.3 Existing water service. When replacing or upgrading an existing water distribution
piping system, a dual check valve backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the water
distribution side of the water meter, without a water meter bypass feature. Thermal expansion of
water shall be addressed per Section 607.3.2.
608.14.1.4 Double check-valve assemblies. All new residential water services greater than 1
inch in size shall have at a minimum, a double check-valve assembly in accordance with the City
of Portsmouth Backflow Prevention Ordinance listed in Chapter 16.
608.14.1.5 Bypass lines. Bypass lines around required backflow preventers shall be protected
with a backflow preventer of the same type in the bypass line. Refer to the City of Portsmouth
Backflow Prevention Ordinance listed in Chapter 16 for additional backflow prevention
requirements.
608.14.1.6 Auxiliary wells or water supplies. Whenever an auxiliary well or water supply
serves property that also has a domestic water service, the domestic water service shall have a
reduced pressure principle backflow preventer installed on the water distribution side of the
water meter in accordance with the City of Portsmouth Backflow Prevention Ordinance listed in
Chapter 16.
Change subsection to read as follows:
608.16.5 Connection to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation
systems shall be protected against backflow by a pressure-type vacuum breaker or a reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the
potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer.
Edit subsections as follows:
608.16.8 Portable cleaning equipment. Delete reference to Section 608.13.7 and insert
reference to Section 608.13.5.
608.16.9 Dental pump equipment. Delete reference to Section 608.13.6.
SECTION 701 SANITARY DRAINAGE
Change subsection to read as follows:
701.2 Sewer required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and all premises
having drainage piping shall be connected to a public sewer where available or an approved
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 10 Chapter 15
private disposal system. A building is considered available to a public sewer when said building
is within 150 feet of a public sewer line. When a private subsurface disposal system is provided,
a site plan shall document its location on the lot. Subsurface systems shall meet the requirements
of RSA 485-A:29-44.
SECTION 705 JOINTS
Edit subsections as follows:
705.11.2 Solvent cementing. Delete the word “purple” in the second sentence.
SECTION 905 VENT CONNECTIONS AND GRADES
Change subsection to read as follows:
905.6 Vent for future fixtures. Within a habitable or occupiable space at the lowest level of a
structure where plumbing fixtures are not installed, there shall be made available an accessible
vent connection, not less than 2” inch diameter, which is properly connected to the vent system to
provide for future venting.
SECTION 912 WET VENTING
Amend Table 912.3 as follows:
Table 912.3 Wet Vent Sizing. Delete 1-1/2 inch Wet Vent Pipe Size and 1 Drainage Fixture
Unit Load from table.
SECTION 918 AIR ADMITTANCE VALVES
Change subsection to read as follows:
918.3 Where permitted. Air admittance valves are not a substitute for a conventional venting
system. Air admittance valves shall only be used when structural conditions prevent conventional
venting of fixtures. Use of air admittance valves shall be pre-approved by the code official on a
case-by-case basis. When approved, individual branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to
terminate with a connection to an individual or branch type air admittance valve. Stack vents and
vent stacks shall be permitted to terminate to stack type air admittance valves. Individual and
branch type air admittance valves shall vent only fixtures that are on the same floor level and
connect to a horizontal branch drain. The horizontal branch drain having individual and branch
type air admittance valves shall conform to Section 918.3.1. Stack type air admittance valves
shall conform to Section 918.3.2.
SECTION 1003 INTERCEPTORS AND SEPARATORS
Change subsection to read as follows:
1003.2 Approval. All interceptors and separators shall be of the type and capacity approved by
the City Engineer. Each interceptor and each separator shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements of this section based on the
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 11 Chapter 15
anticipated conditions of use. When exceptions are granted under the conditions of Section
1003.3, the applicant shall obtain in writing, approval from the City Engineer for said exceptions.
Waste exempted from treatment by the City Engineer, shall not be discharged into separators or
interceptors.
Change subsection to read as follows:
1003.3 Food service grease interceptors required. New and remodeled food service
establishments shall install a 1000 gallon in-ground grease interceptor located outside the
building envelope in addition to all required grease interceptors at fixtures inside the building.
The grease interceptor shall receive drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease laden
waste as stated in Section 1003.3.1.
Exception 1: When adequate in-ground space is not available outside on the lot, a grease
interceptor approved by the City Engineer and sized in accordance with section 1003.3.4
shall be installed inside.
Exception 2: When the Health officer and City Engineer do not feel the type of food
service establishment warrants such protection.
Exception 3: If the drain line connecting a grease laden fixture(s) to the in-ground
interceptor exceeds 50 liner feet, then said fixture or fixtures, shall also be protected with
a grease removal device as listed in Section 1003.3.4.
Add sentence to end of subsection to read as follows:
1003.4 Oil separators required. “The City Engineer shall approve all oil separator designs.”
Change subsection to read as follows:
1003.10 Access and maintenance of interceptors and separators. All interceptors and
separators shall be located to provide easy access for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall
not be located in a pit below a slab on grade. Interceptors and separators shall be inspected
cleaned and repaired regularly as needed by the building owner at their expense. The building
owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captured materials and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal. Said records
shall be subject to periodic review by the City Engineer, City Health Officer or Code Official.
Only licensed waste disposal companies shall perform removal and disposal operations of the
collected materials.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 12 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15 REFERENCED STANDARDS
Insert the following referenced codes and regulations:
New Hampshire State Building Code
Department of Safety
33 Hazen Drive Drive
Concord, NH 03305
(603) 271-7965
New Hampshire Architectural Barrier Free Design Code
Governor’s Commission on Disability
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 101
Concord, NH 03301-8518
(603) 271-2773
1-800-852-3405 (NH)
New Hampshire Energy Code
Public Utilities Commission
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 10
Concord, NH 03301-2429
(603) 271-2431
City of Portsmouth Backflow Prevention Ordinance 608.14
Chapter 16 608.16.5
City of Portsmouth New Hampshire
Department of Public Works, Water Division
680 Peverly Hill Road
Portsmouth, NH 03801
(603) 766-1413
Add in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
54-15 National Fuel Gas Code 101.2, 102.8.2
Amend in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
Change 70-14 to 70-17 National Electric Code 102.8.1, 502.1
504.3, 1113.1.3
APPENDIX A – PLUMBING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Appendix A is not adopted as part of this ordinance.
APPENDIX B – RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES
Appendix B is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX C – STRUCTURAL SAFETY
Appendix C is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX D – DEGREE DAY DESIGN TEMPERATURES
Appendix D is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
APPENDIX E – SIZING OF WATER PIPING SYSTEM
Appendix E is adopted as part of this ordinance without amendments.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 13 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15
Part II
INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE, 2015
(Adopted 12/02/2019)
The City of Portsmouth adopts the State Building Code, which adopts by reference The
International Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition (IMC) as published by International Code Council
is hereby adopted as Chapter 15, Part II, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, New
Hampshire, subject to the following amendments, additions and deletions.
SECTION 101 GENERAL
Insert in blank space:
101.1 Title. “the City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire”
Edit subsection as follows:
101.2 Scope. Delete the reference, “International Fuel Gas Code” and replace with the reference,
“National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54.”
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
Add new subsections to read as follows:
102.8.3 Electrical code. The provisions of the National Electric Code, NFPA 70 shall apply to
the installation of electrical systems including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. Where ever this Code references the
International Electric Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Electric
Code, NFPA 70 as adopted by the State of New Hampshire. Article 80, Administration and
Enforcement, of NFPA 70 is not adopted by the City of Portsmouth. Refer to Chapter 12 of the
city ordinances (Building Code) for the electric code administration process.
102.8.4 Gas code. The provisions of the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54, shall apply to the
installation of gas piping from the point of delivery (meter) to gas appliances and related
accessories as covered in this code. Wherever this Code references the International Fuel Gas
Code the reader shall substitute that reference with the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54.
102.8.5 Liquefied petroleum gas code. The provisions of the Liquefied Petroleum (LP) Gas
Code, NFPA 58, shall apply to the installation of propane containers and the first- and second
stage pressure regulators.
102.8.6 Commercial cooking. The requirements of NFPA 96, the Standard for Ventilation
Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations, Chapter 10: Fire-
Extinguishing Systems, Chapter 11: Procedures for the Use and Maintenance of Equipment and
Chapter 14: Solid Fuel Cooking Operations shall apply to Type I hoods, in occupancies with
commercial food preparation services.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 14 Chapter 15
SECTION 103 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Change subsection to read as follows:
103.1 General. The Inspection Department’s executive official is the Chief Building Inspector.
There shall be a Plumbing/Mechanical Inspector assigned to this department, and he/she will
report to the Chief Building Inspector. For the purposes of this Code, the Plumbing/Mechanical
Inspector shall be referred to as the code official.
SECTION 106 PERMITS
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.3 Mechanical permits. Mechanical permits shall be issued on the form provided by the
Building Inspection Department. A separate permit application is not required.
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.4 Permit issuance. The construction documents and other data filled by an applicant for a
permit shall be reviewed by the code official. If the code official finds that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and the
fees specified in Section 106.5 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. Work
shall be done in accordance with the submitted construction documents presented at the time of
permit issuance.
Mechanical permits shall only be issued to resident owners of single family homes for work in
said home in which the owner currently resides, and to businesses engaged in the installation of
any heating, cooling, air-conditioning or domestic water heating systems. All permits shall be
obtained in person by the qualified person or agency taking responsibility for the work.
Mechanical permits shall not be transferable.
For gas piping work and the installation and repair of all gas fired equipment, a qualified person
shall be any person who conforms to the SAFE-C-8000 Licensing of Fuel Gas Fitters rules, as
regulated by The State of New Hampshire Division of Fire Safety.
The code official shall have the authority to issue a permit for the construction of part of a
mechanical system before the entire construction documents for the whole system have been
submitted, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying
with all pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of the partial permit shall proceed at
their own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire mechanical system will be granted.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.4.1 Approved construction documents.
Change subsection to read as follows:
106.4.3 Expiration and extensions. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within one year after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after the time of commencing the work. The
building official may grant one (1), extension of time not exceeding twelve (12) months if there
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 15 Chapter 15
is reasonable cause and only when requested in writing prior to the permit expiration date. Said
extension will only be authorized when it does not conflict with any local laws or ordinances
governing the construction work. For a permit to be considered active, periodic inspections must
be requested and work progress documented by inspections. Work elements shall be items
associated with the mechanical permit scope of work.
Delete the following subsection without substitution:
106.4.4 Extensions.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
106.4.9 Outstanding permits. Any person or company with outstanding or expired permits, for
work that has been completed and not inspected, may be denied issuance of new permits, until all
prior work has passed all required inspections.
Change subsections to read as follows:
106.5.1 Commencing work before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on
mechanical equipment, systems, pipes, ducts or fixtures without first obtaining the required
permit(s) shall, upon issuance of said permit(s), be assessed a fee in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article XVI or similar wording, of the Ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, NH.
106.5.2 Fee schedule. Fees shall be determined by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of
the City Council in accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, of the Ordinances of the City of
Portsmouth, NH. All permit fees shall be payable at the time the permit is issued. No work will
be inspected unless all fees are paid in full. See Section 107.3.4 for reinspection fees.
Edit subsection as follows:
106.5.3 Fee refunds:
Insert in blank spaces: 2. “50%”; 3. “50%”
In last paragraph substitute “one year” in place of “180 days”.
Add sentence to end of last paragraph:
“Refunds shall not be issued on permits that have expired under the conditions of Section
106.4.3.”
Add new subsection to read as follows:
106.5.4 City construction projects. Fees shall not be assessed for work associated with projects
undertaken by the City of Portsmouth. These projects may also include contract work done by
private contracting firms hired directly by the City. This exemption shall not apply to projects
done by the State Department of Public Works, Pease Development Authority, State Port
Authority or the Portsmouth Housing Authority.
SECTION 107 INSPECTIONS AND TESTING
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 16 Chapter 15
Add new subsection to read as follows:
107.3.4 Reinspection fees: If, upon being called for any inspection, and the work is not in
compliance with this Code, verbal and written notice (including the specific code section) will be
provided clearly identifying the deficiencies. The permit holder shall be responsible for
correcting the item(s) and for notifying the code official to reinspect said deficiencies. If when
called to reinspect these deficiencies, all is correct, no further action will be taken. However, if
during the first reinspection, the work in question has not been corrected, there will be a
reinspection fee assessed by the adoption of fees by budget resolution of the City Council in
accordance with Chapter 1, Article XVI, which must be paid at the Inspection Office before a
third inspection will be made. For each subsequent reinspection of the same deficiency or
deficiencies, a like procedure and fee shall be assessed.
During any inspection, the code official may find new item(s), not previously discovered, to be
nonconforming. These item(s) will be noted on the code official’s report, and will require
reinspections. Reinspection fees will not be assessed for items newly found or for their first
reinspection. However, said fees shall be assessed for these items if a third inspection is
required. The same procedures as outlined above shall govern. Failure to pay any reinspection
fees shall be just cause to revoke the permit under which the work was being done. Furthermore,
no future permits will be issued to any person who owes the City of Portsmouth said reinspection
fees, until all outstanding fees are paid.
Add sentence to end of subsection:
107.4 Approval. “Said notice shall be the completed permit inspection log form.”
SECTION 108.0 VIOLATIONS
Change subsection to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
mechanical equipment or mechanical work and a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the penalty provisions prescribed by RSA 155-A:8. Each
day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Reference State RSA's 155-
A:8, 625:8 I(c), 651:2 IV(a) and 676:17 for further penalty provisions.
108.5 Stop work orders: Insert in the first blank: “$100.00”; Insert in the second blank:
“$1,000.00”
SECTION 109 MEANS OF APPEAL
Delete the entire section and substitute with the following:
109.1 Application for appeal. Refer to City Ordinance Chapter 12, Part 1, Appendix B as
amended (City Building Code), for the procedure to follow when an appeal from the provisions
of this Code is being requested and for the membership and qualifications of the Board of
Appeals.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 17 Chapter 15
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Add new definition to subsection:
Food service establishment. Any fixed or mobile restaurant, temporary food service
establishment, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tearoom, sandwich
shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, industrial food service
establishment, catering kitchen, commissary and any other eating or drinking establishment
where food or beverages are prepared or served; whether private, public, profit or non-profit.
SECTION 303 EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCE LOCATION
Add new subsection to read as follows:
303.9 Equipment noise. Refer to the City of Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance, for the limitations
of excessive noise from mechanical equipment operations. Noise from mechanical equipment
shall not exceed the levels so stated.
SECTION 501 EXHAUST SYSTEM
Add new subsection to read as follows:
501.6 Mechanical equipment and terminations in the Historic District. Mechanical
equipment and equipment terminations shall comply with the City of Portsmouth Zoning
Ordinance with respect to the allowable size of equipment and termination devices, without
having to receive Historic District Commission approval.
SECTION 507 COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOODS
Add exception 4 in subsection to read as follows:
Exception 4. Cooking equipment that has been listed in accordance with ANSI/UL 197 or an
equivalent standard for reduced emissions shall not be required to be provided with an exhaust
system. Spaces in which such systems are located shall be considered to be kitchens and shall be
ventilated in accordance with table 403.3. For the purpose of determining the floor area required
to be ventilated, each individual appliance shall be considered as occupying not less than 100
square feet (9,3m2).
SECTION 509 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS
Add subsection to read as follows:
509.2 NFPA 96. The following amendments to NFPA 96 are hereby incorporated into this code:
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 18 Chapter 15
Chapter 10 Fire-Extinguishing Equipment
Add new subsections to read as follows:
109.3 Initial System Test.
109.3.1 Prior to placing the cooking equipment in service, all the systems shall be tested as
required by the City of Portsmouth Range Hood Test Report Form. The suppression test shall
use a substitute non-flammable gas in place of the UL 300 suppression agent.
109.3.2 When the conditions I Section 10.2.3.1 apply, a re-test of all the systems as stated in
Section 10.9.3.1 shall be performed.
Chapter 11 Procedures for the Use and Maintenance of Equipment
Add new sentence to end of subsection:
11.6 Cleaning of Exhaust Systems.
11.6.2* “The methods, tools and values outlined in Annex A, Section A.11.6.2 and Figure
A.11.6.2 shall become mandatory requirements of this Section.”
End of NFPA 96 Amendments
SECTION 801 CHIMNEYS AND VENTS
Change subsections to read as follows:
801.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the installation, maintenance, repair and approval of
factory-built chimneys, chimney liners, vents and connectors. This chapter shall also govern the
utilization of masonry chimneys. Gas-fired appliances shall be regulated in accordance with the
National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54.
801.3 Masonry chimneys. Masonry chimneys shall be constructed in accordance with the
International Building Code and NFPA 211, the Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and
Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances.
SECTION 902 MASONRY FIREPLACES
Change subsection to read as follows:
902.1 General. Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with the International
Building Code and NFPA 211, the Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-
Burning Appliances.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 19 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15 REFERENCED STANDARDS
Insert the following Codes and Regulations:
New Hampshire State Building Code
Department of Safety
33 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03305
(603) 271-7965
Guidelines Manual for Two (2) PSIG Gas Systems. 1601.2 (NFPA 54, 5.5.1)
Unitil Corporation.
PO Box 508
325 West Road, Portsmouth, NH 03802-0508,
1-800-552-3047
New Hampshire Energy Code
Public Utilities Commission
21 South Fruit Street, Suite 10
Concord, NH 03301-2429
(603) 271-2431
Add in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
54-15 National Fuel Gas Code 101.2, 102.8, 801.1
70-17 National Electric Code 102.8
96-11 Ventilation Control and Fire Protection 102.8.4
of Commercial Cooking Operations
Amend in the NFPA section the following referenced Standards:
Change 31-06 to 31-11 Standard for Installation of Oil Burning Equipment
Change 58-04 to 58-14 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code
Change 211-0 to 211-13 Standards for Chimneys,
Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliance
APPENDIX A – COMBUSTION AIR OPENINGS AND CHIMNEY CONNECTOR
PASS-THROUGH
Appendix A is adopted as part of this ordinance.
APPENDIX B – RECOMMENDED PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
Appendix B is not adopted as part of this ordinance.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 20 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15
PART III
NATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE
This chapter shall govern the installation, modification and maintenance of fuel gas
piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment and related accessories. All such installations
shall be regulated by the National Fuel Gas Code, NFPA 54 (2015) subject to the following
additions, amendments and deletions.
Section 7.2 Installation of Piping.
Add new subsections to read as follows:
7.2.6.1 Exterior Meter Connections. CSST shall not be connected to an exterior meter. The
tubing shall terminate at the foundation wall with a termination fitting, and the gas meter shall be
rigidly connected with steel piping to the building structure.
7.2.6.2 Fireplace Log Installations. CSST shall terminate with a termination fitting at the
entrance to the masonry fire box. The workmanship shall be performed and completed in such a
manner so that the termination will not be exposed to any mechanical damage.
7.2.6.3 Fixed Appliance Connection Using CSST. CSST may be directly connected to a fixed
appliance when all the following conditions are met:
1. The tubing is securely attached to the building structure or other means of solid support.
2. Tubing shall not run exposed for a distance greater than or equal to 30 inches without
being physically attached to the building structure or other means of solid support.
3. CSST terminates with a proper fitting and gas cock.
7.2.6.4 CSST Used as an Appliance Connection. CSST shall not be used as a flexible
appliance connector downstream of the appliance shutoff device.
7.3.6.5 Testing Requirements for CSST Systems. When CSST piping systems are installed in
new construction or remodeling, the system shall be tested before any piping is covered as part of
the inspections prescribed in Chapter 8.1. Before placing appliances and equipment in operation
a second pressure test as prescribed in Chapter 8.1 shall be completed and inspected.
7.2.6.6 CSST Piping Installed on Roofs. CSST shall be installed for roof top equipment only
when it is supported by one of the following methods:
1. The CSST tubing is installed within a metal or plastic conduit that is securely attached by
an appropriate method every six feet to the roof structure. Where the piping system
requires a tee to be installed within the line, the sleeve shall terminate no more than 12
inches from the tee on both main and branch line runs.
2. For CSST tubing having sizes of 1½ inch and two inches and having a UV stabilized
jacket, all the following requirements shall be satisfied:
a. The CSST shall be supported on blocks which are spaced not more than 48 inches
apart.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 21 Chapter 15
b. The blocks shall be constructed of materials appropriate for outdoor conditions
and shall be securely attached by an appropriate method to the roof structure, and
c. The method used to attach the CSST to the block shall not damage the plastic
coating.
3. The maximum length of tubing not supported by any method listed shall not exceed 30-
inches when connected to a gas fired roof top unit or similar gas equipment.
Section 12.5 Type of Venting Systems to be Used.
Change subsection to read as follows:
12.5.3 Plastic Pipes and Joints. Plastic pipe and fittings used to vent appliances shall be listed
for use as a gas vent by the piping manufacturer and shall be installed in accordance with the
appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where primer is required, it shall be of
contrasting color.
Section 12.9 Through the wall vent termination.
Add new subsection to read as follows:
12.9.7 Through-the-wall vents for mechanical draft vented appliances shall terminate a minimum
of 5 ft from property lines.
End of NFPA 54 Amendments.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 22 Chapter 15
CHAPTER 15
PART IV
NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE, 2017
The City of Portsmouth adopts the State Building Code, which adopts by reference The
National Electrical Code, 2017(NEC), as Chapter 15, Part IV, of the ordinances of the
City of Portsmouth, New Hampshire, subject to the following amendments, additions and
deletions:
Change subsection to read:
210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel.
(A) Dwelling Units. All 125-volt, and 240 volts single-phase, 15-thru 50 ampere
receptacles installed in the locations specified in 210.8(A)( 1) through (10) shall have
ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.
(B) All Area Including Dwelling Unit. All single-phase receptacles rated 150 volts to
ground or less, 50 amperes or less and three phase receptacles rated 150 volts to
ground or less, 100 amperes or less installed in the following locations shall have
ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel.
(E) Kitchen Microwaves, Range Hood Branch Circuits. GFCI protection shall be
provided for outlets, or hard wired microwaves and range hood in dwelling unit
locations.
(F) Kitchen Refrigerator Branch Circuits. GFCI protection shall be provided for
outlets that supply refrigerators installed in dwelling unit location.
(G) Kitchen Garbage Disposal, and Trash Compactors Branch Circuits. GFCI
protection shall be provided for outlets that supply garbage disposals and trash
compactors installed in dwelling units.
(H) Kitchen Electric Ranges Branch Circuits. GFCI protection shall be provided for
all electric ranges 120 volts thru 240 volts 50 amps and less in dwelling units.
(I) Electric Dryers in Bathrooms, Basements and Laundry Room Rooms. GFCI
protection shall be provided for circuits for 120 volt thru 240 volts 50 amps or less
that supply electric dryers in dwelling units.
Change subsection to read as follows:
230 Service, Part VI. Service Equipment — Disconnecting Means.
230.70 General. Means shall be provided to disconnect all conductors in a
building or other structure from the service entrance conductors.
(A) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in accordance
with 230.70(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3) except for one and two family dwellings, the
disconnecting means shall be located on the outside of the dwelling in a readily
accessible location nearest point of the conductors entering the building or
structure.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 23 Chapter 15
(C) Suitable for Use. Each service disconnecting means shall be suitable for the
prevailing conditions. Service equipment installed in hazardous (classified) locations
shall comply with the requirements of Articles 500 through 501
Change subsection to read as follows:
Article 334. Part II. Installation
334.10 Uses Permitted. Type NM, Type NMC, and Type NMS cables shall be
permitted to be used in the following, except as prohibited in 334.12:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings and their attached or detached garages, and
their storage buildings.
(A) Type NM. Type NM cable shall be permitted as follows:
(1) For both exposed and concealed work in normally dry locations in one
and two family dwelling.
334.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Types NM, NMC, and NMS cables shall not be
permitted as follows:
(1) In any dwelling or structure not specifically permitted in 334.10(1)
(2) Exposed in a dropped or suspended ceiling in other than one- and two-family.
Change subsection to read as follows:
334.15 Exposed Work in one and two family dwelling.
In exposed work, except as provided in 300.11(A), cable shall be installed as
specified in 334.15(A) through (C).
(C) In Unfinished Basements and Crawl Spaces in one and two family dwellings.
Where cable is run at angles with joists in unfinished basements and crawl spaces, it
shall be permissible to secure cables not smaller than two 6 AWG or three 8 AWG
conductors directly to the lower edges of the joists. Smaller cables shall be run either
through bored holes in joists or on running boards. Nonmetallic sheathed cable
installed on the wall of an unfinished basement shall be permitted to be installed in a
listed conduit or tubing or shall be protected in accordance with 300.4. Conduit or
tubing shall be provided with a suitable insulating bushing or adapter at the point the
cable enters the raceway. The sheath of the nonmetallic-sheathed cable shall extend
through the conduit or tubing and into the outlet or device box not less than 6 mm (1/4
in.). The cable shall be secured within 300 mm12 in.) of the point where the cable
enters the conduit or tubing. Metal with the provisions of 250.86 and 250.148.
Change subsection to read as follows:
334.23 In Accessible Attics in one and two family dwellings. The installation of cable
in accessible attics or roof spaces shall also comply with 320.23.
Not an official copy
City of Portsmouth Page 24 Chapter 15
Change subsection to read as follows:
Article 338. Service Entrance Cable: Type SE and USE, Part II. Installation
338.10 Uses Permitted.
(A) Service-Entrance Conductors for one and two family dwellings. Serviceentrance
cable shall be permitted to be used as service-entrance conductors and shall
be installed in accordance with 230.6, 230.7, and Parts II, III, and IV of Article 230.
Change subsection to read as follows:
338.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(A) Service-Entrance Cable. Service-entrance cable (SE) shall not be used under the
following conditions or in the following locations, other than one and two family
dwellings.
(1) Where subject to physical damage unless protected in accordance with 230.50(B).
(2) Underground with or without a raceway.
(3) For exterior branch circuits and feeder wiring unless the installation
complies with the provisions of Part I of Article 225 and is supported in
accordance with 334.30 or is used as messenger-supported wiring as permitted in
Part II of Article 396.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 1 Chapter 16
CHAPTER 16
UTILITIES
(Adopted Chapter 12/4/2006)
Article I Water Ordinance 16.101 - 16.119
Article II Regulation of Discharges into Storm
Water Drainage System
16.201 - 16.212
ARTICLE I: WATER ORDINANCE
SECTION 16.101: DEFINITIONS
1. “Abutter” shall mean one whose property abuts, is contiguous to, or joins at the border or
boundary of a public right-of-way in which a Main Pipe is to be or has been installed.
2. “Backflow” shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
Utility’s service or Main Pipes from any source other than the intended source.
3. “Backflow Prevention Device” shall mean a Utility approved device which operates on
the Service Pipe to prevent any material from being forced or drawn into the Main Pipe
and contaminating the potable water supply.
4. “Bypass” shall mean the pipe extended around the meter from and to the Service Pipe
through which the Utility may provide service to the Customer while the meter is out of
service.
5. “Capacity Improvements Multiplier” shall mean the multiplier used as part of the
Capacity Use Surcharge formula to generate funds to be used for capital improvements
necessary to serve future users. The Capacity Improvements Multiplier shall be
established as part of the rate setting process.
6. “Capacity Use Surcharge” shall mean a one-time fee assessed by the Utility at the time
of connection. The Capacity Use Surcharge shall be calculated as follows: (projected
average daily flow/equivalent dwelling unit) multiplied by Capacity Improvements
Multiplier. The equivalent dwelling unit shall be set as part of the rate setting process.
7. “Cross Connection” shall mean any actual or potential physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable
water and the other which contains unacceptable levels of material of unknown or
questionable safety, including water containing any physical chemical, biological, or
radiological substance or matter.
8. “Curb Stop/Curb Shut Off” shall mean the valve owned and maintained by the Utility,
normally located at or adjacent to the Customer’s property line, which the Utility alone
may use to turn on or Shut Off service to the Premises.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 2 Chapter 16
9. “Customer” shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, city
government, or governmental division owning or having an interest in property to which
the Utility supplies service.
10. “Customer Unit” shall mean the occupancy to which meter rates shown herein shall be
separately applied.
11. “Main Pipe” shall mean the Utility’s supply pipe from which service connections are
made to supply water to Customers.
12. “Outside Reader” shall mean the device placed by the Utility on the outside surface of
the Customer’s Premises permitting the Utility to obtain a meter reading without entering
the Premises.
13. “Petitioner” shall mean the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of real property
who is requesting Main Pipe extension for any purpose.
14. “Premises” shall mean the Customer’s property or building(s) thereon to which service is
provided.
15. “Private Fire Protection” shall mean private water service located on the Premises,
including fire sprinklers, hose lines, and hydrants, connected to or served by the Utility
system to provide water for extinguishing purposes.
16. “Private Meters” shall mean additional non-Utility owned meters monitoring service to a
portion of the Customer’s Premises.
17. “Rate and Fee Schedule” shall mean those rates, fees and charges set by the Portsmouth
City Council.
18. “Regular Working Hours” shall mean the hours, Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays, during which time the Utility is normally open for business.
19. “Service Pipe” shall mean the pipe running from the Main Pipe into the Customer’s
Premises.
20. “Shut Off” shall mean the valve owned and maintained by the Customer, located within
the Customer’s Premises or on Customer’s property, which may be used to turn on or off
service to the Premises.
21. “Utility” shall mean the City of Portsmouth’s Department of Public Works, Water
Division.
22. “Utility Specifications” shall mean those construction guidelines, approved product,
policies and practices set forth in the Portsmouth Water Division Utility Manual.
23. “Zones” shall mean groupings of multiple sprinkler heads which provide water to one
area of a Customer’s lawn at a time.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 3 Chapter 16
SECTION 16.102: APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all retail Customers served by the Utility. Wholesale service shall be
per the terms of individual Agreements.
SECTION 16.103: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE AND CONNECTION FEE AND
COSTS
a. Procedure.
(1) Applications for new service shall be made in person by the Customer or a
duly authorized agent at the office of the Utility.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee and
completed service application data form, identifying each plumbing
fixture and estimates of flow and peak demand as may be requested by the
Utility for which service will be required. At the discretion of the Utility,
this information may be provided in a letter signed by the Customer’s
architect or engineer.
(3) The Utility shall review the service data to determine whether it has
sufficient capacity to provide adequate water service to the Customer.
(b) Determination
(1) If the Utility determines that it does not or will not have sufficient capacity
to serve it shall not be obligated to provide the service. The Utility may, at
its option and discretion, enter into such agreements with applicants to
make readiness to serve improvements at Customer’s expense.
(2) If the Utility determines that it has sufficient capacity to provide adequate
water service, the Utility will approve the service and assess a connection
fee. The connection fee will consist of the following components: labor
and material charges related to the work components of connecting to the
Main Pipe as well as a Capacity Use Surcharge.
(3) Service shall not be provided until all required deposits or payments have
been made by the Customer.
c. Change of Ownership in a Commercial or Industrial Customer Unit. Upon the
change of ownership in a commercial or industrial Customer Unit, the Customer
shall be required to reapply and to submit revised service data to the Utility and
shall conform to all Utility regulations governing new installations.
SECTION 16.104: SERVICE PIPE
a. Installation, Ownership and Maintenance. The Service Pipe as it extends from the
Main Pipe and Curb Stop located within the limits of the public right-of-way or
Utility easement shall be installed, owned and maintained by the Utility. The
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 4 Chapter 16
Customer may, subject to prior written approval and inspection by the Utility,
install the Utility’s portion of the Service Pipe. The Service Pipe from the Curb
Stop into the Premises shall be owned by the Customer and installed and
maintained at Customer’s expense.
b. Connection. Only the Utility or its duly authorized agents shall install, maintain
or repair any Service Pipe connection to a Main Pipe. Such connections shall be
made only from the street which is the legal address of the Premises served,
unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Utility.
c. Installation Specifications.
(1) The Customer’s portion of a Service Pipe shall be installed in accordance
with Utility Specifications. It shall be composed of a material which is
acceptable to the Utility and the installation and pipe shall be in
conformance with good engineering practices and in accord the
requirements of law.
(2) The Service Pipe shall be no less than one (1) inch diameter, and shall
have a minimum ground cover of five (5) feet unless authorized in writing
by the Utility.
d. Installation Period. The Utility’s portion of a Service Pipe shall be installed
during the period of mid-April to mid-November as frost and weather conditions
permit. In an emergency and upon the Customer’s request, the Utility in its sole
discretion may authorize service installation during winter months.
e. Service.
(1) Customer shall be provided service through only one Utility owned
Service Pipe and Curb Stop/Curb Shut Off per legally subdivided lot.
Customer may at Customer’s own expense separately meter individual
buildings and tenants as Customer determines.
(2) When an existing Customer has more than one service per legally
subdivided lot, the Utility reserves the right to reduce the number of
services provided to one, as part of any conversation of use, renovation or
other changes in condition requiring a building permit.
(3) Where more than one Customer is currently provided service through one
Service Pipe and Curb Stop/Curb Shut Off, any violation of Utility
regulations by one or more Customer(s) so serviced shall be deemed a
violation by all, and the Utility may take such action against all such
Customers as could be taken against a single Customer. The Utility shall
make reasonable efforts to advise all Customers served by the common
Service Pipe and Curb Stop of the violation and, where appropriate given
an opportunity to cure the violation.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 5 Chapter 16
f. Joint Use of Service Pipe Trench. Joint use of a Service Pipe trench with gas
pipe, sewer pipe or other Utility service shall only be performed in accord with
Utility Specifications.
g. Shut Offs. The Customer shall install and maintain on that portion of the Service
Pipe located on or within the Premises served two (2) Shut Offs, one on either
side of the meter. The Shut Offs shall be of a type acceptable to the Utility. The
Utility may use the Shut Off for service, maintenance and other purposes.
h. Thawing. The Customer shall be responsible for thawing Customer’s portion of
the Service Pipe, and the Utility shall be responsible for thawing its portion of the
Service Pipe.
i. Allocation of Responsibilities.
(1) Installation. Installation by the Utility of its portion of a Service Pipe shall
be at the Customer’s expense. If the Customer elects and the Utility
allows the Customer to install the Utility’s portion of the Service Pipe,
inspection by the Utility shall be at the Customer’s expense.
(2) Reinstallation. Reinstallation of the Utility’s portion of the Service Pipe
which, in the opinion of the Utility, is required due to increased demand
within the Customer’s Premises shall be performed by the Utility at the
Customer’s expense.
(3) Relocation. Any relocation or replacement of the Customer’s portion of
the Service Pipe shall be approved by the Utility and performed at the
Customer’s expense.
(4) Installation During Winter Months. Any Customer requesting emergency
service installation during winter months shall pay all extra expenses
incurred by the Utility due to frost and weather conditions, including
maintenance of the excavation until final paving is installed.
(5) Thawing. When the point at which a Service Pipe is frozen cannot be
determined and the Utility is requested by the Customer to thaw the pipe,
one-half of the thawing cost shall be paid by the Customer.
(6) Shut Offs. Shut Offs shall be provided, installed and maintained by the
Customer at Customer’s own expense.
SECTION 16.105: PRIVATE MAINS, PRIVATE METERS AND PLUMBING
TANKS
a. Private Mains. The Utility recognizes that there exists within its service area
water lines servicing multiple Utility Customers that were installed by private
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 6 Chapter 16
parties, are not within the public right of way easement area, and are not
maintained by the Utility. Customers shall maintain private mains in good repair
and cooperate and coordinate with the Utility as may be necessary to ensure that
the requirements of this ordinance and the delivery of potable water to Utility’s
Customers is met.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 7 Chapter 16
b. Private Meters. Customers may install such Private Meters as Customer desires
to monitor water usage. All such Private Meters shall be installed, owned,
operated and maintained by Customer.
c. Maintenance of Plumbing. Customers shall maintain the plumbing and fixtures
within their Premises in good repair, free from leaks and protected from freezing.
d. Fees and Expenses. All fees and expenses associated with Private Mains, Private
Meters and plumbing and fixtures shall be Customer’s responsibility.
SECTION 16.106: BACKFLOW PREVENTION
a. Prevention.
(1) The Customer shall protect against the possibility of Backflow between
the public water supply and any plumbing, fixture, device, or appliance by
furnishing and installing a Backflow Prevention Device, in accordance
with Utility Specifications with the degree of potential hazard in
accordance with regulations adopted by the N.H. Department of
Environmental Services or any other regulating agency.
(2) Customers with presently installed Backflow prevention devices that do
not meet the requirements of this Ordinance and Utility Specifications
may continue to use nonconforming Backflow Prevention Devises
provided they satisfactorily protect the Utility system whenever the
nonconforming device is moved from the present location and requires
more than minimum maintenance and there is otherwise a hazard to
Utility’s potable water supply, the Backflow prevention device shall be
replaced by a device meeting current requirements.
(3) The Backflow prevention device shall be installed on the Service Pipe at
or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served,
but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the Service Pipe.
All water entering the Premises shall pass through the protective device in
accordance with Utility Specifications.
b. Inspection, Testing and Repair. The Customer shall, in accordance with Utility
Specifications, periodically inspect and test the Backflow Prevention Device.
c. Fees and Expenses. The purchase, installation, maintenance, inspection and
testing of the Backflow Prevention Device shall be at the Customer’s expense and
in accord with Utility Specifications.
SECTION 16.107: METERS
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 8 Chapter 16
a. Ownership, Installation and Maintenance. All water service shall be metered by
the Utility, and the meter, strainer, and Outside Reader shall be owned, installed
and maintained by the Utility.
b. Location and Placement of Meters.
(1) Location. The meter shall be located at the point of entry to the
Customer’s Premises.
(2) Placement. The Customer shall provide a clean, dry and warm place,
always free from debris, for the installation and placement of the meter.
The meter shall be placed in accordance with Utility requirements, either
special or general, and in a location which may be safely and easily
accessed by a person in an upright position for the purpose of reading,
maintaining and changing the meter. In no case shall a meter be placed in
an open or concealed area beneath a floor and, if a meter is so placed, the
Utility may require the Customer to remove and place the meter in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
c. Meter Specifications.
(1) Installation. Meters shall be installed according to Utility Specifications
available at the Utility office. The size of the meter shall be determined
by the Utility after a review of the information submitted by the Customer
on the service application data form.
(2) Bypass. A properly valved and sealed Bypass shall be provided by the
Customer around all meters larger than two (2) inches. The Bypass shall
be metered. The Bypass shall not be used or tampered with by the
Customer for any reason.
d. Outside Reader. All meters shall be equipped with an Outside Reader. The
Outside Reader shall be installed at a place on the Premises acceptable to the
Utility. Unless the Utility authorizes an alternative location, the Outside Reader
shall be placed on the Customer’s Premises near or adjacent to the driveway or
walkway.
e. Private Meters. If Customer desires Private Meters, they shall be furnished,
installed, maintained and read by the Customer for Customer’s own purposes.
f. Testing. Meters will be tested before installation. Thereafter all meters will be
tested in accordance with guidelines set forth by the American Water Works
Association.
g. Allocation of Responsibilities.
(1) Meter. The meter and its installation shall be at the Customer’s expense.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 9 Chapter 16
(2) Meter Repairs. Meter repairs or replacements necessitated by ordinary
wear will be performed by the Utility at no expense to Customer; those
caused by freezing, hot water, or by any other reason shall be paid by the
Customer in accordance with the applicable rate schedule.
(3) Outside Reader. Upon application for service, the Customer shall pay a
fee for the cost of providing and installing the Outside Reader. The
Customer shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of damaged
Outside Readers, and may be billed by the Utility for labor, material and
equipment costs associated with such repair or replacement.
(4) Meter Box. The construction or relocation of a meter box or vault,
whether performed by the Customer or the Utility, shall be at Customer’s
expense. Maintenance of the meter box shall be the responsibility of the
Customer.
(5) Meter Removal. When the Utility requires the Customer to remove a
meter from an open or concealed area beneath a floor, the removal and
replacement of the meter shall be performed by the Customer at
Customer’s expense within a reasonable period of time as determined by
the Utility.
(6) Right of Access. The Utility shall have the right of reasonable access to
the Customer’s Premises to set, read, remove, replace, or repair meters and
enforce this ordinance.
SECTION 16.108: INSPECTIONS
The Utility may, with such notice as may be reasonable in the circumstances, have access to and
inspect Service Pipes, private mains, meters (Utility’s and private) plumbing and all other
equipment and facilities connected to the Utility’s system to prevent the possibility of
contamination of the Utility’s potable water supply, to prevent waste or fraudulent use, and to
otherwise ensure compliance with all components of this Ordinance.
SECTION 16.109: PROHIBITED USE
a. Fraudulent Use. Evidence of the existence of an unsealed Bypass, the Bypassing
of water around meters, or the unauthorized piping or selling of water, or any
other use of un-metered water except for fire extinguishing purposes shall be
deemed fraudulent use.
b. Tampering. All Curb Stop/Curb Shut Off, valves, hydrants, meters, or other
property of the Utility shall not be opened, closed, or tampered with in any way
by any person not authorized to do so by the Utility.
c. Cross Connections. No Cross Connection shall be permitted between the public
water supply and any other water supply, or between the public water supply and
any plumbing fixture, device, or appliance capable of contaminating the public
water supply unless the connection is protected at the metering point by a
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 10 Chapter 16
Backflow prevention device as required by this ordinance. The connection shall
be approved by the Utility and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services, and shall satisfy in all respects the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
d. Electrical Ground Wires. No ground wires from any source whatsoever shall be
attached to any water pipe inside or outside the Premises served, unless the wires
are attached to the Service Pipe at its entrance to the Premises and on the street
side of the meter.
e. Fees and Expenses.
(1) Tampering. Any damage to the Curb Stop/Curb Shut Off, valve, hydrants,
meters, or other property of the Utility which the Utility determines is
caused by tampering caused by the Customer (or Customer’s employees,
contractors or agents) shall be repaired by the Utility at the Customer’s
expense.
(2) Fraudulent Use. Upon discovery by the Utility of fraudulent use by a
Customer, the Customer shall be charged not less than double rates for
such quantities of service as the Utility shall estimate to have been
fraudulently used.
f. Civil Penalty. Any person who violates this Ordinance shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000 per day of such violation.
SECTION 16.110: UTILITY RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
a. Service Generally. The Utility will conform to all requirements of the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services for construction and operation
of its water system as pertains to sanitation and potability of the water.
b. Waste and Improper Use. The Utility shall determine what constitutes waste or
improper use and reserves the right to restrict the same when necessary. The
Utility assumes no responsibility for any water fixtures or for the use or waste of
water on any metered Premises. Delivery of a courtesy notice to a Customer
regarding a possible leak or wasteful condition on the metered Premises shall not
imply any such care or responsibility, nor shall any omission or delay by the
Utility in sending a courtesy notice create any liability.
c. Conservation. When necessary to conserve supply, the Utility reserves the right
to restrict or prohibit the use of water.
d. Hot Water Tanks. Service will be provided to direct pressure hot water tanks or
appliances at the Customer’s risk, and the Utility shall not be responsible for any
damage caused by the Customer’s failure to provide a thermal expansion device
or pressure relief valve in the pipe system.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 11 Chapter 16
e. Maintenance of Plumbing. In no event shall the Utility be responsible for any
damage caused by water escaping from plumbing and fixtures.
f. Refusal of Service to Customers Contemplating Building. The Utility reserves
the right to refuse water service to any Customer that contemplates building until
such time as the Utility shall decide that there is sufficient progress to show that
the building will be completed and occupied and that adequate water service, as
determined by the Utility, can be supplied.
g. Private and Public Fire Protection. The Utility will endeavor to maintain
reasonable private and public fire service, but does not guarantee adequate service
or any aspect of such service.
h. No Liability. The Utility shall not be responsible for any direct, indirect or
consequential damage caused by: service interruption or pressure loss in the Main
Pipes or Service Pipes; dirty, discolored or contaminated water; or other failure to
provide service.
i. Electrical Ground Wires. The Utility shall not be responsible for the installation
of a water pipe grounding system or for the maintenance or integrity or continuity
of any grounding attachment or connection made to a water pipe system.
SECTION 16.111: DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE
a. Discontinuation by the Utility Without Notice. Service may be discontinued by
the Utility without notice for any of the following reasons:
(1) Misrepresentation by the Customer in the application for service or other
fraudulent procurement of service.
(2) Use of water for purposes other than described by the Customer in the
application for service.
(3) Willful waste of water.
(4) Fraudulent use of or tampering with Utility property.
(5) Abandonment of the Premises by the Customer.
(6) Cross Connection or unauthorized connection to the Utility’s Service Pipe
or Main Pipe with any other fixture or supply source in violation of this
Ordinance or Utility Specifications.
(7) Failure to maintain plumbing and fixtures in good repair that could, in the
Utility’s judgment, result in contamination of the potable water supply or
damage or injury to the Utility’s system, persons or property.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 12 Chapter 16
(8) Failure to install, maintain, or repair a Backflow prevention device within
the period specified by the Utility.
(9) Failure to prevent contamination of potable water.
(10) Unauthorized use of private fire protection system.
(11) Any other use of the water or the Utility system that could cause an
imminent danger or loss to the Utility’s system or supply or the persons
and property of others.
b. Discontinuation by the Utility With Notice. Service may be discontinued by the
Utility with written notice postmarked at least twelve (12) days in advance of the
proposed discontinuation date for any of the following reasons:
(1) Refusal of reasonable access to the Customer’s Premises for inspection;
(2) Any refusal or neglect to comply with this ordinance or with Utility
Specifications;
(3) Customer’s failure to comply with terms of payment arrangement entered
into between the Customer and the Utility; and
(4) For such other reasons as the Utility may designate in writing.
c. Discontinuation for Non-Payment of Utility Bills. Service may be discontinued
by the Utility for non-payment of any Utility bill, including late payment charges,
if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) If the Customer has not paid the bill in full within 30 days from the
postmark date on the bill;
(2) The Utility has provided the Customer with written notice of its intention
to discontinue service, postmarked at least twelve (12) days in advance of
the proposed discontinuation date for residential Customers or, in the case
of non-residential Customers, at least five (5) days in advance of the
proposed discontinuation date; and
(3) Prior to the date of notice of discontinuance, the Utility has not received
payment in full.
d. Conference Prior to Discontinuation. A Customer may request a conference with
the Utility prior to the proposed date of service discontinuation. Such conference
shall be held in accordance with the Utility’s standard procedure.
e. Restoration of Service. If service has been discontinued, the Utility shall restore
service promptly upon the Customer’s request when the cause of discontinuation
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 13 Chapter 16
has been removed provided that the Customer has paid the restoration charges
required under the rate schedule.
SECTION 16.112: BILLING AND DEPOSITS
a. Billing.
(1) The Utility shall periodically bill Customers for water service in
accordance with the applicable rate schedule.
(2) If a meter is found not to register, a bill for the period of non-registration
shall be estimated based upon consumption recorded prior or subsequent
to the period of non-registration, and any other pertinent information
supplied by the Customer or known to the Utility.
(3) In the event that the Utility cannot readily and safely gain access to the
meter for the purpose of obtaining the meter reading, the Utility shall
make its best estimate of the consumption which might be registered by
the meter since the last reading date. The estimate shall be as valid as if
the meter reading had actually been determined, and the Customer shall be
billed according to the estimate for the period of non-registration.
However, there shall be no more than two (2) consecutive estimated bills.
After the second estimated bill has been prepared, the Customer shall be
required to provide safe and ready access to the meter in accordance with
this Ordinance.
b. Payment.
(1) The Customer shall make payment for all water registered by the water
meter regardless of leaks or the manner in which the water was used.
(2) Bills shall be due and payable upon presentation to the Customer.
Payment shall be made at the Tax Collector’s Office or at such other
offices as the Utility may designate to accept payment.
(3) Any payment received by the Utility later than thirty (30) days after the
due date shall be subject to a late payment charge in accordance with the
Fee Schedule.
(4) The Customer shall be responsible for all obligations including payment
for service regardless of any lease, contract, agreement, or otherwise
between Customer and another person or tenant purporting to assign or
transfer the obligation to pay. The City’s acceptance of any third party
payment shall not constitute a waiver of Customer’s responsibility for
payment.
c. Non-Payment.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 14 Chapter 16
(1) Service may be discontinued in accordance with this Ordinance for nonpayment
of any bill.
(2) Failure to receive a bill shall not discharge the Customer of the obligation
of payment or the consequence of non-payment.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 15 Chapter 16
(3) When a Customer cannot pay a bill in full, the Utility shall continue to
serve the Customer if the Customer pays a reasonable portion of the bill as
determined by the Utility and the Customer agrees to pay the balance of
the outstanding bill in reasonable installments. All payment agreements
shall be confirmed in writing and copies will be kept by the Utility and the
Customer.
(4) Whenever a check or draft presented for payment of service is not
accepted by the institution on which it is written, a charge shall be
imposed by the Utility as specified in the applicable rate schedule.
(5) All water charges shall become a lien upon real estate as provided by state
law.
(6) Interest and late fees for non-payment shall be assessed as set forth in the
rate schedule.
d. Deposits. The Utility may require a satisfactory cash deposit under the following
circumstances: (1) before rendering service to any new Customer; (2) before
rendering continued service when the Customer has demonstrated a lack of
responsibility in making service payments or committed other acts harmful to the
Utility or (3) when the Customer has requested that the Utility provide a special
service. The deposit, less any amount due the Utility, shall be refunded either
upon termination of service or when the Utility determines, in its sole discretion,
that satisfactory credit relations have been established.
e. Change of Address or Ownership. The Customer shall provide the Utility with
prior notice of any change in ownership or change in billing address of a metered
Customer Unit. Upon such notice, the Utility shall determine a meter reading and
render the Customer a bill for service up to the date of transfer.
f. Service Discontinuation and Restoration. When the Utility is requested by the
Customer to connect or disconnect service for any reason, the Customer shall pay
a fixed charge as specified in the applicable rate schedule for such service if
performed during the Utility’s Regular Working Hours or, if performed outside
the Utility’s Regular Working Hours, the Customer shall pay all costs incurred by
the Utility in providing such service.
g. Request by Customer for Discontinuation of Service. The Customer shall provide
the Utility with reasonable notice of Customer’s intention to have service
discontinued and shall be responsible for all charges associated with service until
expiration of such service.
g. Seasonal Use: When, due to seasonal use, the Customer requires the Utility to
remove and set the meter, the Customer shall be billed for such service and for the
resetting and reinstallation of the meter as specified in the Rate and Fee Schedule.
The Customer shall be billed for water used in accordance with the Rate and Fee
Schedule.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 16 Chapter 16
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 17 Chapter 16
SECTION 16.113: LAWN SPRINKLER SERVICE
a. Requirements and Specifications.
(1) Service. A lawn sprinkler system shall be served through the Customer’s
domestic service. If the existing pipe capacity is insufficient, a new
Service Pipe shall be installed upon reapplication by the Customer.
(2) Water Use. Sprinkler heads shall be limited to a maximum water use of
forty (40) gallons per minute per zone.
(3) Timing. Sprinkler Zones shall be controlled by an automatic time clock or
similar device which shall limit the operation of the sprinkler system from
10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
(4) Backflow Prevention. The sprinkler system shall be equipped with a
Backflow Prevention Device which meets the requirements of this
Ordinance. If the Utility discovers an existing sprinkler system which is
not equipped with a Backflow prevention device, the Utility may require
the Customer to provide and install the device.
(5) Metering. Except as provided under the sewer ordinance for single
family residences, separate meters for irrigation are not available unless in
existence at the effective date of this Ordinance.
(6) Installation and Maintenance. Installation and maintenance shall be in
accord with Utility Specifications.
b. Fees and Expenses.
(1) The purchase, installation and maintenance of the Backflow prevention
device shall be at the Customer’s expense.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 18 Chapter 16
SECTION 16.114: AIR CONDITIONING
In order to encourage the conservation of water, all water-cooled air conditioning and
refrigeration equipment with a total installed cooling capacity in excess of three (3) tons shall
include a water conserving device that limits the actual water used for cooling to 10% of the
usual amount required for service to the Premises without use of the equipment.
SECTION 16.115: HYDRANTS
a. Prohibited Use. Public or private hydrants shall not be used for any purpose other
than to extinguish fires or for such other purposes as may be authorized by the
Utility. In no case shall hydrants or any adaptor installed on a hydrant be
operated by any person other than the Utility or its duly authorized agent.
b. Permitted Use. Where use of water from a hydrant is requested for purposes other
than to extinguish fires, and written permission is granted by the Utility, an
adapter shall be installed on the hydrant by the Utility. All hydrants, whether
public or private, connected to the Utility system shall be of a type approved by
the Utility.
c. Fees and Expenses.
(1) The hydrant user shall be required to make a cash deposit as specified by
the Rate and Fee Schedules. Deposits made for adapters shall not be
credited with any interest.
(2) If there is no damage to the hydrant or the adapter, the charge for water
will be deducted from the deposit and the balance, if any, returned. If the
Utility discovers any damage to the hydrant or adapter, the Utility shall
make the necessary repairs at the expense of the hydrant user.
(3) The hydrant user shall be charged for either the volume of water used, or
on a per diem basis as determined by the Utility, and for setting and
removal of the adapter.
SECTION 16.116: PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION
a. Application. The Customer shall submit to the Utility a written application for
private fire service. The application shall be accompanied by site and plumbing
plans of the proposed fire system and a written statement indicating the size and
all specific design features.
b. Pipe Installation. The fire Service Pipe located within the public right-of-way or
Utility easement shall be installed and maintained by and shall be the property of
the Utility. The Customer may, subject to prior approval and on-site inspection
by the Utility, install the Utility’s portion of the fire Service Pipe. From the limits
of the public right-of-way or Utility easement to the Premises served, the fire
Service Pipe shall be owned and maintained by the Customer.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 19 Chapter 16
c. Maintenance. Customer shall be responsible for all maintenance and testing by a
qualified person (to be conducted at least annually) of private fire protection
systems and shall keep all records of such maintenance and testing for a minimum
of three (3) years. Customer shall produce such records of maintenance and
testing upon request of the Utility. The Utility shall be given at least 3 business
days prior notice of the test date and time and reserves the right to view the test.
d. Contamination. Where a standpipe, reservoir, pump house or tank is proposed in
connection with private fire service, the Customer shall submit complete fire
system plans to the Utility for prior approval. The connection shall be protected
by a Backflow prevention device as required by this Ordinance.
e. Access and Utility Inspection. In the construction or installation of such
appurtenances as standpipes, reservoirs, pump houses, or tanks, the Customer
shall provide a means of easy access to the interior of the appurtenance to permit
inspection by the Utility or cleaning by the Customer as required by the Utility.
During such construction or installation, the Customer shall connect to the
appurtenance a separate pipe to periodically draw off water for sampling and
inspection. Such draw off pipe shall not be directly connected with a sewer,
drain, or outlet in any way which is not permitted by this Ordinance, or may
permit contamination of the public water supply.
f. Fees and Expenses.
(1) The Customer shall pay a charge for private fire service as specified in the
Rate and Fee Schedule.
(2) The Customer shall maintain in good repair all fire service appurtenances
located on the Premises at Customer’s expense.
(3) Installation by the Utility of its portion of the fire Service Pipe shall be at
the Customer’s expense. If the Customer elects to install the Utility’s
portion of the fire Service Pipe, on-site inspection by the Utility shall be at
the Customer’s expense.
(4) Any costs associated with the Utility’s presence during private fire service
testing by the Customer or insurance inspector may be charged to the
Customer or to the insurance inspector.
SECTION 16.117: MAIN PIPE EXTENSIONS
a. Main Pipe Installation.
(1) All petitions for Main Pipe extensions shall be submitted to, and be
subject to the approval of, the Utility.
(2) Each petition shall be accompanied by an application fee for the Main
Pipe extension as specified in the Rate and Fee Schedules.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 20 Chapter 16
(3) Main Pipe extensions shall be owned and maintained by the Utility and
shall be installed by the Utility or its authorized agent.
(4) Installation and construction of Main Pipe extensions shall continue at the
discretion of the Utility as frost and weather conditions permit.
(5) Prior to installation, sub-divisions shall be approved by the local planning
authority, and the right-of-way in which the Main Pipe is to be installed
shall be laid out, and lines and grades established.
(6) The size of the Main Pipe to be installed shall be determined by the
Utility.
(7) Main Pipe extensions shall typically be installed along the frontage of the
Petitioner’s Premises or, in the case of corner lots, along the frontage
abutting the public right-of-way in which the Service Pipe is to be
installed.
(8) Final Approval of the City of Portsmouth Planning Board of a site review
application for a Main Pipe extension shall constitute approval from the
Utility for such extension.
b. Petitioners.
(1) Prior to installation, Petitioner (or Petitioners as applicable) shall sign a
petition which shall be presented to the Utility for approval. If the Utility
approves the petition, each Petitioner shall enter a contract for the Main
Pipe extension that shall be binding on the Petitioner’s heirs, assigns,
successors, executors, and administrators. The contract shall create a lien
upon each Petitioner’s Premises as provided by state law.
(2) Each Petitioner shall be charged its proportionate share of the entire cost
of installing a Main Pipe and each Petitioner shall deposit with the Utility
the estimated amount of Petitioner’s proportionate share of the extension
cost prior to the installation. Final billing will be based on actual
installation cost.
(3) A Petitioner’s proportionate share shall be calculated by dividing the final
bill by the total number of properties (whether developed or undeveloped)
having frontage along the right of way in which the Main Pipe extension is
to be installed.
c. Charges to Non-participating Abutters. An Abutter who does not participate in a
petition for the Main Pipe extension to which the Abutter is connecting shall be
required to pay to the Utility, prior to connecting to an installed Main Pipe and in
addition to other applicable charges, an amount equal to that Abutter’s
proportionate share of the original extension costs, adjusted annually by the
Engineering News Record (ENR) Construction Cost Index.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 21 Chapter 16
d. Connection to Main Pipes. No connection shall be made to any Main Pipe or to
any private main without prior written authorization by the Utility after
application by the Customer. Connection to privately owned mains, if authorized
by the Utility, shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications
prepared by the Customer and approved by the Utility. After completion of such
projects, the Utility may require the Customer to prepare a set of as built plans
showing the location, size and depth of all water facilities.
e. Reservation of Ownership by Utility. Where the Utility elects to maintain
ownership of a Main Pipe located on private property, the Customer shall grant
the Utility an easement sufficient to provide access by the Utility to the Main Pipe
and Utility-owned appurtenances.
f. Refusal to Install a Main. The Utility reserves the right to refuse or disallow the
installation of a Main Pipe extension where it determines that service demand
does not warrant the cost of installation, where there are environmental or other
impacts unacceptable to the Utility, or where the extension will tend in any way to
constitute discrimination against other Utility Customers.
SECTION 16.118: RATES, FEES AND CHARGES
All rates, fees and charges including the Capacity Improvements Multiplier shall be established
by the City Council in accord with its customary policies and practices.
SECTION 16.119: SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Ordinance is held to be invalid, illegal, or unenforceable, the remaining
provisions shall remain in force and effect.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 22 Chapter 16
ARTICLE II: REGULATION OF DISCHARGES INTO STORM WATER
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
SECTION 16.201: – PURPOSES
This Regulation of Discharges into the Storm Drainage System (the "Ordinance") is intended to:
provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Portsmouth;
provide additional protection to local natural resources; and facilitate municipal compliance with
federal and state environmental laws and regulations
SECTION 16.202: – DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
A. Discharge: "Discharge" includes any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emptying, dumping, disposing or conveying.
B. Enforcement Authority: "Enforcement Authority" means the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designee, who shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Person: "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, trust, partnership,
municipality, State agency, Federal agency or other legal entity.
D. Pollutant: "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil
and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution;
floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
E. Premises: "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, parking areas or
portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks
and parking strips, located within the City from which Discharges into the Storm
Drainage System are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained.
F. Storm Drainage System: "Storm Drainage System" means the publicly owned
facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not
limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs,
inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures. The privately owned and maintained service pipe extending
from the Premises to the municipally maintained main pipe, culvert, manhole or
other device in the public right of way shall not be considered part of the Storm
Drainage System.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 23 Chapter 16
G. Storm Water: "Storm Water" means any natural precipitation including rain
storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage;
"Stormwater" has the same meaning as "Storm Water."
SECTION 16.203: – APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to all Discharges into the Storm Drainage System.
SECTION 16.204: – ALLOWED DISCHARGES
The following Discharges are allowed:
A. Storm Water as defined.
B. Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters;
uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20));
uncontaminated pumped ground water; flows from uncontaminated springs; lawn
watering runoff; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
C. Uncontaminated flows from foundation drains; air conditioning and compressor
condensate; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; uncontaminated
flows from footing drains;
D. Residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous materials
have not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and detergents are
not used);
E. Hydrant flushing and fire fighting activity runoff; water line flushing and
discharges from potable water sources;
F. Discharges specified in writing by the Enforcement Authority as being necessary
to protect public health and safety;
G. Dye testing, with written notification to the Enforcement Authority prior to the
time of the test;
H. Individual residential car washing; or
I. A discharge permitted pursuant to:
1. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm
Water Discharge Permit issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency or by the Department of Environmental Services including a
NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section
122.26(b)(14); or
2. A waste discharge license or order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency ("EPA") or the Department of Environmental Services.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 24 Chapter 16
SECTION 16.205: – PROHIBITTED DISCHARGES
A. All Discharges not allowed under Section 16.204 are prohibited. This includes
without limitation all Pollutants defined in Section 16.202. Discharges may be
prohibited notwithstanding that the City may have approved the connections,
drains or conveyances by which a Person Discharges into the Storm Drainage
System. Persons therefore have a responsibility for ensuring compliance with this
Ordinance regardless of prior City approvals.
B. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit or prohibited
connections to the storm drain. This prohibition expressly includes, without
limitation, connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
SECTION 16.206: - PRIVATE DRAIN STRUCTURES
The Enforcement Authority recognizes that there exist private drainage structures on both public
and private property. The owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures
within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
SECTION 16.207: – ACCESS BY PERMIT ONLY
A. No Person shall connect to the Storm Drainage System unless the City has issued
a permit for such connection.
B. Any Person wishing to connect to the Storm Drainage System (the Applicant)
shall make application on a form furnished by the City. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, engineering studies or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Enforcement Authority.
Such supplemental information will be supplied at Applicant’s cost.
C. The Applicant shall pay such application fee, annual permit fee and inspection
fees, as determined in accord with Chapter 1, Article XVI of the City of
Portsmouth Ordinances.
D. The Enforcement Authority shall review the service data to determine whether it
has sufficient capacity to provide storm water drainage service to the Applicant.
(1) If the Enforcement Authority determines that it does not or will not have
sufficient capacity to serve it shall not be obligated to provide the service.
The Enforcement Authority may, at its option and discretion, enter into
such agreements with Applicant to make readiness to serve improvements
at Applicant’s expense.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 25 Chapter 16
(2) If the Enforcement Authority determines that it has sufficient capacity to
provide adequate service, the Enforcement Authority will approve the
service and assess a permit fee.
(3) Service shall not be provided until all required deposits or payments have
been made by the Applicant.
E. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection to the Storm
Drainage System shall be borne by the Applicant. The Applicant shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the connection to the Storm Drainage System.
F. The method of connection the Storm Drainage System shall be acceptable to the
Enforcement Authority and shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code, Public Works Department specifications or to other applicable
rules and regulations.
G. The Applicant shall notify the Enforcement Authority when the connection to the
Storm Drainage System is ready for inspection and connection to the Storm
Drainage System. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Enforcement Authority or his/her designee. No back-filling shall occur prior to
inspection.
H. All excavations for connections to the Storm Drainage System shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights and so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City. Prior to any
excavating on any public property, an excavation permit must be obtained from
the Department of Public Works. This provision does not relieve any Person from
any applicable state or federal laws or regulations relating to excavation.
I. Connection to the Storm Drainage System is at the Person’s own risk.
J. Any Person connected to the Storm Drainage System shall be responsible for the
ownership and maintenance of the service pipe extending from the Premises to the
Storm Drainage System and all equipment and devices as approved by the Permit.
SECTION 16.208: - SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
A. When it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened prohibited Discharge, the
Enforcement Authority may issue an order to any Person to suspend Discharge to
the Storm Drainage System. If the Person fails to comply with an order, the
Enforcement Authority may take such steps within the public way or on public
property as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the Discharge. This may
include physically suspending access to the Storm Drainage System. Such
suspension may include, but is not limited to, blocking pipes, constructing dams
or taking other measures to physically block the Discharge to prevent or minimize
a non-permitted Discharge to the Storm Drainage System.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 26 Chapter 16
B. The Enforcement Authority may physically suspend Discharge access to the
Storm Drainage System without prior notice to the Person Discharging when:
1. it is not practical or reasonable to give such notice; and
2. it is necessary to stop an actual or threatened non-permitted discharge that
presents or may present an imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the Storm
Drainage System or the discharge may cause the City to violate the terms
of its environmental permits.
C. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent and which may be connected to the Storm Drainage System shall be
located by the owner or occupant of the property upon receipt of written notice of
violation from the Enforcement Authority requiring such locating to be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determine, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm drain, sanitary sewer system or other sewer
system or other discharge point to be identified. Results of the investigations are
to be documented and provided to the Enforcement Authority.
SECTION 16.209: - MONITORING OF DISCHARGES
In order to ensure compliance with this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon
and inspect any Premises subject to this Ordinance with the consent of the Premises' owner,
occupant, tenant, agent, or legal representative. The Enforcement Authority shall have the power
to inspect the Premises and connections thereon to the Storm Drainage System and to conduct
monitoring, sampling and testing of the Discharge to the Storm Drainage System as often as may
be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. The Enforcement Authority shall
have the authority to require that discharges into the Storm Drainage System be monitored at
owner’s cost. Failure of any Person to consent to a request for inspection may result in
suspension of access to the Storm Drainage System and enforcement action under this ordinance.
SECTION 16.210: - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
No Person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper
with any pipe, drain, equipment or other part of the Storm Drainage System.
SECTION 16.211: – ENFORCEMENT AND FINES
A. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person
has violated this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may order compliance
with this Ordinance by written notice of violation to that Person indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including,
without limitation:
1. Disconnection of the Premises from the Storm Drainage System;
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 27 Chapter 16
2. The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
Ordinance;
3. At the Person's expense, the abatement of non-allowed Discharges and the
restoration of any affected property; and/or
4. The payment of fines, of the City’s remediation costs, and of the City’s
reasonable administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the
notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement or restoration must
be completed.
B. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief.
1. Any Person who knowingly violates the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $1,000. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offence.
2. Any Person who violates this Ordinance shall be responsible for any and
all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to
attorneys' fees and costs, incurred by the City for violation of federal and
state environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that
Person's violation of this Ordinance. This responsibility shall be in
addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relieve imposed under this
Section.
3. Any Person who violates this Ordinance may be subject to orders for
injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the City’s attorney's fees and
costs related thereto if injunctive relief is ordered by the Court.
C. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may enter into a written consent
agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violation(s) of this
Ordinance, for the purposes of eliminating violations of this Ordinance, and of
recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
D. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger. The standards set forth herein are
minimum standards; therefore this Ordinance does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any Person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor authorized discharge of Pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by
such Person. This ordinance shall not create liability on the party of the City, or
any officer agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any
Person's reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
E. Restoration/Remediation/Losses. The Enforcement Authority shall also have the
right to levy an assessment of costs related to the restoration or impacted property,
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 28 Chapter 16
the remediation of non-permitted discharges and such other quantifiable losses
and damages caused by any non-permitted Discharge.
F. Nothing in this ordinance precludes the City’s Zoning Enforcement Officer from
exercising concurrent enforcement powers arising from the City’s planning,
subdivision, site review and zoning regulations as they may relate to Storm Water.
SECTION 16.212: - SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph
of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall
be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses, sentences, or
paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.
City of Portsmouth, NH Ordinances Page 29 Chapter 16