Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Construction and Penalties
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 30 of the 1995 Code]
§ 1-1. General penalty.
Any person or persons, company or corporation who or which shall violate
or cause to be violated, by agent or otherwise, any provision of this the
Code of the City of Rochester, or any order, rule or regulation made under
authority granted by the Code, shall, upon conviction thereof, before the
District Court or other court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more
than $1,000, except in cases where a different punishment is provided for
by the laws of the state or this the Code of the City of Rochester.
§ 1-2. Definitions and word usage. [Added 3-5-2019]
A. Definitions. Unless the context requires other interpretations or
otherwise noted, the following terms are defined:
CITY — The City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of Rochester, New Hampshire.
CODE — The Code of General Ordinances of the City of Rochester, New
Hampshire.
COUNTY — Strafford County.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association
or corporation in his/her or its own capacity as administrator,
conservator, executor, trustee, receiver or other representative
appointed by a court.
PUBLIC WAY — Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public
thoroughfare.
STATE — The State of New Hampshire.
B. Word usage.
(1) Whenever any words in this Code denote the plural, the singular
shall be deemed included, and whenever the singular number shall
be used, it shall be deemed to include the plural.
(2) All gender references have been removed. Only gender-neutral
references shall be used throughout the Code.
(3) Words in the present tense shall be deemed to include the future.
(4) The word "shall" as used in this Code is mandatory.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-5-2019]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the City of Rochester of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the City Council of the City of Rochester, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code, and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 275, inclusive, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the City of Rochester," hereinafter referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the City Code adopted June 6,
1995, and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken
on this ordinance, and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall
be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Rochester by impressing thereon
the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of the Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Rochester" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted
in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Rochester, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, notice of the adoption of this
ordinance. A copy of the Code of the City of Rochester shall be maintained
in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during
regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this ordinance,
coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the
public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Rochester to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine as
provided in § 1-1 of the Code.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the City of Rochester which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect.
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 4, 2018.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-18. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made part of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the City of Rochester, to be titled "General Provisions, Article II,
Adoption of Code."
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending a zoning map or otherwise
rezoning property.
O. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the City.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
sewer or water rates or charges.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the City of Rochester, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the
intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)
§ 1-15 ROCHESTER CODE § 1-18
1:8
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9

ARTICLE I
Legal Basis and Departmental Organization
§ 7-1. Legal basis.
This Administrative Code is established in accordance with the provisions
of Section 26 of the Rochester City Charter, adopted September 12, 1989.
§ 7-2. Administrative departments. [Amended 10-15-2013;
3-5-2019]
The administrative service of the City shall consist of the following
departments, and the department heads shall be known by the titles shown:
Department Department Head
Assessing City Assessor
Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services
Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services
Economic Development Economic Development Director
Finance Finance Director
Fire Fire Chief
Health City Health Officer
Information Technology Chief Information Officer
Legal City Solicitor
Library Library Director
Planning and Development Director of Planning and Development
Police Chief of Police
Public Works Commissioner of Public Works
Purchasing City Purchasing Agent
Records City Clerk
Recreation and Arena Director of Recreation and Arena
Tax Collection Tax Collector
Welfare Welfare Director
§ 7-3. Powers and duties of department heads.
A. Each department head shall be responsible for the efficient operation of
his/her department. He/she shall perform all the duties and exercise all
the powers conferred upon his/her office by applicable laws and
ordinances.
B. Department heads may, with the approval of the City Manager,
establish such department divisions and subunits as may be deemed
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:11
§ 7-4. Appointment and compensation of department heads.
§ 7-5. Department staffs.
desirable in the interest of economy and efficiency, and in accordance
with sound administrative principles and practices.
C. Department heads may prescribe departmental regulations subject to
the approval of the City Manager not inconsistent with law, the City
Charter, and rules and regulations of the City Council, for the
administration of their various departments, conduct of their
employees, and the proper performance of the department's business.
D. Pursuant to the authority established by the City Charter, Sections 14,
15 and 18, a decision of any department head shall be subject to review
and final decision by the City Manager.
A. All department heads shall be appointed in the manner and for such
terms as shall be provided by the Rochester City Charter or the
applicable statute or ordinance.
B. The compensation of all department heads, unless otherwise provided,
shall be as established in the annual budget appropriation for their
respective departments.
A. Department heads may establish subordinate positions and make
appointments and removals as may be necessary, within the limitations
of the appropriations provided and subject to Section 15 of the City
Charter.
B. All employees shall be under the immediate supervision of their
respective department or division heads.
§ 7-3 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-5
1:12
ARTICLE II
Municipal Departments
§ 7-6. Administrative head of City.
§ 7-7. (Reserved)1
§ 7-8. Assessing Department.
A. The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City, and shall
perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities prescribed by the
City Charter. The City Manager shall be appointed in accordance with
the provisions of Section 11 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The City Manager shall supervise the heads of all departments
established by this code, and shall have the power to suspend and
discipline, and to perform or delegate the duties and responsibilities of
such department heads.
C. The City Manager may prescribe such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the City Charter and City ordinances as he/she may
deem necessary for the conduct of the various departments, and he/she
may investigate and inquire into the affairs of any department at any
time.
A. The Assessing Department shall consist of one Assessor, to be known as
the City Assessor, and three Deputy Assessors, who all together shall be
known as the Board of Assessors, and such personnel as may be
provided for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The City
Assessor shall be appointed in the manner and for such term provided
in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter. The Deputy
Assessors shall be appointed in accordance with provisions of Section
20 of the Rochester City Charter. The Assessing Department shall be
under the immediate supervision of the City Assessor. [Amended
5-1-2007; 3-5-2019]
B. The City Assessor, with the assistance of City personnel, shall perform
the following functions: [Amended 5-1-2007]
(1) Carry out the duties relative to taking the inventory and appraisal
of property for taxation.
(2) Prepare all assessments and tax rolls and tax notices as required by
law.
(3) Check all property transfers and maintain all property records
pertaining to the assessing function.
(4) Perform other related functions as required.
1. Editor's Note: Original § 2.18, Arena Department, was repealed 3-5-2019. See now § 7-21,
Recreation and Arena Department.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:13
§ 7-9. Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services.
[Amended 10-15-2013]
§ 7-10. Economic Development Department.
C. The Board of Assessors shall perform the following functions:
(1) Review and sign all tax warrants to be committed to the Tax
Collector.
(2) Act as a Board of Tax Review on all appeals from assessments and
sign all appeal forms, after their action.
A. The Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall be
under the immediate supervision of the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services and shall consist of such personnel as may be
provided for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall be appointed
in the manner and for such term provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the
Rochester City Charter.
B. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall perform
the following functions:
(1) Supervise the issuance of building, plumbing and housing permits.
(2) Inspect existing housing, new construction, remodeling, and land
use for conformity with the Building, Plumbing and Zoning Codes.
(3) Prepare and maintain all necessary records.
(4) Issue all permits for the erection of signs.
(5) Inspect existing housing, new construction and remodeling for
conformity with the Housing Code.
(6) Perform all other functions that may be required by law or
ordinance.
A. The Economic Development Department shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Economic Development Director and shall consist of
such personnel as may be provided for in the annual departmental
budget appropriation. The Economic Development Director shall be
appointed in such manner and for such term provided in Sections 15
and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Economic Development Department shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Promote the City of Rochester, through advertising, prospect
development, and other means, as an attractive location for
industrial and commercial location and expansion.
§ 7-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-10
1:14
§ 7-11. Finance Department.
(2) Assist prospects interested in evaluating Rochester as a potential
industrial or commercial location.
(3) Undertake appropriate actions to encourage the continued
availability of marketable industrial and commercial sites within
the City.
(4) Utilize available industrial and commercial development financing
programs to provide a source of financing for local plant
construction and/or expansion.
(5) Act as the City's liaison with businesses and industries located in
the greater Rochester area, to ensure maintenance of good
relations, encourage the City's responsiveness to industry needs,
and to foster expansion of the City's established industrial and
commercial base.
(6) Formulate economic development policy for the City of Rochester,
in conjunction with the Rochester Economic Development
Commission, and implement the same.
(7) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Finance Department, under the general supervision of the Finance
Director, shall consist of the Divisions of Fiscal Control and Treasury.
Each division shall consist of a division head and such other personnel
as may be provided for in the annual departmental budget
appropriation. The Finance Director shall be appointed in the manner
and for such term provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City
Charter. [Amended 5-1-2007; 3-5-2019]
B. The Division of Fiscal Control shall be under the immediate supervision
of the Finance Director. It shall perform the following functions:
[Amended 3-5-2019]
(1) Maintain an encumbrance system of budget operation.
(2) Pre-audit all claims and demands against the City prior to payment.
(3) Maintain and supervise control of all payments from public funds
by individual warrants for each payment to the official having
custody thereof.
(4) Post-audit all receipts by all departments.
(5) Post-audit all disbursements by the City Treasurer.
(6) Maintain the general financial accounts of the City.
(7) Prepare financial reports as required by the City Manager.
(8) Supervise all accounting operations of the City.
§ 7-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:15
§ 7-12. Fire Department.
§ 7-13. Health Department.
(9) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. The Treasury Division, under the immediate supervision of the City
Treasurer, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Maintain custody of all City funds, investments, and securities,
except trust funds, including the deposit, withdrawal and recording
thereof.
(2) Maintain jointly with other trustees of trust funds custody of all
trust fund assets.
(3) Negotiate, upon the authorization of the City Manager and City
Council, all loans to the City.
(4) Sign all checks, notes and bonds of the City.
(5) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Fire Department, under the supervision of the Fire Chief, shall
consist of such permanent officers and firefighters and such other
personnel as may be provided for in the annual departmental budget
appropriation. In addition, there shall be a call force of not fewer than
25 officers and firefighters provided for in the annual departmental
budget appropriation. The Fire Chief shall be appointed in the manner
and for such term provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City
Charter. [Amended 8-1-1995; 6-3-2008]
B. The Fire Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Extinguish fires, and protect life and property against fire.
(2) Enforce all laws regarding the inspection for and removal of fire
hazards, and the prevention of fires.
(3) Care for and maintain all property and equipment assigned to the
Fire Department.
(4) Care for and maintain the signal alarm system.
(5) Prepare and maintain all Fire Department records as required.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Health Department shall be under the immediate supervision of the
City Health Officer and shall consist of such personnel as may be
provided for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The City
Health Officer shall be appointed in the manner and for such term
provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
§ 7-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-13
1:16
§ 7-14. Legal Department.
§ 7-15. Library Department.
B. The City Health Officer shall perform the following functions:
(1) Procure, study and analyze data concerning public health and take
whatever action is necessary to protect and maintain the public
health.
(2) Investigate all sanitary hazards and enforce sanitary laws.
(3) Investigate and render assistance in reference to private water
supply and septic tanks.
(4) Prepare and maintain all necessary records.
(5) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Legal Department under the supervision of the City Solicitor shall
consist of such personnel as may be provided for in the annual
departmental budget appropriation. The City Solicitor shall be
appointed in the manner and for such term provided in Sections 15 and
18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The City Solicitor shall perform the following functions:
(1) Represent the City in all matters in which the City has an interest
coming before any court or tribunal, except in such cases as other
arrangements may be specifically made by the City Manager.
(2) Advise the City Manager, department heads and City Council in all
cases when legal opinion is required or requested, if authorized by
the City Manager.
(3) Draft all deeds, leases, contracts and other legal instruments as
required.
(4) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. The City Solicitor shall be an attorney of the courts of New Hampshire.
A. The Library Department, under the supervision of the Library Director,
shall consist of such personnel as may be provided for in the annual
departmental budget appropriation. The Library Director shall be
appointed in the manner provided in Section 22 of the Rochester City
Charter.
B. The Library Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Select and procure books, magazines, periodicals and other printed
material for use by Rochester residents.
(2) Catalog and classify all such printed material.
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15
1:17
§ 7-16. Planning and Development Department.
§ 7-17. Police Department.
(3) Circulate printed material for home use.
(4) Provide a reference service for answering requests for specific
information.
(5) Distribute printed materials by the establishment and maintenance
of branch libraries.
(6) Promote the availability of the library material to stimulate a wider
general interest in its use.
(7) Promote special reading services for children and young people to
aid in the development of desirable reading habits.
(8) Maintain and care for all property assigned to the Library.
(9) Prepare and maintain all records pertaining to the Library
Department.
A. The Planning and Development Department shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Planning and Development and shall
consist of such personnel as may be provided for in the annual
departmental budget appropriation. The Director of Planning and
Development shall be appointed in such manner and for such term
provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Planning and Development Department shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Investigate, study and report on matters relating to zoning,
including the preparation, revision, and modifications of
ordinances and maps.
(2) Investigate, study and report on all phases of highway layout,
widening, abandonment and use, and traffic and parking problems.
(3) Investigate, study and report on phases of subdivision control.
(4) Investigate, study and report on all matters relating to construction
and use of municipal structures, buildings, land (including tax title
land), parks, playgrounds, and other municipal property.
(5) Community development activities.
A. The Police Department, subject to the provisions of Sections 23 through
25 of the Rochester City Charter, shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Chief of Police and shall consist of such personnel as
provided for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The
Chief of the Police shall be appointed by the Police Commissioners as
provided in Section 24 of the Rochester City Charter.
§ 7-15 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-17
1:18
§ 7-18. Public Works Department.
B. The Police Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Enforce the laws and ordinances.
(2) Prevent crime and maintain peace and order.
(3) Protect lives and property from malicious damage and injury.
(4) Maintain and care for all property of the Police Department.
(5) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Police
Department.
(6) Perform all related functions as required.
A. The Public Works Department shall be under the supervision of the
Commissioner of Public Works and shall consist of the Division of Public
Works, Division of Water Supply Works and Division of Sewage and
Waste Treatment Works. Each division shall consist of such personnel
as may be provided for in the annual departmental budget
appropriation. The Commissioner of Public Works shall be appointed in
the manner and for such term provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the
Rochester City Charter.
B. The Division of Public Works shall perform the following functions:
(1) Design, lay out and map all municipal works projects as required.
(2) Construct, maintain and repair all roads, bridges and sidewalks,
except where specific projects may be let to contractors.
(3) Remove snow and distribute salt and sand on all highways, streets,
bridges and sidewalks, and other public ways.
(4) Plant, maintain and remove trees and brush on affected City
property.
(5) Collect, remove and dispose of all refuse as required.
(6) Repair and maintain all the motorized and other public works
equipment.
(7) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. The Division of Water Supply Works shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Develop, maintain, and operate the water supply system of the City,
including watershed areas, reservoirs, pumping stations,
standpipes, mains, hydrants and services.
(2) Prepare and distribute bills and charges to users of the water
system.
§ 7-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:19
§ 7-19. Purchasing Department.
§ 7-20. Records Department.
(3) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Water
Supply Works.
(4) Care for and maintain all property assigned to the Water Supply
Works.
(5) Perform all other related functions as may be required.
D. The Division of Sewage and Waste Treatment Works shall perform the
following functions:
(1) Develop, maintain, and operate the sewage and waste treatment
system of the City, including lagoons, treatment plants, pumping
stations, pipes, and services.
(2) Prepare and distribute bills and charges to users of the sewage and
waste treatment system.
(3) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the
Sewage and Waste Treatment Works.
(4) Care and maintenance of all property assigned to the Sewage and
Waste Treatment Works. [Amended 3-5-2019]
(5) Perform all other related functions as may be required.
A. The Purchasing Department shall be under the supervision of the City
Purchasing Agent and shall consist of such personnel as may be
provided for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The City
Purchasing Agent shall be appointed in the manner and for such term
provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Purchasing Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Receive and coordinate all requests and solicit, receive and
tabulate all bids and contracts for the purchase of materials,
supplies, equipment and services.
(2) Prepare and maintain all necessary purchasing records.
(3) Institute and ensure that all departments are practicing
conservation measures for all commodities.
(4) Administer the disposition of all surplus municipal property.
(5) Perform all other related functions.
A. The Records Department shall be under the supervision of the City
Clerk and shall consist of such other personnel as may be provided for
in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The City Clerk shall
§ 7-18 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-20
1:20
§ 7-21. Recreation and Arena Department. [Amended 3-5-2019]
be appointed in the manner and for such term provided in Sections 15
and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Records Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Prepare, maintain, publish and index all proceedings of the City
Council including City ordinances.
(2) Arrange for all elections and maintain all election records.
(3) Obtain and maintain all statistics on births, marriages and deaths
as required by law.
(4) File and preserve, as required, all contracts, bonds, oaths of office
and other documents.
(5) Collect all licenses and fees required by statute and ordinance
unless otherwise provided, and deposit these collections with the
City Treasurer.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Recreation and Arena Department shall be under the supervision of
the Director of Recreation and Arena and shall consist of such other
personnel as may be provided for in the annual departmental budget
appropriation. The Director of Recreation and Arena shall be appointed
in the manner and for such term provided in Sections 15 and 18 of the
Rochester City Charter.
B. The Recreation and Arena Department shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Develop a general recreation program for the City.
(2) Operate the recreational activities on all City parks, playground,
swimming pools, tennis courts, and all other recreational facilities.
(3) Maintain, care for and operate all property assigned to the
Recreation and Arena Department, including the Rochester Ice
Arena.
(4) Prepare and maintain all records and books pertaining to the
Recreation and Arena Department.
(5) Cooperate with private groups as well as with public officials in the
development, promotional and recreational activities within the
City.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21
1:21
§ 7-22. Tax Collection Department.
§ 7-23. Welfare Department.
(7) Annually establish a fee schedule for the services provided by the
Recreation and Arena Department, said fee schedule to be subject
to approval by the City Council.
C. All moneys received by the Recreation and Arena Department shall be
held by the City of Rochester in a fund specifically established for the
Recreation and Arena Department, and if at the end of any fiscal year
the moneys received by the Recreation and Arena Department shall
exceed the moneys expended for the benefit, maintenance and
operation of the Recreation and Arena Department, then said moneys
shall not revert to the general fund for the City of Rochester but shall be
held in a separate fund exclusively for the future use and benefit of the
Recreation and Arena Department.
A. The Tax Collection Department shall be under the supervision of the Tax
Collector and shall consist of such other personnel as may be provided
for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The Tax Collector
shall be appointed in the manner and for such term provided in Sections
15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Tax Collection Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Mail out tax notices.
(2) Collect all accounts due the City, including taxes, rentals, licenses,
and fees, except where otherwise provided in this Administrative
Code.
(3) Maintain proper records pertaining to the collection function.
(4) Register motor vehicles and collect the fees therefor.
(5) Turn over all receipts to the City Treasurer.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Welfare Department shall be under the supervision of the Welfare
Director and shall consist of such other personnel as may be provided
for in the annual departmental budget appropriation. The Welfare
Director shall be appointed in the manner and for such term provided in
Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Welfare Department shall perform the following functions:
(1) Investigate all requests for relief.
(2) Authorize such relief as may be deemed necessary.
(3) Prepare and maintain all necessary relief records.
§ 7-21 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-23
1:22
(4) Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the
Welfare Department.
(5) Perform all other related work as required.
§ 7-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:23

ARTICLE III
Boards, Commissions and Committees
§ 7-24. Organization.
§ 7-25. Board of Appeals.
The composition, function, and duties of the Board of Appeals shall be as
provided by ordinance.
§ 7-26. Board of Health.
A. There shall be the following boards, commissions, and committees in
the City of Rochester: [Amended 3-5-2019]
(1) Board of Appeals.
(2) Board of Health.
(3) Board of Trustees of the Public Library.
(4) Planning Board.
(5) Trustees of Trust Funds.
(6) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(7) Licensing Board.
(8) Conservation Commission.
(9) Recreation and Arena Commission.
(10) Board of Assessors.
(11) Economic Development Commission.
(12) Arts and Culture Commission.
(13) Utility Advisory Board.
B. All boards, commissions, and committees shall promulgate rules and
regulations governing the conduct of their business, and no member of
any board, commission, or committee shall introduce, speak, or vote on
any motion or issue in which he/she has a personal or pecuniary
interest, direct or indirect.
A. The composition of the Board of Health shall be as provided in Section
21 of the Rochester City Charter. The three Board members, other than
the City Physician and the City Health Officer, shall be appointed by the
City Manager for three-year terms, with said terms so arranged that
one of the three appointed members, other than the City Physician or
the City Health Officer, shall be appointed each year in January.
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-26
1:25
§ 7-27. Board of Trustees of the Public Library. [Amended 5-1-2007;
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The composition, functions, powers and duties of the Board of Trustees of
the Public Library shall be as provided in Section 22 of the Rochester City
Charter, state statutes, and/or ordinance. Vacancies occurring in said Board
shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term.
§ 7-28. Planning Board.
Vacancies in these three appointed positions shall be filled by the City
Manager for the unexpired term.
B. The Board of Health shall meet annually and at other times as the Board
or the Health Officer deems necessary.
C. The Board of Health shall perform the following functions:
(1) Formulate general policies regarding public health in the City of
Rochester.
(2) Advise the Health Officer on all public health matters. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(3) Conduct public hearings and perform any quasi-judicial functions
which may be required by law or necessitated by the operation of
the Health Department.
(4) Make all rules and regulations relating to the public health as in its
judgment the health and safety of the people may require.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of nine members selected as follows:
(1) The City Manager or, with the approval of the City Council, the City
Manager's designee, who shall be an ex officio member;
(2) A member of the City Council selected by the City Council, who
shall be an ex officio member; and
(3) Seven persons appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the
provisions of Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. The Mayor shall also appoint, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter, five alternate members of the
Planning Board. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 673:6, the
City Council may select a member of the City Council to serve as an
alternate to the City Council member of the Planning Board, which
alternate shall be in addition to the five appointed alternate members of
the Planning Board. The term of office of the members of the Planning
Board appointed in accordance with the provisions of Section 74 of the
Rochester City Charter shall be three years and the term of ex officio
members and ex officio alternates to the Planning Board shall be as
§ 7-26 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-28
1:26
§ 7-29. Trustees of Trust Funds. [Amended 12-4-2007; 10-6-2015; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
provided in RSA 673:5, I(a). The terms of appointed members and
appointed alternates of the Planning Board shall be staggered in a
manner consistent with the provisions of RSA 673:5, II. Vacancies
occurring in the membership or alternate membership of the Planning
Board, occurring other than through the expiration of a term, shall
be filled by the original appointing or designating authority for the
unexpired term.
C. The Planning Board shall perform all functions provided for by Title
LXIV of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated applicable to
planning boards, as presently enacted or the corresponding provisions
of any recodification or amendment of the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated, and shall be subject to all provisions of said Title.
[Amended 3-5-2002]
A. The Board of Trustees of Trust Funds shall consist of five members
representing an increase from the traditional three members. The two
additional members shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with
the provisions of Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter with one
Trustee appointed for a one-year term and one Trustee appointed for a
two-year term. Thereafter, one Trustee shall be appointed annually in
January by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of Section 74 of
the Rochester City Charter for a term of three years to replace those
whose terms expire, and vacancies occurring in such office shall be
filled in like manner for the unexpired term. The Trustees shall organize
annually by electing one of their number Treasurer, who shall keep the
records and books of the Trustees.
B. The fund held in trust by the City of Rochester under the provisions of
the last will and testament of Seth Adams, late of Boston in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, known as the Adams Fund, and the
fund held in trust by said City under an agreement with the donors
thereof for the purpose of keeping in repair the Old Cemetery in
Rochester proper, and the burial lots and monuments therein,
denominated the Old Cemetery Conservation Fund Perpetua, shall both
be kept by said Board of Trustees, and administered by the City
Manager acting pursuant to authority conferred upon such City
Manager by the provisions of § 49-1 of the Code of the City of
Rochester.
C. Said Trustees, with the approval, and subject to the authority, of the
City Manager acting pursuant to authority conferred upon such City
Manager by the provisions of § 49-1 of the Code of the City of
Rochester, shall direct the expenditure of the income derived from the
Old Cemetery Conservation Fund Perpetua, according to the terms of
the agreement aforesaid, and shall annually, with the approval, and
subject to the authority, of the City Manager acting pursuant to
authority conferred upon such City Manager by the provisions of § 49-1
§ 7-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:27
§ 7-30. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 7-31. Licensing Board.
The composition, functions, powers and duties of the Licensing Board shall
be as provided by ordinance.2
of the Code of the City of Rochester, determine who are to be the
recipients of the income of the Adams Fund, as per the provisions of
said will, and the amount thereof to be paid to each, and shall file a list
of the same with the City Clerk.
D. In addition to the functions specified above, the Trustees of Trust Funds
shall perform the following functions:
(1) Receive all trust funds which may be donated or bequeathed to any
department in the City of Rochester.
(2) Invest said funds in such investments as are legal for investment by
Trustees of Trust Funds.
(3) Distribute income and principal in accordance with the purposes
for which the trust funds were established.
(4) Prepare and maintain complete records of all amounts pertaining
to trust funds as required.
E. The Trustees of Trust Funds shall be completely responsible for the
custody of all trust funds. All investments or reinvestments of trust
funds shall be made only with the authorization of the majority vote of
the full Board of Trustees. The Trustees may retain investments as
received from donors until maturity thereof.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members
appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of Section 74
of the Rochester City Charter. The functions and duties of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be provided by Chapters 673 and 674 of the
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated as presently enacted or
the corresponding provisions of any recodification or amendment of the
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, and by ordinance.
[Amended 12-4-2007]
B. The Mayor in accordance with the provisions of Section 74 of the
Rochester City Charter may appoint up to but not more than five
alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, each to serve for
a term of three years, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 673
of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated as presently enacted
or the corresponding provisions of any recodification or amendment of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 123, Licensing Board.
§ 7-29 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-32
1:28
§ 7-32. Conservation Commission.
§ 7-33. Recreation and Arena Commission. [Amended 11-4-2015]
The composition, functions, powers and duties of the Recreation and Arena
Commission shall be as provided by Chapter 158 of the Code of the City of
Rochester.
§ 7-34. Board of Assessors.
The composition, functions, powers and duties of the Board of Assessors
shall be as provided in Section 20 of the Rochester City Charter, state
statutes, and/or ordinance.
§ 7-35. Economic Development Commission. [Amended 6-3-2008]
A. The City of Rochester hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 36-A of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated as presently enacted
or the corresponding provisions of any recodification or amendment of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated.
B. The Conservation Commission shall consist of seven members, one of
whom may be a member of the Planning Board. Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the
provisions of Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter for terms of three
years. The terms of members of the Commission shall be so arranged
that two regular members of said Commission shall be appointed
annually and a Chairperson shall be appointed every third year by the
Mayor. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Two alternate
members of the Commission shall be appointed in the same manner as
regular members of the Commission for terms of three years, and when
such alternate serves in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member, he/she shall have full voting powers. [Amended 5-7-1996;
11-1-2016]
C. The functions, duties, and powers of the Conservation Commission shall
be as provided in Chapter 36-A of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated as presently enacted or the corresponding provisions of any
recodification or amendment of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated.
A. The Economic Development Commission shall consist of 11 members,
two of which members shall be ex officio members. Nine of the initial
members of the Commission shall be those currently serving on the
Commission. Thereafter, three members shall be elected annually for a
term of three years with vacancies being filled by the City Council for
any unexpired terms. The initial election shall be so arranged that 1/3 of
the members may be elected each year. After the initial election, the
three annual vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor in accordance with
Section 74 of the City Charter. The Economic Development Commission
shall recommend at least two persons from the private sector to the
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35
1:29
Mayor each year as potential nominees. In all cases, election shall
be by the City Council. Members shall be chosen for their expertise,
experience and abilities in business, industry, finance, real estate,
government and law. A majority of the members shall reside within
the City of Rochester and up to four of the elected members may
reside outside of the City; provided, however, that any elected member
residing outside of the City shall maintain a place of business or shall
be employed within the City, while serving as a member of the
Commission. The Mayor and the Economic Development Director shall
be ex officio, nonvoting members of the Commission.
B. The Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the Mayor, and the
Commission shall elect from its members such other officers and
committees as it deems necessary.
C. The Economic Development Commission shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Promote the City of Rochester, through advertising, prospect
development and other means, as an attractive location for
industrial and business expansion;
(2) Assist prospects interested in evaluating Rochester as a potential
industrial or business location; act as the official agent of the City
government in matters pertaining to economic development;
(3) Undertake appropriate actions to encourage the continued
availability of marketable industrial/commercial sites within the
City, including:
(a) Advising the Mayor, Council and departments concerning
planned capital improvements, municipal programs or actions
which may affect the City's future economic growth;
(b) Conducting studies to determine suitability and development
potential of industrial/commercial sites within the City; and
(c) Assisting interested site owners and/or their agents in
marketing available industrial/commercial properties;
(4) Utilize available industrial/commercial development financing
programs to provide an attractive source of financing for local plant
construction or expansion;
(5) Act as the City's liaison with existing business and industry located
in the greater Rochester area, to ensure maintenance of good
relations, encourage the City's responsiveness to industry needs,
and foster expansion of the City's established industrial/
commercial base;
(6) Identify and secure funding from federal, state, and local
governmental and private sources to carry out the Commission's
approved programs; and
§ 7-35 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-35
1:30
(7) Serve as Rochester's Business and Industrial Development
Authority in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 162-G of the
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended.
D. In performing the functions listed in Subsection C above, the
Commission shall be empowered to:
(1) Operate flexibly within the limitations of formal economic
development policies adopted by the City Council.
(2) Submit annually to the Mayor and Council a proposed work
program and funding request for staffing, consultants, advertising,
travel, etc., necessary to carry out its program, for inclusion in the
City's annual operating budget.
(3) Apply for, receive, and administer grants from federal, state, and
other public sources.
(4) Receive and administer funds raised from private sources.
(5) Carry out all other functions and responsibilities as outlined in
Subsection C above.
(6) Submit annually to the Mayor and City Council a report of the
preceding year's activities.
(7) Serve as Rochester's Business and Industrial Development
Authority and exercise the powers and duties granted to such
Business and Industrial Development Authority by RSA Chapter
162-G, as amended, except those powers and duties relating to
findings and approvals which are the exclusive duties of the City
Council, and provided, further, that the exercise of such powers
and duties of the Commission shall be subject to the following
limitations:
(a) No lease, sublease, purchase agreement or other instrument
executed or entered into by the Economic Development
Commission shall obligate the City of Rochester to make
expenditures in excess of appropriations received from the City
Council and/or bonds authorized by the City Council and issued
by the City of Rochester pursuant to the provisions of RSA
Chapter 162-G, or of funds received or to be received under the
provisions of a lease, sublease or other instrument. This
prohibition is not intended to limit the Commission's authority
with respect to the application for, receipt and administration
of funds referred to in Subsection D(2), (3) and (4) above.
(b) The Commission shall not be authorized to issue bonds, i.e.,
any evidence of indebtedness issued to finance a project in
whole or in part. The authority to issue bonds pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 162-G of the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated shall be vested in the City Council.
§ 7-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35
1:31
§ 7-36. Utility Advisory Board. [Amended 3-5-2002]
§ 7-37. Arts and Culture Commission. [Added 2-1-2011]
(c) All funds of the Commission shall be kept and accounted for as
an enterprise fund of the City of Rochester, no matter their
source. Funds appropriated by the City Council for the
Economic Development Department shall not be considered
funds of the Commission for the purposes of this subsection.
(d) All actions of the Commission under RSA Chapter 162-G shall
be authorized by resolutions of the Commission passed on the
affirmative votes of at least 2/3 of the Commission members
present and voting, subject to the voting restrictions provided
for in RSA 162-G:15-a, III. Actions of the Commission which are
not taken under RSA 162-G shall be authorized by the
Commission on the affirmative votes of a majority of the
Commission members voting, unless otherwise provided by
law.3
A. In accordance with the provisions of Section 19 of the Rochester City
Charter, the Utility Advisory Board shall consist of five members, which
members shall be appointed in the manner and for such term as
provided for in § 260-28 of the Code of the City of Rochester.
B. The Utility Advisory Board shall perform the following functions:
(1) Make recommendations to the City Council, from time to time, on
the level of sewer and water rates to be charged pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 200, Sewers, and Chapter 260, Water, Article
I, Use Regulations and Rates, of the Code of the City of Rochester,
but such recommendations shall not be binding on the City Council.
(2) Hear and decide appeals of such matters relating to the sewer and
water usage and connections as shall be assigned to the Board by
ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council.
(3) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. Definition. For the purpose of this section, "arts and culture"
encompasses a wide range of activities, including painting, sculpture,
other fine and folk arts, crafts, popular culture, music, theater, dance,
film, other performance arts, architecture, archaeological resources,
cemeteries, literature, history, community/cultural heritage,
agriculture, and other elements consistent with the intent of this
section.
B. Purpose of the Commission. This section is established by the Rochester
City Council pursuant to RSA 47:17, XV, and 674:2, III(h). The
3. Editor's Note: Original § 3.13, Arena Advisory Commission, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 11-4-2015.
§ 7-35 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-37
1:32
geographic focus of the Arts and Culture Commission's activities shall
be Rochester, but when appropriate, the Arts and Culture Commission
may work to promote arts and culture in the greater Rochester area,
consistent with the intent of this section. The purpose of the Arts and
Culture Commission (or "the Commission") is to implement the Arts and
Cultural Resources Master Plan by:
(1) Highlighting our heritage to inspire a sense of place and pride in
the City of Rochester;
(2) Identifying, strengthening, promoting and broadcasting
Rochester's cultural assets, infrastructure, and artistic treasures;
(3) Facilitating community involvement in the arts;
(4) Recognizing the economic power of the arts and culture in
Rochester;
(5) Invigorating Rochester with an emphasis on the City's unique blend
of old-fashioned charm and progressive vision; and
(6) Acting on the City's behalf on arts and culture matters.
C. Functions of the Commission. The Arts and Culture Commission is not a
regulatory body. It has no review authority and there is no requirement
for it to review or approve any proposed event, project, or installation.
No artist, organization, or business is required to consult with or
appear before the Commission. The roles and responsibilities of the
Arts and Culture Commission include the following, subject to
establishing priorities and availability of time and resources:
(1) Master Plan. Implementation of the Arts and Cultural Resources
Master Plan (Community Revitalization and the Arts; A Cultural
Plan for Rochester, New Hampshire, adopted October 4, 2010, and
as may be amended in the future). Implementing this plan is the
primary role of the Commission.
(2) Public displays. Promotion and organization of public art displays,
forums, fairs, murals, exhibitions, performances, and other events.
(3) Developing resources. Development of resources to support local
artists and cultural organizations.
(4) Coordination with other organizations. Coordinating, as
appropriate, with other governmental, nonprofit, social, and
business organizations that have a connection with the arts,
cultural resources, our community heritage, land development,
economic development, tourism, and historic preservation.
(5) Promoting cooperation. Promotion of dialogue and cooperation
among arts and cultural organizations and coordination of
activities and projects with these organizations. This includes
§ 7-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:33
organizations located in Rochester as well as those situated outside
of the City.
(6) Education. Educating the public about art and cultural resources.
(7) Marketing. Marketing, promoting, and developing Rochester as an
arts and cultural destination.
(8) Advice and advocacy. Providing advice and advocacy to agencies of
local, state, and federal government regarding the identification,
promotion and preservation of art and cultural resources.
(9) Area businesses. Encouraging local and regional businesses to
support and engage in arts and culture.
(10) Fostering excellence in design. Fostering excellence in design in
wide-ranging aspects of civic and community life in Rochester.
(11) Diverse populations. Encouraging participation of diverse
populations in Rochester in arts and culture.
(12) Planning. Periodically recommending to the Planning Board
updates to the Cultural Resources Master Plan.
(13) Amendments. Recommending to the City Council amendments to
this section.
(14) Funding. Applying for and implementing grants and soliciting other
funds, as appropriate.
(15) Data. Developing a database and directory of activities and
resources in the greater Rochester area.
(16) Annual report. Preparation of an annual state of the City arts and
cultural report for the City Council.
(17) Other activities. Undertaking any other appropriate action or
activity necessary to carry out its mission.
D. Structure of the Commission.
(1) Composition. The Arts and Culture Commission shall consist of
nine members, all of whom shall be regular voting members. The
ideal (desired but not required) composition of the Commission
shall be as follows, subject to availability and qualifications of
candidates [in accordance with Subsection D(2) below] as
determined by the City Council:
(a) One member from Rochester City government;
(b) One member from the business community;
(c) One member from the education community;
§ 7-37 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-37
1:34
(d) One member who is the Rochester Poet Laureate, or if he/she
is not available, then a person from the literary arts
community; and
(e) Five members who are actively engaged in arts and culture,
representing a broad cross section of the arts, culture, and
heritage community.
(2) Qualifications. All members shall be residents of the City of
Rochester, except that up to three members may reside in the
greater Rochester area. In reviewing the qualifications of all
candidates for the Commission, the City Council shall consider his/
her demonstrated interest and experience in, and knowledge of,
arts, crafts, and culture, and his/her ability to administer this
section consistent with the mission of the Commission. To the
extent that such persons are available, the Council shall seek
members with diverse backgrounds.
(3) Appointments. The members of the Arts and Culture Commission
shall be appointed pursuant to Section 74 of the City Charter for
terms of three years. Some initial appointments (and subsequent
appointments, when necessary) shall be for less than three years in
order that the various terms shall be staggered.
E. Administration.
(1) Meetings and activities. The Commission shall meet as needed, but
it shall meet at a minimum twice each calendar year. It shall hold an
annual meeting in February, or at such other time as determined by
the Commission, to review activities of the prior year and to plan
for the upcoming year.
(2) Bylaws. The Commission shall adopt bylaws to govern its operation.
(3) City and state law. The Commission shall be regulated by all
applicable City and state laws.
(4) Staffing and resources. The City of Rochester will provide staffing
and other support to the Arts and Culture Commission, as
appropriate, subject to availability of staff resources.
(5) Professional advice. The Commission may seek advice from such
professional resources as is deemed necessary, subject to
availability of funding.
§ 7-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:35

ARTICLE IV
Purchases and Contracts
§ 7-38. Legal basis.
The provisions of this article governing purchasing procedures to be used
by the City of Rochester are incorporated with the Administrative Code
in accordance with the requirements of Section 27 of the Rochester City
Charter.
§ 7-39. Purchase orders required.
Purchase orders authorized by the proper authority shall be used in all
instances.
§ 7-40. Purchasing procedures. [Amended 9-4-2007; 10-15-2013]
§ 7-41. Sale of tax-deeded property. [Amended 2-1-2005]
A. All purchases under one thousand one dollars ($1,001.) shall have the
electronic approval of the department head and Purchasing
Department with the limitation that said sum shall not be exceeded for
any one item or combination of items to be purchased from any single
vendor.
B. All purchases greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and less than
ten thousand one dollars ($10,001.) shall have a minimum of three
comparable quotes. If three quotes are not available then an exception
may be made with the approval of the City Manager, or his/her
designee, clearly documenting the reason for the exception in the
electronic requisition document. The maximum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.) shall not be exceeded for any one item or combination of
items to be purchased from any single vendor.
C. All individual item purchases or contracts over ten thousand dollars
($10,000.) shall require a competitive sealed bid process and approval
of the department head, Finance Director and the City Manager.
Exceptions for purchases over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.) may be
allowed at the discretion of the City Manager for professional service
contracts, computer software/hardware, passenger vehicles/one-ton
vehicles or smaller, or other items where comparative pricing instead of
a sealed bid process may be in the best overall interest of the City. The
City Council shall be formally notified whenever an exception to the
sealed bid process occurs.
A. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 80:42 and/or 80:80, the City
Manager is hereby indefinitely, and until such time as this section is
repealed, authorized to transfer tax liens upon real property acquired
by the City at a Tax Collector's sale for nonpayment of taxes thereon
and/or to convey property acquired by the City by tax deed for
nonpayment of taxes; provided, however, that a public auction and/or
§ 7-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41
1:37
advertised sealed bid sale is held, and the results of said public auction
and/or sealed bid sale are confirmed by a majority vote of the City
Council. In conducting such public auction and/or sealed bid sale, the
City Manager may establish a minimum amount for which the property
is to be sold and the terms and conditions of sale.
B. The City Manager, by ordinance, may be authorized to dispose of tax
liens or tax-deeded property in a manner otherwise than provided in
this section, as justice may require.
C. Upon the affirmative two-thirds vote of the Rochester City Council, the
City Manager may be authorized to transfer tax liens upon real property
acquired by the City at a Tax Collector's sale for nonpayment of taxes
thereon and/or to convey property acquired by the City by tax deed for
nonpayment of taxes without conducting a public auction and/or
advertised sealed bid sale, subject to such terms and conditions as the
City Council shall establish.
D. For purposes of this section, the authority to dispose of the property "as
justice may require" shall include the power of the City Manager to
transfer the tax lien(s) and/or convey the property to a former owner, or
to a third party for benefit of a former owner, upon such reasonable
terms as may be agreed to in writing, including the authority of the City
to retain a mortgage interest in the property, or to reimpose its tax lien,
contingent upon an agreed payment schedule, which need not
necessarily reflect any prior redemption amount. Any such agreement
shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. This subsection shall not be
construed to obligate the City to make any such conveyance or
agreement.
§ 7-41 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-41
1:38
ARTICLE V
Salaries
§ 7-42. Declaration of policy.
The salaries of all City officials and employees shall be in full payment and
final satisfaction for all services required by law.
§ 7-43. Payment.
The salaries of all full- and part-time City officers and employees, except
for the salaries of such officials as are popularly elected, shall be paid
from the budget appropriation for the department employing such officer
or employee in such amount as shall be established by contract and/or
provided for in the annual budget appropriation of such department for
such office or position.
§ 7-44. Salaries of elected officials. [Amended 9-5-1995; 3-6-2007;
6-8-2010; 12-1-2015]
The following salaries shall be paid to the following City officials:
A. Effective January 1, 2008:
(1) Mayor: two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.) per year in
addition to salary as City Councilor.
(2) Deputy Mayor: one hundred dollars ($100.) per year in addition to
salary as City Councilor.
(3) City Councilor: one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per year, plus ten
dollars ($10.) per meeting for each member of a regular, workshop
or special City Council committee attending a meeting of such
committee at which a quorum is present. The Chairperson of any
regular or special committee of the City Council shall receive an
additional one hundred dollars ($100.) per year. [Amended
3-5-2019]
(4) School Board member: one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per year,
plus ten dollars ($10.) per meeting for each member of a regular,
workshop or special School Board committee attending a meeting
of such committee at which a quorum is present. The Chairperson
of any regular or special committee of the school board shall
receive an additional one hundred dollars ($100.) per year.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
(5) Police Commissioner: one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per year.
(6) Election officials.
(a) Ward Moderator: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.) per day.
(b) Ward Clerk: one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.) per day.
§ 7-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-44
1:39
§ 7-45. Expenses.
Expense allotments shall be budgeted items for expenses relating to the
performance of each office and shall not be used to supplement the salary
levels established by this article.
(c) Selectman: one hundred twenty dollars ($120.) per day.
(d) Checklist Supervisor: one hundred fifty dollars ($150.) per
election or session day.
(e) Checklist Supervisor Chairperson: none. [Amended
3-5-2019]
(f) Ballot Clerk: one hundred dollars ($100.) per day.
(g) In the event that an election official shall perform duties and/or
attend any election-related activity approved by the City Clerk
and lasting four or fewer hours, the election official(s) in
question shall receive a per diem payment for the performance
of such duties or attending such activity at a rate one-half that
provided for in Subsection A(6)(a), (b), (c) and (f) above.
§ 7-44 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-45
1:40
ARTICLE VI
Legislative Body
§ 7-46. Ordinances.
§ 7-47. Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and petitions.
Every proposed ordinance, proposed amendment to any ordinance,
proposed resolution, or other proposed petition to be submitted to any
regular meeting of the City Council shall be submitted by the proponent
thereof in writing to the City Clerk no later than five days prior to the
regular meeting of said Council. The City Clerk shall notify each member
of the City Council in writing of each proposed ordinance, proposed
amendment to any ordinance, proposed resolution or other proposed
petition submitted as aforesaid at least four days prior to the date of
said regular City Council meeting. Any proposed ordinance or amendment
thereto, proposed resolution or other proposed petition not submitted to the
City Clerk at least five days prior to a regular meeting of the City Council
or whose contents have not been submitted to each City Councilor at least
four days prior thereto may be acted upon by the City Council at such
regular meeting, provided that the City Council shall vote to act upon such
legislation by a two-thirds vote of the Council.
§ 7-48. City Seal.
A. Citation. All citations of this Code may be designated the Code of the
City of Rochester, adding to the citation when necessary the number of
the chapter and section. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Enacting style. The enacting style in making and passing ordinances
shall be, "The City of Rochester Ordains."
C. Effective date. Every ordinance shall take effect upon passage unless a
different time is provided therein.
D. Recordation and preservation. The City Clerk shall cause to be
engrossed all ordinances which have passed the City Council. The same
shall be done in plain and legible handwriting, typewriting, or printing
as the City Clerk shall determine without erasure or interlineation,
upon strong paper of a suitable size with a proper margin, and he/she
shall bind such ordinances in a book lettered, "Record of General
Ordinances of the City of Rochester" which book shall be preserved in
the office of the City Clerk and shall be currently maintained by said
City Clerk and shall be subject to the inspection of the citizens.
A. The design of the City Seal shall be: a circle with a border around it;
across the center of the circle, the word "Rochester"; above said word a
perspective view of Haven's Hill, a pair of horses attached to a cart,
men loading grain; below said word a perspective view of shoe shops,
tannery, railroad tracks, engine and car; in the border, the words "Town
§ 7-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-48
1:41
§ 7-49. Conflict of interest.
Chartered 1722, Settled 1728, Organized 1737, City Charter 1891," the
device thereof being as follows:
B. Custody. The City Clerk shall have the custody of the City Seal, but shall
permit any duly authorized officer of said City to affix said Seal to any
document requiring the same.
C. Affixation. All deeds and other legal documents made, given, or entered
into by the City, requiring a seal, shall be sealed with the City Seal and
be signed and acknowledged in behalf of the City by the City Manager
or such other official as may be duly authorized.
A. Municipal body in legislative capacity; prohibition on voting. When a
municipal body acts in a legislative capacity, no member shall vote on
any matter in which he/she has a conflict of interest.
B. Municipal body in legislative capacity; limitation on discussion. When a
municipal body acts in a legislative capacity, a member having a conflict
of interest concerning a matter before the body may participate in the
body's discussion concerning the matter, whether in public or executive
session, only upon satisfaction of the requirements established by
Section 72 of the Rochester City Charter.
C. Municipal body in judicial capacity. When a municipal body acts in a
judicial capacity, no member shall sit upon the hearing, participate in
any discussion, attend any executive session, or vote upon the matter if
he/she would be disqualified for any cause to act as a juror upon the
trial of the same matter in any action at law. Reasons for
disqualification do not include exemption from service as a juror or
knowledge of the facts involved gained in the performance of the
member's official duties.
D. Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall have the meaning given to them in this subsection:
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Direct personal and pecuniary interest.
DIRECT — Immediate, definite, and capable of demonstration; not
remote, uncertain, contingent, and speculative.
MEMBER — A member of a municipal body.
MUNICIPAL BODY — The Rochester City Council, Police Commission,
School Board, Utility Advisory Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
§ 7-48 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-49
1:42
Planning Board, Historic District Commission or any other authorized
City body with legislative and/or judicial powers.
PECUNIARY INTEREST — Any advantage in the form of money,
property, commercial interest or anything else, the primary significance
of which is economic gain.
PERSONAL — An interest different from that of any other citizen.
E. Procedure. When uncertainty arises as to a member's right to
participate in the municipal body's work, because of Subsection A, B or
C, the municipal body shall, upon the request of that or any other
member, vote on whether that member should be disqualified. Any such
request and vote shall be made prior to or at the commencement of any
discussion of the matter before the municipal body. If by an affirmative
roll-call vote of at least 2/3 of the members of the body present the body
finds that the member has a conflict of interest, that member shall be
prohibited from action in accordance with this section. The challenged
member, if present, shall be entitled to vote on the question of his/her
disqualification. If a court of a competent jurisdiction subsequently
determines that the municipal body erroneously found a conflict of
interest to exist, then the member in question may at the regular
meeting of the municipal body first following the date of such
determination move for reconsideration of the matter. If a court of
competent jurisdiction subsequently determines that the municipal
body erroneously failed to find a conflict of interest, and the official in
question voted in the majority on the matter, then at the regular
meeting of the municipal body first following the date of such
determination any member who voted in the minority may move for
reconsideration. [Amended 5-1-2007]
§ 7-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-49
1:43

ARTICLE VII
Finance
§ 7-50. City Finance Director. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The City Manager, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 15 and
18 of the Rochester City Charter, shall appoint a City Finance Director
who shall be responsible for the supervision and direction of all phases of
the City's fiscal operations subject to the direction and supervision of the
City Manager. This position shall require a four-year degree in accounting,
business administration or related area, plus professional experience in the
field.
§ 7-51. Claims against City.
§ 7-52. City funds.
A. Itemization. No account or claim against the City, except judgments of
judicial courts, shall be received or acted upon unless each item thereof
shall be specifically set forth, and unless such account or claim shall be
accompanied with the approval of the officer or agent authorized in
behalf of the City, School Board or Trustees of the Public Library to
make the contract, or cause the expenditure to be made, that the same
is correct and just.
B. Officers to receive. The Superintendent of Schools shall receive all
accounts and claims from persons having demands against the School
Board, the Librarian from persons having demands against the Trustees
of the Public Library and the City Finance Director from persons for all
other demands against the City. They shall carefully examine all such
accounts and claims and see that they are correctly cast, and present
the same to the City Finance Director for final approval by the City
Manager. [Amended 3-5-2019]
C. Payment by check. Payment of all claims as approved in accordance
with the preceding section shall be made by check drawn and signed by
the City Treasurer and countersigned by the City Manager; provided,
however, that the City Council, in the absence or disability of either the
City Treasurer or the City Manager, or both, may appoint some other
person to sign in his/her place.
A. Deposited in name of City. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all
sums received by or on behalf of said City shall be deposited in the
name of the City.
B. When and where deposited. The City Treasurer and City Tax Collector
shall deposit to the credit of the City all money which they may receive
for or in behalf of the City in such bank or banks as the Treasurer may
direct. Their financial records and lists shall be submitted to the City
Finance Director for his/her inspection and computation. All other
persons who shall at any time have money in their hands belonging to
§ 7-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-52
1:45
§ 7-53. Collection of motor vehicle permit fees.
The City Tax Collector shall collect all permit fees required by law in the
registration of motor vehicles, keep a proper record of the same, and pay
the same to the City.
§ 7-54. Negotiation of loans to City. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The City Treasurer, with the assistance and subject to the approval of the
City Manager, shall negotiate all loans to the City which shall be authorized
by the City Council and shall report the amount to the City Finance Director.
§ 7-55. Notes of City.
the City, unless otherwise provided, shall forthwith pay the same to
the City Treasurer, taking his/her receipt for the same. [Amended
5-1-2007]
C. Record of receipts and payments. The City Finance Director shall enter
in suitable books fair, detailed and correct records of all sums of money
received into and paid from the City treasury. He/she shall enter the
various appropriations made by the City Council, each under its
appropriate head, and charge to each the different payments and
expenditures which from time to time shall be made therefrom.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
D. Expended appropriations to be reported. Whenever any appropriation
shall be expended, the City Finance Director shall immediately give
notice thereof to the City Manager and the City Council, and no claim or
account shall be passed or allowed chargeable to any head or
appropriation which has been expended, until the City Council shall
have provided the means for paying the same. [Amended 3-5-2019]
A. Exemption for prisoners of war. The permit fee shall be waived for a
permit to register one motor vehicle owned by any person who was
captured and incarcerated for 30 days or more while serving in a
qualifying war and armed conflict as defined in RSA 72:28, IV, and who
was honorably discharged, provided the person has provided the City
Tax Collector with satisfactory proof of these circumstances.
A. Signatures required. Whenever authority is given by the City Council to
borrow money on the credit of the City, all notes and certificates of
indebtedness given therefor shall be signed by the City Manager and
City Treasurer and countersigned by the City Clerk, and all such notes
and certificates shall be registered in books kept for that purpose by the
City Finance Director. Such registers shall describe said notes and
certificates by number, date and amount, the name of the person to
whom payable, when payable, the rate of interest and the date of the
ordinance or resolution authorizing the same, and, when paid, the date
of payment shall be inserted on each of said registers. [Amended
3-5-2019]
§ 7-52 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-55
1:46
§ 7-56. Annual report of City receipts and expenditures. [Amended
9-4-2007]
The City Manager shall annually, before the last day of January, present the
independent auditors' report, in accordance with § 7-58 of this article, of the
preceding year.
§ 7-57. Preparation of City budget.
The City Manager shall annually prepare the municipal budget in
accordance with the provisions of Section 40 of the Rochester City Charter,
and shall lay the same before the City Council at least 60 days before the
start of the fiscal year of the budget. Said budget shall contain an estimate
of the amount of money necessary to be raised for the next financial year,
under the various heads of appropriations, and the various means of raising
the same. The City Council shall set a date for a public hearing on the
annual budget, which hearing shall be held before the final adoption of said
budget, at such time and place as the City Council shall direct, provided
that notice of such public hearing shall be published by the City Clerk at
least one week in advance of said hearing, and posted together with a
summary of the budget, as submitted, in two public places at least one week
in advance of said hearing.
§ 7-58. Audit of City accounts.
An independent audit of all accounts of the City shall be made annually by
certified public accountants selected by the City Council and experienced in
municipal accounting in accordance with the provisions of Section 46 of the
Rochester City Charter.
B. Form. All notes given the City of Rochester shall be substantially in the
following form:
CITY OF ROCHESTER
Treasurer's Office
For value received the City of Rochester will pay at the office of
the City Treasurer to _______________ or order, the sum of
________________________ dollars __________ in __________ from the date
hereof, with interest __________ at the rate of __________ percent. In
testimony whereof we, the City Manager and Treasurer, in the name
and in behalf of the City, by virtue of authority in us vested for this
purpose, by an order of the City Council of said City, passed on the
_______ day of _____________ A.D. _____ have hereunto set our hands and
the Seal of said City, at said Rochester this __________
City Manager
Treasurer
This note is also countersigned by the City Clerk of said City.
City Clerk
§ 7-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-59
1:47
§ 7-59. Redemption of City bonds. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The City Treasurer with the approval of the City Manager is hereby
authorized to purchase any bonds of the City of Rochester from any funds in
said City, provided they can do so to the advantage of said City. Any bonds
and the coupons attached thereto when purchased and redeemed shall be
canceled by the Treasurer of said City, and a record of the same shall be
made in the bond book of said City and signed by the City Clerk, City
Treasurer, and City Manager showing the numbers of the bonds with their
coupons attached, when purchased, and their numbers when canceled. Said
bonds when so canceled shall be kept by the City Finance Director.
§ 7-60. Fiscal year.
The fiscal and budget year of the City shall begin on the first day of July.
§ 7-61. Contracts with City officials limited.
No contract or agreement for labor, or for the purchase or sale of any
materials, goods, wares or merchandise, in which any member of the City
Council or any officer or agent appointed by the City Council shall be
directly or indirectly interested in a private capacity, shall be made and
concluded by any person or persons in behalf of the City, unless such
contract or agreement shall have been authorized or ratified by the City
Council, and no account or claims against the City arising out of such
contract or agreement shall be allowed or certified by any committees,
nor shall any order therefor be drawn upon or paid by the City; provided,
however, that such restriction shall not be construed to prevent the
purchase of ordinary supplies from members of the City Council who may be
engaged in trade, nor the employment of the members of the City Council
in their ordinary vocation, by duly authorized heads of departments.
§ 7-62. Undesignated fund balance.
A. Purpose. The Rochester City Council recognizes that the establishment
and maintenance of fiscal responsibility and the promotion of property
tax stabilization are goals which promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the City of Rochester and its inhabitants. Therefore, it is the
purpose of the Rochester City Council in adopting this section to
establish a mechanism whereby the fiscal integrity of the City is
strengthened and maintained, and the long-term stability of the City's
property tax rate is promoted, through the establishment of a systemic
and disciplined process for the prudent and planned utilization of
revenues. In adopting this section, the Rochester City Council
recognized that it is prudent financial practice for municipalities such
as Rochester to establish and maintain an undesignated fund balance
(as hereinafter more particularly defined) between 5% and 10% of their
respective total general fund appropriations.
B. Minimum undesignated fund balance requirement. The general fund
balance of the City, at the end of any fiscal year, as established in
§ 7-59 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-62
1:48
§ 7-63. Economic Development Special Reserve Fund. [Added
9-6-2016]
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP),
including any and all balances derived from accounts and/or operations
taken into account in the "general fund" column of the City's annual
audit, and excluding any and all reserves, and any dedicated fund
balances of the general fund, shall for the purposes of this section be
designated as the "undesignated fund balance" of the general fund of
the City of Rochester, and shall be referred to throughout this section
as the "undesignated fund balance." The undesignated fund balance for
any fiscal year shall be maintained at a level of not less than 5% of the
actual total general fund appropriations for the City for that fiscal year.
C. Use of undesignated fund balance. In any subsequent fiscal year, the
City Council may utilize the excess of the actual fund balance of the
general fund (as determined by the annual audit of the City) over the
prescribed undesignated fund balance level established in Subsection B
of this section from the prior fiscal year for capital projects, transfers to
capital projects, transfers to capital reserve, or for any other
appropriation of a nonrecurring nature.
D. Emergency appropriations of undesignated fund balance. At any time in
a budget year, the City Council may, upon adoption of a written
resolution by majority vote, after notice and public hearing, make
emergency appropriations from the general fund balance of the City of
Rochester to meet an essential need for public expenditure. If such
emergency appropriation reduces the undesignated fund balance to a
level below the minimum prescribed by Subsection B of this section, the
resolution authorizing such appropriation shall include a plan to restore
the undesignated fund balance to the minimum level established in
Subsection B of this section.4
A. Statement of purpose.
(1) The City of Rochester currently serves as the "Host Community" for
the Turnkey Recycling and Environmental Enterprises Waste
Disposal Facility (TREE) currently operated by Waste Management
of New Hampshire, Inc., and located on the Rochester Neck Road.
By virtue of its status as Host Community for TREE, the City of
Rochester, in addition to incurring significant expenses in
connection with such facility, receives significant financial benefits
in the form of real property taxes, user fees (in the form of so-called
"host community fees") and various other benefits relative to the
cost to the City and its inhabitants of the disposal and/or recycling
of various solid waste, including reduced and/or eliminated fees for
the disposal and/or recycling of solid waste generated within the
City of Rochester. It is currently estimated that the permitted
4. Editor's Note: Original § 11.20, City of Rochester Economic Development Special Reserve
Fund, added 6-22-2004, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-5-2016.
§ 7-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-63
1:49
capacity of the TREE Waste Disposal Facility (TLR-Ill) will be
reached in approximately the year 2023. When such facility is
filled to its permitted capacity, it is anticipated that the City will
experience a loss in revenues, and the City and its inhabitants
will experience increased costs associated with the disposal and/or
recycling of solid waste, particularly in the form of reduced and/
or lost user fees and reduced property tax revenues, as well as
increased costs associated with the disposal and/or recycling of
solid waste. Therefore, in an effort to offset the expected loss of
revenues and increased costs occurring to the City as a result of
the anticipated filling of the TREE Waste Disposal Facility to its
permitted capacity and to promote the general fiscal strength and
well-being of the City, it is necessary that economic development in
the City of Rochester be promoted and/or maintained to ensure the
existence and/or expansion of a vibrant economic base for the City
and its inhabitants.
(2) Therefore, the City Council of the City of Rochester, pursuant to the
authority granted by RSA 47:1-b and 47:1-c, hereby establishes a
special revenue reserve fund from the specific source identified in
Subsection B of this section for capital expenditures or
expenditures for capital projects, transfers to capital projects,
transfers to capital reserve, or for any other appropriation of a
nonrecurring nature in support of economic development as
determined by the City Council. The special reserve fund
established in Subsection B of this section shall be known as the
"City of Rochester Economic Development Special Reserve Fund."
No expenditure from said City of Rochester Economic Development
Special Reserve Fund shall be made without an appropriation of
such funds having been adopted by the Rochester City Council,
which appropriation shall provide that such appropriation is for
economic development purposes and shall contain a statement and/
or finding by the City Council indicating the manner in which it is
anticipated that such appropriation is related to the economic
development of the City of Rochester.
B. There is hereby created a non-lapsing budgetary account within the
City of Rochester, pursuant to the authority granted to the City by the
provisions of RSA 47:1-b, such special reserve fund to be known as the
"City of Rochester Economic Development Special Reserve Fund." Such
fund shall be funded on an annual basis by the appropriation by the City
Council to such special reserve fund of an amount not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) from the funds annually payable
to the City of Rochester by Waste Management of New Hampshire, Inc.,
from the so-called "host community fees" payable to the City pursuant
to the provisions of the Host Agreement between the City and Waste
Management of New Hampshire, Inc., or of any successor to such
agreement. In addition to such minimum funding level, the City
Manager may, during any fiscal year of the City, upon written
notification to, and appropriation by, the City Council, transfer to said
§ 7-63 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-63
1:50
§ 7-64. Conservation Fund.
City of Rochester Economic Development Special Reserve Fund
unappropriated host community fees in an amount not to exceed the
difference between the total amount of host community fees received
from Waste Management of New Hampshire, Inc., during such fiscal
year and the amount of such host community fees previously
appropriated by the Rochester City Council during such fiscal year
(having in mind the minimum funding/appropriation requirement
provided for herein and any other appropriation of such fiscal year's
host community fees by the City Council during such fiscal year).
A. Purpose. The Rochester City Council recognizes that the proper
utilization and protection of the City's natural resources and the
protection of its watershed resources are important to the well-being of
the City of Rochester and it inhabitants, and to that end the City has
adopted the provisions of Chapter 36-A of the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated providing for the establishment of a Conservation
Commission. The Rochester City Council further recognizes that
realizing the goals of properly utilizing and protecting its natural
resources and protecting its watershed resources requires the
development and implementation of a systematic program designed to
maintain and care for such resources, which program implementation is
enhanced when the Conversation Commission is provided with a
regular source of revenue. Therefore, it is the purpose of the Rochester
City Council in adopting this section to establish a mechanism whereby
the Conservation Commission is provided with a source of funding
which can be utilized to aid in the accomplishment of the goals of
properly utilizing and protecting the City of Rochester's natural
resources and protecting its watershed resources. [Added 5-4-1999]
B. Establishment of Conservation Fund. Pursuant to the provisions of RSA
36-A:5, I, a Conservation Fund is established by the City of Rochester.
Funds appropriated to said Conservation Fund by the Rochester City
Council, and any gifts received pursuant to the provisions of RSA
36-A:4, shall be placed in said fund and allowed to accumulate from
year to year. The City Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys in the
Conservation Fund and shall pay out the same only upon the order of
the Conservation Commission. Money may be expended from the
Conservation Fund by the Conservation Commission for the purposes
specified in Chapter 36-A of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated without further approval of the City Council. The
disbursement of Conservation Fund moneys shall be authorized by a
majority of the Conservation Commission. Prior to the use of such funds
for the purchase of any interest in real property, the Conservation
Commission shall hold a public hearing with notice in accordance with
RSA 675:7.
C. Establishment of annual Conservation Fund budget. The City Manager
shall include in the budget prepared and submitted to the City Council
§ 7-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-64
1:51
§ 7-65. Budget line items for merit salary increases or pay
adjustments. [Added 6-1-2004]
annually, pursuant to Section 40 of the Rochester City Charter, an
appropriation to the Conservation Fund in an amount hereinafter
provided for, the source of funds for which appropriation shall be
specified as being drawn in their entirety from revenues received by
the City during such budgetary period from the so-called "current use
change tax" provided for in RSA 79-A:7, or the corresponding provision
of any recodification of such statute. Said appropriation shall be in an
amount equal to all revenues, in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.), projected in the budget to be received by the City during
such budgetary period from the so-called "current use change tax." In
the event that the funds received by the City from the so-called "current
use change tax" shall exceed the amount projected in the budget to
be received from such source during such budgetary period, the City
Manager shall, prior to the close of the fiscal year in question, present
a supplemental appropriation in the amount of the excess receipts
funds so received and identifying such excess receipts as the source of
funding for such supplemental appropriation. The City Council shall act
on such supplemental appropriation in the ordinary course. [Amended
8-6-2002]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the authority of
the Mayor and City Council to take proper care that no money shall be
paid from the City treasury unless previously granted and appropriated,
and to secure a just and prompt accounting for expenditures made
pursuant to appropriations as provided for in RSA 47:6, as well as to
promote the well-being of the City in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 47:17, and to implement the power of the Mayor and City Council
over the City budget as specified in Sections 38 through 46 of the
Rochester City Charter. The provisions of this section shall apply solely
to annual budget line items dealing with salaries and benefits payable
to City of Rochester employees subject to the so-called Merit Plan
provided for in Sections 59 through 64 of the Rochester City Charter.
B. Establishment of annual budget line item(s) for the purpose of
estimating the amount of, and appropriating funds to pay for, a merit
salary increase and/or a merit pay adjustment. The annual proposed
budget submitted to the City Council each year, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 40 of the Rochester City Charter, and the annual
budget adopted by the City Council pursuant to the provisions of
Section 43 of the Rochester City Charter shall contain for each City
department, except for the School Department, one or more separate
line items, which line item(s) shall contain the estimated amount of
expenditures for a merit salary increase and/or a merit pay adjustment
to be made during the fiscal year covered by such budget under, and
pursuant to, the so-called Merit Plan embodied in Sections 59 through
64 of the Rochester City Charter, and the provisions of Article VI,
§ 7-64 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-65
1:52
§ 7-66. Limitation on budget increase. [Amended 1-6-2009]
Section 3 and Section 3a, of the Employment Policy Handbook, City of
Rochester, New Hampshire.
C. Prohibition against payment of a merit salary increase and/or a merit
pay adjustment made pursuant to Article VI, Section 3 and Section 3a,
of the Employment Policy Handbook, City of Rochester, New
Hampshire. No payment of any merit salary increase and/or merit pay
adjustment authorized pursuant to the provisions of Article VI, Section
3 and Section 3a, of the Employment Policy Handbook, City of
Rochester, New Hampshire, shall be paid to any employee of any
department except from the budgetary line item(s) established
pursuant to the provisions of Subparagraph B of this section for the
department in question.
D. This section shall become effective on July 1, 2004.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of
Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter, adopted on November 4,
2008, and known as the so-called "tax cap" Charter amendment.
B. The word "budget" as used throughout Section 43-a of the Rochester
City Charter, as well as in the phrases "The City Manager shall submit
the proposed budget to the City Council" in Section 40 of the Rochester
City Charter and "The budget shall be finally adopted" in Section 43 of
the Rochester City Charter, shall include the county expenditures and
the state school tax apportionment. The word "budget" as used in the
aforesaid circumstances shall not include enterprise and special
revenue funds that do not impact the tax commitment for the City.
C. The phrase in the "Override provision" of Section 43-a of the Rochester
City Charter which provides "Budgetary restrictions described in any
part of Section 43-a may be overridden upon a vote of 2/3 of all elected
members of the City Council" shall refer to both capital and operating
budgets.
D. The phrase in the "Override provision" of Section 43-a of the Rochester
City Charter which provides that "may be overridden upon a vote of 2/3
of all elected members of the City Council" shall mean 2/3 of the total
number of City Councilors in office at the time of the vote, whether or
not all of the Councilors are present. If, for example, the office of Mayor
and all 12 Council seats are filled at the time of a vote, nine votes are
needed, even if not all 13 members of the City Council are present.
E. The provisions of Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter which
provide "Such override expires following adoption of the annual
budget" and "Subsequent budgets or supplemental appropriations
require additional two-thirds override votes, or the limitations
expressed in this section will apply" shall mean that once a budget is
adopted, and throughout the fiscal year for which it is adopted, any
§ 7-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-66
1:53
subsequent supplemental appropriation to the general fund budget
for which the amount that needs to be raised by taxes exceeds the
limitation of Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter shall require
a new two-thirds override vote. The "limitation on budget increase"
as provided for in Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter for a
subsequent fiscal year budget shall be calculated using the official
Department of Revenue Administration tax setting documents for the
immediately preceding year. The "amount to be raised by taxes" as set
forth on such document shall be adjusted as provided for in Section
43-a of the Rochester City Charter. [Amended 3-5-2019]
F. If there is a decrease in revenue after adoption of the budget and before
the setting of the tax rate, which causes the tax levy to exceed the
limitations of Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter, the Council
shall reconsider the adopted budget.
G. The phrase "National Consumer Price Index – Urban as published by
the United States Department of Labor for the calendar year
immediately preceding budget adoption" shall mean the "percent
change Avg.-Avg." and not "percent change Dec.- Dec." for the calendar
year preceding the year of budget adoption of the Consumer Price
Index – All Urban Consumer (Current Series), U.S. All items,
1982-84=100, Series CUUROOOOSAO, not seasonally adjusted, as
published by the United States Department of Labor available on the
federal government website found at www.bls.gov.
H. The phrase "revaluation year" in Subsection C shall not apply to the
annual assessment updates implemented by the City of Rochester
Assessor, and such phrase shall only refer to a full City-wide revaluation
that physically reinspects every property in that year and develops new
formulas for value calculation.
I. The phrase "budget limitation with annual changes in assessments" as
contained in Subsection D of Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter
shall refer to the annual updates and phased physical property
examination that are part of the requirements to keep the City within
the parameters recommended by the New Hampshire Department of
Revenue Administration (DRA). It does not require that all properties be
changed, but that some are reviewed and/or changed as part of a
planned process to keep assessed values within DRA guidelines.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
J. The phrase "plus real estate taxes calculated by applying the prior year
real estate tax rate to the net increase in new construction" as
contained in Subsection D of Section 43-a of the Rochester City Charter
shall mean the taxes that apply to the budget as defined in Subsection B
above, namely the municipal and school tax rate and shall include the
county and state school tax rate.
K. The phrase "total dollar value of building permits less total dollar value
of demolition permits issued for the period of April 1 – March 31
§ 7-66 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-66
1:54
§ 7-67. School Building Fund [Added 10-4-2016]
preceding budget adoption" as contained in Subsection D of Section
43-a of the Rochester City Charter shall mean the construction/
demolition value estimate on which the building/demolition permit fee
is calculated, namely the values used by the Department of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services in calculating the fee to be charged
in connection with the issuance of building permits. [Amended
10-15-2013]
L. The phrase "increased by the other revenues generated by the
municipality" as contained in Subsection E of Section 43-a of the
Rochester City Charter shall include the funds derived from the use of
fund balance, transfers from other funds and all other anticipated
revenues.
M. The amount of money raised by taxes for the municipal, county, state
school tax and local school tax rates shall be derived from the DRA's tax
rate setting documents. Each of the tax rates shall separately be
multiplied by the National CPI. If the City is operating under Subsection
D of Section 43-a, the total of net new construction shall be multiplied
by the state and local school tax rate and that number added to the
school amount to be raised by taxes. The total of net new construction
shall be multiplied by the municipal and county tax rate and that
number added to the municipal amount to be raised by taxes. By
February 1 of each year, the City Manager shall inform the School
Board and the City Council of these amounts, noting they are
preliminary pending the final new net construction numbers as of April
1 of each year.
N. The School Board shall adjust its budget for the increases and
decreases in the state tax and the City shall adjust its budget for the
increases and decreases in the county tax.
O. The School Board will submit to the City Manager by March 25 of each
year its recommended budget within its cap amount, including detailed
revenue projections. The City Manager, in his/her budget presentation
to the City Council, may adjust the school budget to meet the overall
spending limitation for the City.
P. If any provision of this section shall be declared illegal, void or
unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected but shall
remain in full force and effect.
A. By adoption of a resolution on December 15, 2015, the City Council
established a capital reserve fund pursuant to RSA 34:1 for the purpose
of rehabilitating, enlarging, replacing, and/or constructing new school
facilities and/or the purchase of land for the enlargement of existing
school facilities and/or siting of new school facilities. The name of such
fund shall be the School Building Fund.
§ 7-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-67
1:55
B. The City Council, at its sole discretion, may appropriate moneys to said
School Building Fund through the annual budgeting process. The City
Council may also, by favorable vote of 3/4 of its members, transfer to
such fund, after a public hearing with notice as provided in RSA 34:2,
not more than 1/2 of its unencumbered surplus funds remaining on
hand at the end of the fiscal year, within limits as provided in RSA 34:4.
No transfer from the City's unencumbered surplus funds to the School
Building Fund shall be considered until after the annual audit
presentation by the independent auditor and confirmation of the stated
surplus. The City Council may also accept and appropriate gifts,
legacies and trusts to the School Building Fund by majority vote.
C. Expenditure of funds from the School Building Fund is at the sole
discretion of the City Council.
D. Pursuant to RSA 34:6, the Trustees of Trust Funds shall have custody of
all capital reserves transferred to the School Building Fund. The
Trustees of Trust Funds will hold the moneys appropriated to the
School Building Fund in a separate account. Appropriations made to the
School Building Fund will be paid over to the Trustees of Trust Funds
after July 1 but prior to June 30 of the fiscal year of the appropriation.
E. The City Council may dissolve the School Building Fund at its sole
discretion. Upon dissolution of any portion of said fund appropriated
from the general fund said funds will lapse to surplus (unassigned
general fund fund balance) and cannot be repurposed directly to a
different capital fund or project. Any funds contained in the School
Building Fund accepted and appropriated from gifts, legacies or trusts
may be redirected at the discretion of the City Council.
§ 7-67 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-67
1:56
ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Elections
§ 7-68. Conduct of municipal elections.
Regular and special municipal elections shall be held at such intervals and
in the manner provided in Sections 47 to 58 of the Rochester City Charter.
§ 7-69. Filing declaration of candidacy. [Amended 6-1-2010]
No person's name shall be printed upon the municipal election ballot unless,
not later than 5:00 p.m. of the 45th nor earlier than 9:00 a.m. of the 60th
day prior to the date of said municipal election, such person shall file with
the City Clerk a written declaration of candidacy on forms prepared by the
City Clerk and shall have paid to the City Clerk, for the use of the City, a
filing fee in the appropriate amount. The appropriate amount of filing fee
for the various municipal offices shall be as follows: for Mayor, fifty dollars
($50.); for City Council, ten dollars ($10.); for School Board, ten dollars
($10.); for Police Commission, ten dollars ($10.); and for election official and
any other municipal office to be voted upon at said municipal election, two
dollars ($2.).
§ 7-70. Incompatible candidacies.
No person shall be permitted to file declarations of candidacy at any
municipal election for incompatible offices. For purposes of this section,
incompatible offices shall include the offices of Mayor, City Councilor,
School Board member, and Police Commissioner. If any person shall attempt
to file declarations of candidacy for such incompatible offices, the City Clerk
shall advise of the provisions hereof.
§ 7-71. Incompatible offices.
No person shall hold two of the following offices at the same time: Mayor,
City Councilor, School Board member, and Police Commissioner. An
acceptance of any one of the aforesaid offices shall be a resignation of the
others.
§ 7-72. Recount.
Any candidate for an office at a municipal election shall be entitled to a
recount of the ballots cast at said election upon his/her filing with the City
Clerk an application for such recount in accordance with the provisions
of Section 52 of the City Charter and paying to the City Clerk for the
use of the City a fee in the appropriate amount. In cases where the vote
margin separating the candidate requesting the recount from the winning
candidate according to the official canvass of the votes is no greater than
3% of the total votes cast for such office at said election, the appropriate fee
shall be fifty dollars ($50.) for a City-wide recount and ten dollars ($10.) for
a ward recount. In all other cases, the appropriate fee for a recount shall be
§ 7-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-72
1:57
six hundred dollars ($600.) for a City-wide recount and two hundred dollars
($200.) for a ward recount.
§ 7-72 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-72
1:58
ARTICLE IX
Appointment, Election and Removal of City Officers
§ 7-73. Appointment of department heads, officers and employees.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 15 and 18 of the Rochester
City Charter, the City Manager shall appoint all department heads, officers
and employees in the administrative service of the City, except the School
Department and the Police Department as provided for in Sections 23, 24,
and 25 of the Rochester City Charter. All such appointments shall be without
definite term unless for provisional, temporary, or emergency service not
to exceed the maximum periods which may be prescribed by the rules and
regulations of the Merit Plan established pursuant to Section 60 of the
Rochester City Charter.
§ 7-74. Removal of department heads, officers and employees.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Rochester City
Charter, the City Manager may remove all department heads, officers and
employees in the administrative service of the City, except the School
Department and Police Department as provided for in Sections 23, 24 and
25 of the Rochester City Charter.
§ 7-75. (Reserved)5
§ 7-76. Public notice of vacancy.
§ 7-77. Form of statement of interest.
A person's statement of interest in an office to be filled pursuant to Section
74 of the Rochester City Charter shall be legible, shall contain writing or
A. Within three days of the receipt of a report of a vacancy in an office to
be filled pursuant to Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter, the City
Clerk shall cause a notice of such vacancy to be posted in a public place
in Rochester City Hall. Said notice shall contain the following
statement: "Any person interested in being considered for this (these)
office(s) shall file a written statement to that effect with the Rochester
City Clerk. The Mayor and City Council are not obligated to nominate
any person who files such a statement, and may nominate a person who
has not filed such a statement. All statements filed, however, will be
given to each member of the City Council before the vacancy is filled.
The City Council may fill this vacancy at any regular or special meeting
of the City Council."
B. Each such notice may list as many offices as are then vacant. The City
Clerk shall provide a copy of each such notice to each member of the
City Council as soon as practicable.
5. Editor's Note: Original § 13.3, Election of Chairman of Board of Supervisors of the
Checklist, was repealed 3-5-2019. See Sec. 53 of the City Charter.
§ 7-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-77
1:59
printing on only one side of the paper, and shall be 8.5 inches by 11 inches
or smaller. The statement shall include the person's name and address, a
statement that he/she is 18 years old or older, whether he/she is a registered
voter, the ward in which he/she resides, and such other information as he/
she desires. The City Clerk shall maintain a supply of forms to be used by
those filing such statements, and may also accept a statement on any other
paper that otherwise complies with this section.
§ 7-78. Filling vacancy; procedure.
When the Mayor intends to make a nomination to fill a vacancy pursuant to
Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter, the Mayor shall so advise the City
Clerk when preparing the agenda for the meeting at which such nomination
shall be made. The City Clerk shall then provide to each member of the
City Council a copy of each written statement received by the City Clerk
pursuant to § 7-77 and pertaining to such vacancy. All statements filed with
the City Clerk shall at all times be available for public inspection.
§ 7-79. Report of vacancies.
The chairperson of each board or committee whose members are appointed
pursuant to Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter shall be responsible
for reporting to the City Clerk all vacancies in the membership of that
board or committee. Each such chairperson shall file with the City Clerk a
written report of each such vacancy, whether arising by resignation, death
or otherwise, as soon as practicable after learning of the vacancy. For the
purpose of § 7-76 of this article, vacancies shall be deemed to exist upon the
filing of such report, without further action of the City Council, the Mayor,
the City Manager, or any other body or person.
§ 7-77 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-79
1:60
ARTICLE X
Bonds of City Officials
§ 7-80. Bonds required; amount.
All City officials as are required to give bonds for the faithful discharge of
their duties shall file the same with the City Clerk within 30 days after their
election or appointment, in the amounts following:
§ 7-81. City Council may require bond.
Other officers may be required to give bond as the City Council may
determine.
§ 7-82. Form of bonds.
All bonds shall be drawn by the City Solicitor or approved by him/her as to
legal form and proper execution before the same are presented to the City
Council for approval and shall conform as near as possible to the following
form:
A. Tax Collector: amount required by New Hampshire Department of
Revenue Administration.
B. City Treasurer: twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.).
C. City Clerk: twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.).
D. Chief of Police: five hundred dollars ($500.).
E. Deputy Chief of Police: three hundred dollars ($300.).
§ 7-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-82
1:61
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That we of Rochester, County of Strafford and State of New Hampshire,
as principal, and _________________ as surety, are holden and stand firmly
bound and obliged unto the City of Rochester, a municipal corporation
in said county and state, in the sum of __________________ dollars, to be
paid to the City of Rochester, its successors or assigns, to the payment of
which, well and truly to be made, we bind ourselves, our heirs, executors
and administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally firmly by
these presents.
Sealed with our seals and dated this _____ day of __________ A.D. 20___
The condition of the above obligation is such that whereas said
____________________ has been duly elected the _____________ of such City
of Rochester for the year 20_____ now, therefore, if the said
____________________ shall faithfully perform all the duties incumbent upon
him/her as ____________________ and shall serve all processes lawfully
directed to him/her and perform all other things whatever which a
_______________ may or ought by law to do and shall really and truly account
to said City for all money coming into his/her hands as said _______________
then this instrument shall be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force
and effect.
Signed, sealed and delivered _______________ In the presence of us,
§ 7-82 ROCHESTER CODE § 7-82
1:62
Chapter 11
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and entertainment — See Ch.
22.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 11-1. Legislative findings and purpose.
It is hereby found:
A. That there are a number of types of adult-oriented establishments
which when established require special supervision from the City's
public safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health and
welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adultoriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of socalled
"adult" motion pictures and/or videotapes and/or live
entertainment;
(2) Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts;
(3) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons,
clients or customers of such establishments within such booths,
cubicles and rooms;
(4) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
are in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios
and rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or
with other members of the same sex, thereby promoting and
encouraging prostitution and the commission of sexual acts which
cause blood, semen and urine to be deposited on the floors and/or
walls of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms, which deposits
could prove detrimental to the health and safety of other persons
who may come into contact with such deposits; and
§ 7-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1
1:63
§ 11-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases used
therein shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, videocassettes, or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below, and in conjunction
therewith has facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as
defined below, and including adult-oriented films, movies or live
entertainment, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion
pictures, live performance, display or dance or any type performance which
has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual
or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or
appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal services
offered customers.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of fewer than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
(5) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and
prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of
the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments.
C. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments,
including, without limitation, those specifically cited in Subsection A of
this section, is and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health
and safety of the citizens of Rochester.
D. It is not the intent of the City, in enacting this chapter, to deny to any
person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or State
Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the City to impose any additional
limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or
other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the City does not
intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view
any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States and/or
State Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such
sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such
materials.
§ 11-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 11-2
1:64
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, and adult mini motion-picture
theaters and further means any premises to which the public, patrons, or
members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as
to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adultoriented
motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when
such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. An adult-oriented establishment further includes,
without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or any premises that are
physically arranged and used as such, whether advertised or represented
as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter
studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, or any other term of like import.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an adultoriented
establishment.
MINOR — Shall be deemed to be a person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals or pubic region;
(2) Buttocks; or
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2
1:65
§ 11-3. Requirements for adult-oriented establishments.
"Sexual activities" as used in this chapter, is not intended to include
any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publications
or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications which
devote at least 25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and
advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography. Nor does
this definition apply to any news periodical which reports or describes
current events and which from time to time publishes photographs
of nude or semi-nude persons in connection with the dissemination
of the news. Nor does this definition apply to publications or films
which describe and report different cultures and which, from time to
time, publish or show photographs or depictions or nude or semi-nude
persons when describing cultures in which nudity or semi-nudity is
indigenous to the population.
D.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment,
including parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used
by patrons of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the City shall be
well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such a manner
that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls,
wherein adult entertainment is provided, shall be clearly visible from
the common areas of the premises. Visibility into such booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains,
partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. It shall be
unlawful to install enclosed booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within
adult-oriented establishments for whatever purposes, but especially for
the purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented
motion pictures, or other types of adult-oriented entertainment.
C. Each adult-oriented establishment shall be responsible for and shall
provide that any room or other area used for the purpose of viewing
adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of live entertainment shall
be well lighted and readily accessible at all times and shall be
continuously open to view in its entirety. The premises shall be
equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than 1.0 footcandle as measured at the floor
level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its agents to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
D. No apertures or openings of any kind shall be allowed to exist between
any two booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls used for the purpose of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other types of adult
entertainment.
§ 11-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 11-3
1:66
§ 11-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 11-5. Severability.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or
provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, such decision shall affect
only such section, clause or provision so declared unconstitutional and shall
not affect any other section, clause or provision of this chapter.
Chapter 16
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire safety — See Ch. 75.
§ 16-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for operation
and regulations applicable to emergency fire alarm systems, burglar alarm
systems, alarm businesses and alarm users.
E. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
F. An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether
the operator shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
G. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Rochester Police Department and/or employees
of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department of the City.
[Amended 10-15-2013]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which is found to have
violated this chapter shall be fined a sum not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) for each such violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense,
and any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be
considered a separate offense for each hour of violation.
§ 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2
1:67
§ 16-2. Alarm user permit required.
Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, every alarm user
shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm system he/she operates
within the City of Rochester. This permit shall be obtained through the
Communications Center which is located in the Police Department.
§ 16-3. Alarm user permit application.
§ 16-4. Alarm user permit fee.
§ 16-5. Misuse of alarm user information.
The information contained in the alarm user permit application required by
§ 16-3 and other information received by the Chief of the Police Department
or Fire Department, through correspondence or communications with the
alarm user, shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection by
the Chief of the Police Department or Fire Department or certain police
or fire officers, or City employees specifically assigned the responsibility
for handling and processing alarm user permits in the course of their
duties. If one of those persons is found to have purposely or knowingly
revealed the information contained in an alarm user permit application or
in correspondence or communications with an alarm user to any person for
any purpose not related to this chapter or official law enforcement matters,
A. The alarm user applying for the permit required in § 16-2 of this chapter
shall state on the permit application prescribed by the Chief of the
Police Department or Fire Department his/her name, the address of the
residence or business or businesses where the alarm system has been
installed, his/her telephone number, and at least two persons who can
be reached any time day or night and who are authorized to respond to
an alarm signal and who can open the premises in which the system is
installed.
B. Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an
applicant for the purpose of obtaining a user's permit or renewal, or
while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to
grant or revocation of a permit.
A. Fee. There will be a permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for the
installation of a new alarm system. For each year after the initial
installation, the renewal fee shall be ten dollars ($10.). All permits shall
be renewed each year by April 1. Any renewal fee not paid within 30
days of April 1 shall be subject to a late fee of ten dollars ($10.) in
addition to the renewal fee.
B. Fee exceptions. If a residential alarm user is over 65 years of age and is
the primary resident of the dwelling and if no business is conducted in
the residence, a user's permit may be obtained without the payment of
a fee. Federal, state, county or local government agencies that operate
an alarm system shall be exempt from payment of a fee.
§ 16-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 16-5
1:68
or without the express written consent of the alarm user supplying such
information, he/she shall be guilty of a violation.
§ 16-6. Operating system without permit; penalty.
Any alarm system user who operates or permits to be operated any alarm
system without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter, or who
operates or permits to be operated an alarm system when such permit has
expired, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 16-7. Operating system after revocation or suspension of permit;
penalty.
Any alarm system user who, after having a permit revoked or suspended
and after exhausting his/her right to a hearing, fails to disconnect his/her
alarm system, or reconnects his/her system prior to the restoration of his/
her permit, shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 16-8. False alarms.
§ 16-9. Revocation procedure.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, a false alarm shall be defined as an
alarm signal eliciting a response by police or fire personnel when a
situation requiring a response by police or fire personnel does not exist,
but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of
nature.
B. Any case where a false alarm is received in excess of six alarms in any
calendar year from an alarm system for which an alarm user permit has
been obtained, a service charge of one hundred dollars ($100.) shall be
levied.
C. If the false alarm is due to an alarm system malfunction that is in the
process of being repaired or where immediate steps are taken to
identify or correct the problem and notification has been made to the
dispatch center as applicable, the Chief of the Police Department or
Fire Department may waive the civil assessment. Refusal to pay the
civil assessment within 30 days of the assessment shall be punishable
as a violation and may be cause for revocation of the alarm user's
permit. [Amended 3-5-2019]
A. If the Police Department, in the case of a burglar alarm, or the Fire
Department, in the case of a fire alarm, has recorded false alarms in
excess of limits stated in § 16-8, the Chief of the Police Department or
Fire Department shall notify the permit holder in writing and request
the permit holder to submit a report within 15 days describing efforts to
discover and eliminate the cause(s) of the false alarms. If the alarm user
reasonably requests an extension of time to file said report based upon
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:69
§ 16-10. Application for revoked user permit.
some extraordinary circumstances, the Chief of the Police Department
or Fire Department may extend the 15 days for a reasonable time. If the
permit holder fails to submit his/her report within the specified period,
the Chief of the Police Department or Fire Department shall notify the
alarm user that his/her permit to operate an alarm system has been
revoked, and under such circumstances the user shall not be entitled to
a hearing as hereinafter provided.
B. If the alarm user submits a report as required by Subsection A of this
section but the Chief of the Police Department or Fire Department finds
the report unsatisfactory, then the Chief of the Police Department or
Fire Department may issue a written notice of his/her intent to revoke
the alarm user's permit.
C. If after submission of a report required by Subsection A of this section
which is satisfactory to the Chief of the Police Department or Fire
Department the alarm system of the permit holder incurs two or more
false alarms during the same calendar year, the Chief of the Police
Department or Fire Department may issue a written notice of his/her
intent to revoke the alarm user's permit.
D. Upon receipt of a notice of intent to revoke an alarm user's permit, the
permit holder may, within 10 days of such receipt, submit a written
request for a hearing before the Licensing Board setting forth the
reasons that his/her permit should not be revoked. Written notice of the
time, date and place of the hearing shall be served to the permit holder
at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
E. At the hearing before the Licensing Board, the holder of the permit or
his/her authorized representative shall have the right to be made aware
of the circumstances leading to revocation of the alarm permit and to
present evidence on his/her own behalf. After the hearing, the
Licensing Board may either issue an order of revocation, withdraw the
notice of revocation or allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days,
in which the alarm user must take action to eliminate the cause(s) of the
false alarms.
A. An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked
user permit as provided in § 16-9 of this chapter. The Chief of the Police
Department or Fire Department shall not be required to issue a revoked
user permit unless he/she is satisfied that the user's system has been
properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The Chief of the Police
Department or Fire Department may also impose reasonable
restrictions and/or conditions that shall appear on the permit and shall
provide for automatic revocation on the occurrence of four false alarms
in the remaining permit year.
B. In situations where a user permit is revoked under the conditions in
Subsection A of this section, there shall be no appeal to the Licensing
§ 16-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 16-10
1:70
§ 16-11. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm or corporation within the
boundaries of the City of Rochester who or which violates any provision
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.). Each day
during which a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 16-12. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect upon its passage.
Chapter 22
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 11. Parks, recreation and arena — See Ch. 158.
Board and said revocation shall remain in effect for the remainder of
the calendar year.
C. The fee for reissuance of a user permit shall be seventy-five dollars
($75.).
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-12
1:71

ARTICLE I
Theaters
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as § 26.2 of the 1995 Code]
§ 22-1. Blanket licenses; fees.
The Licensing Board may grant blanket licenses to theaters and in such case
the licensee shall pay in advance the following fees:
A. For the public showing of moving pictures, fifty dollars ($50.) for the
first three months and twenty dollars ($20.) for every three months
thereafter.
B. For exhibitions, vaudeville, entertainment, and presentations other
than moving pictures or in addition to moving pictures, one hundred
dollars ($100.) for the first three months and seventy-five dollars ($75.)
for every three months thereafter; provided, however, that if a licensee
has paid a fee for a license for a motion picture, the fee for occasional
exhibitions, vaudeville, entertainment and presentations shall only be
such sum in addition to a motion picture fee as the Board may deem just
and reasonable, but the fee for a license to exhibit in any hall shall not
exceed fifty dollars ($50.).
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1
1:73

ARTICLE II
Boxing and Wrestling Exhibitions
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as § 26.5 of the 1995 Code]
§ 22-2. Exhibitions authorized. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The holding of boxing and/or wrestling exhibitions or bouts within the
City of Rochester, under license issued by the New Hampshire Boxing
and Wrestling Commission and permit issued by the Licensing Board of
the City of Rochester, is hereby permitted and authorized, subject to the
provisions of the statutes of the State of New Hampshire relating to athletic
exhibitions. No permit for the holding of boxing and/or wrestling exhibitions
or bouts within the City of Rochester shall be issued by the Licensing
Board unless the place for holding such exhibition or bout shall have been
approved by majority vote of the City Council. After issuance by the
Licensing Board, the City Council may revoke or suspend said permit after
hearing for any cause which the Council may deem sufficient. The fee for
such permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.) per day.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:75

ARTICLE III
Public Dances, Circuses and Parades
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as § 26.6 of the 1995 Code]
§ 22-3. License required. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Unless a license therefor shall first have been obtained from the Licensing
Board, no person shall conduct a public dance, circus or carnival, theatrical
or dramatic representation, parade or procession upon any public street
or way, and no open air public meeting upon any ground abutting a public
street or way or any party or gathering on private property which party or
gathering is open to the general public. The fee for such license shall be two
dollars ($2.).
§ 22-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:77

ARTICLE IV
Bowling Alleys and Billiard Tables
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as § 26.8 of the 1995 Code]
§ 22-4. Licensing.
Bowling alleys, billiard tables and pool tables shall be licensed by the
Licensing Board in accordance with the procedures and fees established
in RSA 286 as it is now constituted and as it may from time to time be
amended.
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4
1:79

ARTICLE V
Pinball and Video Games and Machines
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 27 of the 1995 Code]
§ 22-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public
generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score, but shall not include jukeboxes. It shall include, but
not be limited to, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, video
games, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, and all games, operations,
and transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be
indicated.[Amended 3-5-2019]
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION — Includes the
following: any person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of
business any such machine is placed for use by the public, and the person,
firm, corporation, or association having control over such machine.
§ 22-6. Gambling devices not permitted.
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize or license
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary
to law.
§ 22-7. License required. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public
patronage any mechanical amusement device shall obtain a license for each
such mechanical amusement device from the Licensing Board of the City
of Rochester. Application for such license shall be made upon a form to be
supplied by the Licensing Board for that purpose. No license shall be issued
to any applicant unless he/she shall be 18 years of age and a citizen of the
United States and of good moral character. No license shall be issued to any
applicant until after the Chief of Police has approved the application.
§ 22-8. Application for license.
The application for such license shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of the applicant and his/her age, date and place of
birth. If the applicant is a naturalized citizen, he/she shall also give
satisfactory proof of naturalization.
B. Prior criminal convictions of applicant, if any.
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:81
§ 22-9. Inspection.
The Chief of Police shall investigate wherein it is proposed to operate such
machine and ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character.
§ 22-10. License fees. [Amended 12-3-1997]
Every applicant before being granted a license shall pay an annual
nonrefundable application fee of ten dollars ($10.) per machine for which
a license is sought. Upon approval of an application, every applicant shall
pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.) per machine for the privilege
of operation, or maintaining for operation, a mechanical amusement device
as defined in § 22-5 above; provided, however, that with respect to any
machine for which a license is sought under the provisions of this section
on or after July 1 of any calendar year and for which machine no license
has been issued under the provisions of this article since January 1 of the
preceding calendar year, the license fee for such machine for the balance
of such year shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.). Each license shall expire at
12:00 midnight, December 31, of the year in which such license is issued.
§ 22-11. Display of license.
The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
§ 22-12. Transfer of license.
C. Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the
business conducted at that place.
D. Description of machine to be covered by license, mechanical features,
name of manufacturer, and serial number.
E. Signed "release of information authorization" form authorizing the
Rochester Police Department to conduct a criminal record check of the
applicant and authorizing individuals to supply information to the
Rochester Police Department in connection with such record check.
A. Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine, in the same place of business, upon application to the
Chief of Police to such effect and the giving of a description and the
serial number of the new machine or device as described in § 22-8D.
Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and
the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each
and every machine displayed or operated.
B. If the licensee shall move his/her place of business to another location
within the City of Rochester, the license may be transferred to such new
location upon application to the Chief of Police, giving the street and
§ 22-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 22-12
1:82
§ 22-13. Hours of operation by minors. [Amended 3-5-2019]
No person, firm, corporation, or association holding a license under this
article shall permit any person under 18 years of age and over five years
of age to play or operate any mechanical amusement device as defined in
§ 22-5 of this article during normal school hours on any day in which the
Rochester public schools are in session, or permit any minor under the
age of 16 years to play or operate any such mechanical amusement device
after 9:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other suitable
person.
§ 22-14. False representation of age.
A minor who falsely represents his/her age for the purpose of operating
such mechanical amusement device as defined in § 22-5 of this article shall
be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.). The owner shall have
the right to request said minor to exhibit his birth certificate or other proof
of age.
§ 22-15. Revocation of license. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Every license issued hereunder may be revoked in the event the licensee,
directly or indirectly, permits the operation of any mechanical amusement
device contrary to the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the
City of Rochester or the laws of the State of New Hampshire. The license
may be revoked by the Licensing Board by a written notice to the licensee,
which notice shall specify the ordinances or law violations with which the
licensee is charged.
§ 22-16. Appeals.
Any licensee may, by written notice filed with the City Clerk within seven
days of the refusal of the Licensing Board to grant him/her a license or
of the revocation of a license, appeal to the City Council at which appeal
hearing the licensee may present witnesses and submit evidence on his/her
own behalf.
§ 22-17. Seizure and destruction of machine. [Amended 3-5-2019]
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical
amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be
seized by the police and impounded, and if, upon trial of the exhibitor for
allowing it to be used as a gambling device, said exhibitor is found guilty,
such machine shall be destroyed by the police.
number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the
Chief of Police in the same manner as provided in § 22-9 of this article.
C. A license shall not be transferable from person to person and shall be
usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license
except as designated in Subsections A and B of this section.
§ 22-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-18
1:83
§ 22-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, or association violating any of the provisions
of this article, in addition to the revocation of his/her license, shall be liable
to a fine or penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for each
offense.
§ 22-19. Severability.
Each provision of this article shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions therein, and if any provision of this article be declared invalid, all
other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
§ 22-18 ROCHESTER CODE § 22-19
1:84
Chapter 28
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation and Arena — See Ch. 158.
§ 28-1. Animal Control Officer. [Amended 8-5-1997]
The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager in
accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Rochester City Charter.
The Animal Control Officer shall be sworn in by the Chief of Police as
the Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer's salary shall be
established by the Merit Plan adopted pursuant to Section 60 of the
Rochester City Charter.
§ 28-2. Powers and duties of Animal Control Officer. [Amended
11-9-2004]
The Animal Control Officer shall attend to all complaints pertaining to
dogs and other animals, shall investigate and report on all damage caused
by dogs and other animals, shall enforce the licensing laws, and shall
enforce all other statutes which are violations, ordinances, and regulations
pertaining to dogs and other animals. The Animal Control Officer shall pick
up and dispose of all dead animals found upon public property. The Animal
Control Officer shall have the power to issue complaints and make arrests
in the performance of the Animal Control Officer's duties.
§ 28-3. Dogs running at large.6
§ 28-4. Nuisances. [Added 4-5-2011]
A. No person shall permit any dog to run at large within the City of
Rochester, except when such dog is engaged in hunting, herding,
supervised competition and exhibition or training for such. This section
shall apply to all public places and to all private property. Except as
provided for herein, no person shall permit any dog to be out of doors
off the owner's property unless said dog is on a leash held by a person
able to control the dog.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "running at large" shall mean
running without the property owned or otherwise controlled by the
owner, while not on a leash held by a person able to control the dog.
6. Note: For state statutes relative to control of dogs, see RSA 466, all provisions of which
have been adopted by the City of Rochester, effective November 1980.
§ 22-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4
1:85
§ 28-5. Removal of dog excrement. [Amended 3-5-2019]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog to allow
that dog to appear in any public place or upon the property of any other
person unless said owner or person in control has in his/her possession a
mechanical or other device for the removal of excrement, nor shall said
owner or person in control fail to expeditiously remove any such excrement
deposited by said dog in any such place. This section shall not apply to a
blind person while walking his/her guide dog.
§ 28-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-5-2019]
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.)
Chapter 40
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire safety — See Ch. 75.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 218.
Water — See Ch. 260.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
A. This section and any penalties established herein are adopted and/or
imposed pursuant to the authority granted in RSA 466:39 and 47:17, II
and XV.
B. Under this section, an animal is considered to be a nuisance if:
(1) Any animal or bird causes frequent, or long continued, noise which
disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in a neighboring
premises, not including a dog which is guarding, working, or
herding livestock, as defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4).
C. A person who is the owner, keeper, or person in control of an animal
found to be a nuisance by reason of conduct contrary to the provisions
of Subsection B above, and who fails to comply with an order to abate
the nuisance caused by such animal, shall be guilty of a violation of this
section and, after conviction, such person shall be subject to such
penalties as are provided for in this chapter. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 28-4 ROCHESTER CODE § 40-1
1:86
§ 40-1. Statutory authority.
The provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter
673, as amended, pertaining to an inspector of buildings, building plans,
regulations, and appeal are hereby adopted.
§ 40-2. Building Code Board of Appeals.
The power of a Building Code Board of Appeals in Chapter 673 of the New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated shall be vested in the Rochester
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 40-3. Recognition and adoption of State Building Code and State
Fire Code. [Amended 4-19-2005]
The City of Rochester hereby recognizes that the State Building Code under
RSA 155-A and the State Fire Code under RSA 153 are applicable within the
City of Rochester and for enforcement purposes adopts the provisions of the
same.
§ 40-4. Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services.
[Amended 4-19-2005; 10-15-2013]
For enforcement purposes by the City of Rochester, all references in the
State Building Code under RSA 155-A, or in any applicable successor code,
to the "department of building safety" shall be deemed to refer to the
Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services for the City of
Rochester, and all duties as defined therein, including those imposed upon
the "Building Official," shall be assumed by said Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department, along with the right to enforce
the same.
§ 40-5. Adoption of other codes. [Amended 4-19-2005; 9-4-2007;
5-18-2010; 10-15-2013]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of RSA 47:22, 674:51 and 674:51-a, there are
hereby adopted by the City of Rochester for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations, including the issuance of permits for the
construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, location,
maintenance, use and occupancy of buildings and structures,
installation of plumbing, use of concrete, masonry, metal, iron and
wood, and other building material, the installation of electric wiring,
and fire protection incident thereto and for the prevention of fires, the
following codes:
(1) International Property Maintenance Code (2006 edition), published
by the International Code Council, Inc., Copyright 2006.
(2) International Existing Building Code (2009 edition), published by
the International Code Council, Inc., Copyright 2009.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-5
1:87
§ 40-6. Life Safety Code. [Amended 4-19-2005]
The duties defined in and the enforcement of the Life Safety Code, NFPA
101 (2003 edition), or any applicable successor code, shall be assumed by
the Fire Chief of the City of Rochester or his/her authorized representative.
§ 40-7. Electrical Code and Property Maintenance Code. [Amended
4-19-2005; 9-4-2007; 10-15-2013]
The duties defined in and the enforcement of the NEC 2005, National
Electrical Code (2005 edition), and the International Property Maintenance
Code (2006 edition), or any applicable successor codes, shall be assumed
by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services or his/her
authorized representative.
§ 40-8. Plumbing Code. [Amended 4-19-2005; 9-4-2007;
10-15-2013; 3-5-2019]
The duties defined in and the enforcement of the International Plumbing
Code (2006 edition), or any applicable successor code, shall be assumed
by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, or his/her
authorized representative, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 200,
Sewers, of the Code of the City of Rochester where the same are defined as
the duties of the Commissioner of Public Works, with inspections to be done
by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services or an authorized
B. Three copies of each of the aforesaid codes have been and are now on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Rochester and three
copies of such codes are filed with the Department of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services for the City of Rochester. Such codes are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling on the construction of all buildings and
other structures within the corporate limits of the City of Rochester.
There are annexed to such of the aforesaid codes, as filed in the office of
the City Clerk and the Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services, as set forth below, the following exhibits setting forth the
insertions in, deletions from, exceptions to and/or changes in such
codes, which insertions, deletions, exceptions and/or changes are
adopted as part of the aforementioned codes:
(1) Exhibit A, Statement dated September 4, 2007, of insertions in,
deletions from, exceptions to and changes in the International
Property Maintenance Code (2006 edition) by the City of Rochester,
New Hampshire.
(2) Exhibit A, Statement dated January 4, 2011, of insertions in,
deletions from, exceptions to and changes in the International
Existing Building Code (2009 edition) by the City of Rochester, New
Hampshire.
§ 40-5 ROCHESTER CODE § 40-8
1:88
member of the Division of Water Supply Works or Division of Sewage and
Waste Treatment Works.
§ 40-9. Regulation of construction storage yards.
Any individual or entity engaged in excavation, development, construction,
building, and/or similar project within the City and involving the outside
storage of construction and/or related equipment and/or materials shall
forthwith cease to store such equipment and/or materials upon the premises
involving such excavation, development, construction, building and/or
similar project upon the expiration of the building permit or other similar
authorization for such project, or upon the written notification by the City
Engineer that such project has been completed, whichever event shall
first occur. Upon removal of such equipment and/or material upon the
completion of a project, the land disturbed by such storage shall be
returned to its original state.
§ 40-10. Right of entry. [Amended 10-15-2013]
The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, the Fire Chief,
or their authorized representatives in the discharge of their official duties
and upon proper identification shall have authority to enter any building,
structures, or premises at any reasonable hour.
§ 40-11. Definitions.
Where the word "municipality" is used in any code adopted herein, it shall
be deemed to mean the City of Rochester. Where the words "corporate
counsel" or "legal representative" are used in any code adopted herein, they
shall be deemed to refer to the Rochester City Solicitor.
§ 40-12. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of any code adopted herein,
or fail to comply therewith or with any requirements thereof, or who
shall erect, construct, alter, or repair or has erected, constructed,
altered, or repaired a building or structure or portion thereof in
violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved
thereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.)
for the first offense and five hundred fifty dollars ($550.) for subsequent
offenses, for each day that such violation is found by a court to continue
after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives
written notice from the City that he/she is in violation thereof,
whichever date is earlier. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense. The owner of a building or structure or portion
thereof or of the premises where anything in violation of any code
adopted herein shall be placed or shall exist, and an architect, building
contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection
therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such
§ 40-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-12
1:89
§ 40-13. Fire limits established. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The fire limits for the City of Rochester are hereby established as those
areas classified as Downtown Commercial, Office Commercial and Highway
Commercial Districts and adjacent to North and South Main Streets in
Rochester proper and Main Streets in Gonic and East Rochester, so called,
as shown on the Zoning Maps, as an overlay, adopted as part of the Zoning
Ordinance, adopted on March 4, 1986, which are incorporated herein by
specific reference thereto.7
§ 40-14. More restrictive provisions to apply.
When the provisions of any codes adopted herein cover essentially the same
subject matter, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
§ 40-15. Permits.
violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by a civil penalty of two hundred seventyfive
dollars ($275.) for the first offense and five hundred fifty dollars
($550.) for subsequent offenses, for each day that such violation is
found by a court to continue after the conviction date or after the date
on which the violator receives written notice from the City that he/
she is in violation thereof, whichever date is earlier. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense. [Amended 4-5-2016;
3-5-2019]
B. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
City Solicitor from instituting an appropriate action or procedure to
prevent any unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate
a violation or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or
premises, or portion thereof, or of the premises, or to prevent an illegal
act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises.
A. Permits shall be obtained from the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
or repair of any foundation, footing, building or structure or for the
installation of plumbing, use of concrete, masonry, metal, iron and
wood, and other building material, the installation of electric wiring,
and fire protection incident thereto for the prevention of fires, including
but not limited to swimming pools, signs, and fences, except that no
permit shall be required for painting, papering, laying floors, or upkeep
in maintenance of any structure. Separate permits shall be required for
building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire protection, and
demolition. Prior to the issuance of a foundation or building permit by
the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, the applicant
for such permit shall file with the Department of the Building, Zoning,
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning. Original § 40.14, Access to basements, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 9-6-2011.
§ 40-12 ROCHESTER CODE § 40-15
1:90
and Licensing Services a foundation certification plan bearing the
stamp of a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor and containing a
statement from such surveyor to the effect that the proposed building
or structure complies with all applicable building or structure setback
requirements and that no portion of the new building or structure
is located within any of the setback areas required by law. The
requirement for a foundation certification plan may be waived, in
writing, by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
if, in the discretion of the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services there are reasonable grounds to conclude that the preparation
and submission of a foundation certification plan is unnecessary to
ensure that the new building or structure does not violate any required
setback. [Amended 6-15-1999; 6-15-2004; 10-15-2013]
(1) The following fees shall be charged for said permits, based upon
the estimated cost of construction as presented to the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services upon application forms
provided by him: on proposed work, the fee of nine dollars ($9.) per
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) of estimated cost of work, or any
portion thereof, with a minimum fee of ten dollars ($10.), in
addition to an application fee of ten dollars ($10.) for each permit.
(2) Each building permit shall expire 12 months from the date of
issuance unless renewed by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services prior to the expiration date. Any renewal shall
require reapplication and payment of required fees based on the
remaining work to be done. The Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services may issue no building permit until such other
permits or approvals as may be required by any code, other
ordinances, or state statutes have been acquired.
(3) A separate permit shall be required for staging, scaffolding,
platforms, or other similar equipment to be erected on private
property that is to be erected for a period exceeding 30 days. Said
permit shall expire 12 months from the date of issue and all
equipment shall be removed upon said expiration or upon
completion of the work, whichever comes first. The fee for said
permit shall be five dollars ($5.). The City reserves the right to
revoke, deny, or not reissue said permit if work required is not
being actively pursued in a timely or otherwise reasonable manner.
(4) Fees for building permits shall be waived for an honorably
discharged veteran or an active duty, National Guard or reserve
member of the United States Armed Forces who plans to construct
or have constructed for himself/herself a home or appurtenance to
a home already owned by him/her for exclusive occupancy by
himself/herself and his/her immediate family. [Amended
1-12-2016]
(5) Permits issued to or for the City of Rochester are exempt from the
above fees.
§ 40-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-15
1:91
B. The estimated cost of construction for purposes of Subsection A of this
section shall be calculated on the following basis: [Amended
9-4-2007; 1-4-2011]
(1) For contract work, new buildings and newly constructed additions,
the building permit fee shall be based on the greater of all contract/
construction costs associated with the total construction project or
the cost of construction as determined using the latest "Building
Valuation Data" as published periodically by the International Code
Council. When construction costs are determined using the
"Building Valuation Data" as published by the International Code
Council, such costs shall be multiplied by a modification factor of
0.60. Construction costs shall include, but not be limited to, pile
driving, foundations, structural and nonstructural framing, interior
finish (as regulated by this chapter), fire protection systems and
any other work which would render the building complete and
ready for occupancy. [Amended 3-5-2019]
(2) For non-contract work, not covered under Subsection B(1), such as
when a homeowner furnishes his/her own or has furnished free
labor but purchases the materials, the fee shall be based on the
actual cost of all materials with a multiplier of two applied. For
example, total materials of five thousand dollars ($5,000.): $5,000 x
2 = $10,000. The permit fee would therefore be ninety dollars
($90.) (or 10.0 x $9). If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the
cost of construction is underestimated on the application, the
permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed
documentation to meet the approval of the Building Official. Final
building permit cost of construction shall be approved by the
Building Official.
(3) Any person who is found to have demolished, constructed, altered,
removed, or changed the use of a building or structure without the
benefit of a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire
protection or demolition permit shall, upon application for said
permit(s), be assessed a permit fee of twice the normal rate
outlined in Subsection A of this section or twenty-five dollars ($25.),
whichever is greater. Example: Cost of materials = $15,392; Labor
= Self; Permit Fee = 16.0 x $9 x 2 (self labor) x 2 (added fee) =
$576.
(4) In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or
discontinuance of a building project, the portion of the work
actually completed shall be computed and any excess fee for the
uncompleted work shall be returned to the permit holder upon
written request. All plan examination and permit processing fees
and all penalties that have been imposed on the permit holder
under the requirements of this chapter shall first be collected. The
permit processing fee shall be 10% of the building permit
application fee with a minimum fee of ten dollars ($10.).
[Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 40-15 ROCHESTER CODE § 40-16
1:92
§ 40-16. Prospective application.
Nothing in this chapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights
acquired or liability incurred, nor any causes of action accrued or existing,
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby, nor shall any right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired, or affected by this chapter. This chapter
shall have prospective application only.
§ 40-17. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the codes
hereby adopted shall not invalidate any other sections or provisions thereof.
§ 40-18. Cleanup of construction sites. [Amended 2-4-1997;
10-15-2013]
Within 30 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or, in the
case of a project which is terminated or delayed indefinitely, within 30
days of appropriate notification by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services, the land at any construction site must be reclaimed.
Such reclamation includes removal of all vehicles, equipment, materials,
and temporary structures related to the construction project and
restoration of any disturbed land to a grassed, planted, or otherwise
erosion-free condition.
Chapter 49
CEMETERIES
§ 49-1. Adoption of state statutes by reference.
The City of Rochester, by virtue of this reference thereto, hereby adopts
the provisions of Chapter 289 of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated, titled "Cemeteries," as currently enacted, or as from time to
time hereinafter amended, including specifically RSA 289:1 through 289:23,
within the City of Rochester; provided, however, that in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 289:6, II, the City of Rochester shall elect no cemetery
trustees, but rather the powers, duties and responsibilities of cemetery
trustees, as more particularly described and set forth in said Chapter 289 of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, shall be delegated to the
Rochester City Manager.
§ 49-2. Control of certain cemeteries.
The Old Cemetery by Willow Brook, the Old Town Farm Cemetery and the
Cemetery on Haven's Hill shall be under the control of the City Manager
acting pursuant to authority conferred upon such City Manager by the
provisions of § 49-1 of this chapter, who shall have authority to dispose
of vacant lots within said cemeteries, and the money received from any
§ 40-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:93
sales of said lots shall be kept by the Board of Trustees of Trust Funds,8
in accordance with the provisions of this section, and shall be used for the
improvement of said cemeteries by the City Manager acting pursuant to
authority conferred upon such City Manager by the provisions of § 49-1 of
this chapter.
Chapter 54
CITATIONS
§ 54-1. Purpose and objectives.
In addition to any other enforcement procedure authorized by law, any City
official with authority to prosecute an offense under any municipal code,
ordinance, bylaw, or regulation, if such offense is classified as a violation
under applicable law, may issue and serve upon the defendant, in addition
to a summons to appear in the Circuit Court, a local ordinance citation as
set forth in this chapter. A defendant receiving such a citation may plead
guilty or nolo contendere by mail by entering that plea as provided herein.
If such a plea is accepted by the Circuit Court and the prescribed fine is
paid with the plea by mail, the defendant shall not be required to appear
personally or by counsel; otherwise the defendant shall appear as directed
by the Court.
§ 54-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the City by RSA
31:39-d.
§ 54-3. Fine schedule. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Any defendant issued a local ordinance citation may plead guilty or nolo
contendere by mail within 10 days of receipt of the local ordinance citation
consistent with the following violation fine schedule:
Category First Offense Second Offense
Permits $50 $100
Garbage, residential solid waste
and debris
$75 $150
Infestation $100 $200
Interior, building elements $125 $250
Exterior, building elements $150 $300
Exterior, motor vehicles $200 $400
All other violations $100 $275
8. Editor's Note: See § 7-29, Trustees of Trust Funds.
§ 49-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 54-3
1:94
Chapter 75
FIRES AND FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 16.
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-3
1:95

ARTICLE I
Fire Department
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 22 of the 1995 Code; amended 6-6-2006;
8-7-2018]
§ 75-1. Appointment and requirements of Fire Chief. [Amended
3-5-2019]
Upon appointment, the Fire Chief shall within six months establish
residence within the City's boundaries. The Fire Chief shall work under the
direct supervision of the City Manager in accordance with the provisions
of Section 18 of the Rochester City Charter. The Fire Chief shall manage
the Fire Department and consult with and advise the City Manager on all
matters pertaining to the equipment and control of the Fire Department.
Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Fire Chief shall make rules
and regulations for the internal operation of the Fire Department as he/
she deems necessary and shall keep the same posted in the fire station and
other buildings of the Department.
§ 75-2. Transfer of authority in Chief's absence.
The Assistant Chief shall be senior in rank to the Deputy Chief and Fire
Marshal and in the absence of the Chief shall perform all the duties and
have the powers of the Chief. In the absence of the Fire Chief and Assistant
Fire Chief, the Fire Chief shall designate an Acting Chief who shall perform
all the duties and accept all the responsibilities of the Fire Chief per RSA
154:5 and 154:7 until such time as the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief
returns and assumes his/her duties.
§ 75-3. Taking equipment and apparatus outside of City.
The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall be notified by dispatch whenever an
apparatus responds to an incident outside of the City. The Chief shall notify
the City Manager whenever practical and convenient when an apparatus
is to be outside the City for extended periods or other circumstances
determined by the Chief.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:97

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 23 of the 1995 Code]
§ 75-4. Fire Safety Rules and Regulations.
The rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal as they are now
constituted and as they are from time to time amended are hereby adopted
as and for the Fire Safety Rules and Regulations of the City of Rochester.
The full text of such rules and regulations may be obtained by any person at
the office of the Chief of the Fire Department of the City of Rochester.
§ 75-5. Enforcement officer.
The words "officer" and/or "local authorities" wherever used in the rules and
regulations of the State Fire Marshal adopted in the foregoing section shall
be deemed to refer to the Chief of the Rochester Fire Department.
§ 75-6. Smoke detector wiring. [Amended 2-8-2000]
When installing one-hundred-twenty-volt hard-wired smoke detectors in any
type occupancy, the smoke detector shall be wired to a lighting circuit.
§ 75-7. Outdoor fires.9
No person shall kindle, light, or otherwise start an outdoor fire in the
City of Rochester for any purpose whatsoever without first having obtained
a written permit, without cost, from the Chief of the Rochester Fire
Department. All such permits shall be in writing and in such form as the
Chief of the Rochester Fire Department shall prescribe and shall set forth
any conditions or restrictions which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, shall
be reasonably necessary and prudent to ensure the safe performance of
permitted activities.
§ 75-8. Provisions for rapid entry.
A. For purposes of rapid entry in cases of emergencies or required access
to buildings after hours, any new construction on the following type
occupancies occurring after the date of the adoption of this article will
require a Knox-Box® to be installed on such premises:
(1) Assembly.
(2) Educational.
(3) Mercantile.
(4) Business.
(5) Industrial.
9. Editor's Note: See also § 149-1, Burning of refuse and garbage.
§ 75-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-8
1:99
§ 75-9. Public safety amplification system required in large
facilities. [Amended 1-2-2007]
The purpose of this system is to provide minimum standards to ensure
a reasonable degree of reliability for emergency services communications
from within certain buildings and structures within the City to and from
emergency communications centers. It is the responsibility of the
emergency service provider to get the signal to and from the building site.
(6) Apartment complex.
B. The Fire Chief shall have authority to require any other type of building,
not listed above, to install a Knox-Box® to meet rapid entry
requirements, if in his/her discretion public safety considerations
require such installation.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to:
(1) New buildings greater than 50,000 square feet;
(2) Existing buildings over 50,000 square feet when modifications,
alterations or repairs exceed 50% of the value of the existing
building(s) and are made within any twelve-month period or the
usable floor area is expanded or enlarged by more than 50%; and
(3) All sublevels, regardless of the occupancy, over 10,000 square feet.
B. Radio coverage.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall erect,
construct or modify any building or structure or any part thereof, or
cause the same to be done, which fails to support adequate radio
coverage for firefighters and police officers.
(2) The City's Fire Department, with consideration of the appropriate
emergency services department, shall determine the frequency
range or ranges that must be supported. [Amended 3-5-2019]
(3) For the purposes of this section, adequate radio coverage shall
constitute a successful communications test between the
equipment in the building and the communications center for all
appropriate emergency service providers for the building.
C. Inbound into the building.
(1) A minimum average in-building field strength of 2.25 microvolts
(-100 dbm) for analog and five microvolts (-93 dbm) for digital
systems throughout 85% of the area of each floor of the building
when transmitted from the City's police dispatch center and the
appropriate emergency service dispatch centers which are
providing fire and emergency medical protection services to the
building.
§ 75-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 75-9
1:100
(2) If the field strength outside the building where the receive antenna
system for the in-building system is located is less than -100 dbm
for analog or -93 dbm for digital systems, then the minimum
required in-building field strength shall equal the field strength
being delivered to the receive antenna of the building.
(3) As used in this section, 85% coverage or reliability means the radio
will transmit 85% of the time at the field strength and levels as
defined in this section.
D. Outbound from the building.
(1) A minimum average signal strength of 112 microvolts (-6 dbm) for
analog and five microvolts (+1 dbm) for digital systems as received
by the City's police dispatch center and the appropriate emergency
service dispatch centers which are providing fire and emergency
medical protection services to the building.
(2) FCC authorization. If amplification is used in the system, all FCC
authorizations must be obtained prior to use of the system. A copy
of these authorizations shall be provided to the City's Fire
Department.
E. Enhanced amplification systems.
(1) Where buildings and structures are required to provide amenities
to achieve adequate signal strength, they shall be equipped with
any of the following to achieve the required adequate radio
coverage: radiating cable system(s), internal multiple antenna
system(s) with an acceptable frequency range and an amplification
system(s) as needed, voting receiver system(s) as needed, or any
other City-approved system(s).
(2) If any part of the installed system or systems contains an
electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of
operation on an independent battery or generator system for a
period of at least eight hours without external power input or
maintenance. The battery system shall automatically charge in the
presence of external power.
(3) Amplification equipment must have adequate environmental
controls to meet the heating, ventilation, cooling and humidity
requirements of the equipment that will be utilized to meet the
requirements of this section. The area where the amplification
equipment is located must be free of hazardous materials such as
fuels, asbestos, etc. All communications equipment, including
amplification systems, cable and antenna systems, shall be
grounded with a single point ground system of five ohms or less.
The ground system must include an internal tie point within three
feet of the amplification equipment. System transient suppression
for the telephone circuits, AC power, radio frequency (RF) cabling
§ 75-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-9
1:101
and grounding protection are required as needed. [Amended
3-5-2019]
(4) The following information shall be provided to the Fire Department
by the builder:
(a) A blueprint showing the location of the amplification
equipment and associated antenna systems which includes a
view showing building access to the equipment; and
(b) Schematic drawings of the electrical, backup power, antenna
system and any other associated equipment relative to the
amplification equipment, including panel locations and
labeling.
F. Testing procedures; method to conducts tests. Tests shall be made
using frequencies close to the frequencies used by the police and
appropriate emergency services. If testing is done on the actual
frequencies, then this testing must be coordinated within the City's Fire
Department. All testing must be done on frequencies authorized by the
FCC. A valid FCC license will be required if testing is done on
frequencies different from the police, fire or emergency medical
frequencies.
G. Measurements shall be made using the following guidelines:
(1) With a service monitor using a unity gain antenna on a small
ground plane;
(2) Measurements shall be made with the antenna held in a vertical
position at three to four feet above the floor;
(3) A calibrated service monitor (with a factory calibration dated
within 24 months) may be used to do the test;
(4) The telecommunications unit representative for the City may also
make simultaneous measurements to verify that the equipment is
making accurate measurements. A variance of three db between
the instruments will be allowed; and
(5) If measurements in one location are varying, then average
measurements must be used.
(a) All testing shall be done in the presence of a Fire Department
representative at no expense to the City or appropriate
emergency services department.
(b) Signal strength, both inbound and outbound as defined above,
shall be measured on each and every floor above and below
ground, including stairwells, basements, penthouse facilities
and parking areas of the structure. The structure shall be
divided into fifty-foot grids and the measurements shall be
taken at the center of each grid.
§ 75-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 75-9
1:102
§ 75-10. Administration and enforcement. [Amended 3-7-2006;
3-3-2015; 3-5-2019]
The authority having jurisdiction for the administration and enforcement of
this article shall be the Fire Chief of the City of Rochester.
H. Annual tests. Annual tests will be conducted by the City's
telecommunications unit or appropriate emergency services
department. If communications appear to have degraded or if the tests
fail to demonstrate adequate system performance, the owner of the
building or structure is required to remedy the problem and restore the
system in a manner consistent with the original approval criteria. The
re-testing will be done at no expense to the City or the appropriate
emergency services department as required in the original testing
procedures.
I. Field testing. Police and fire personnel, after providing reasonable
notice to the owner or his/her representative, shall have the right to
enter onto the property to conduct field testing to be certain the
required level of radio coverage is present. Certificates of occupancy
may be denied for new and existing buildings for failure to comply with
these requirements.
A. The fee schedule under this article shall be as follows:
(1) Tank removal: twenty-five dollars ($25.).
(2) Blasting: twenty-five dollars ($25.).
(3) Incident report: five dollars ($5.)
(4) Fire Marshal's investigation report: twenty-five dollars ($25.).
(5) Photographs (fire scene): fifteen dollars ($15.).
(6) CD photos (fire scene): fifteen dollars ($15.).
(7) Fire alarm system plan review: one dollar ($1.) per device or fifty
dollars ($50.) minimum.
(8) Sprinkler system plan review: one dollar ($1.) per device or fifty
dollars ($50.) minimum.
(9) Commercial hood fire suppression: one dollar ($1.) per device or
fifty dollars ($50.) minimum.
(10) Clean agent: one dollar ($1.) per device or fifty dollars ($50.)
minimum.
(11) Initial inspection: free of charge.
(12) Reinspections (sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, commercial
hood fire suppression, clean agent): fifty dollars ($50.) per person
with one hundred dollars ($100.) minimum.
§ 75-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:103
§ 75-11. Means of escape. [Amended 6-6-2006]
All factories, hotels, tenement houses, public halls, schoolhouses and other
buildings used as places of public resort in the City shall be provided with
ample means of escape in case of a fire and adequate facilities for entrance
and exits on all occasions, and be so erected as not to endanger the health
and safety of persons who occupy them.
§ 75-12. Fire Department access. [Amended 6-6-2006]
Before construction on commercial buildings, a residential street or a
private street with two or more duplexes or single-family dwellings may
begin, Fire Department access roads shall be designed and maintained to
support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided with a
surface suitable for all-weather driving capabilities.
§ 75-13. Inspections; control of fire hazards. [Amended 6-6-2006]
The Chief or his/her designee shall examine or cause to be examined, at
regular intervals, all places where combustible material may be collected or
deposited and cause the same to be removed by the tenants, occupants or
owners of such place, at their expense, whenever, in the opinion of the Fire
Chief, such removal is necessary for the security of the City against fires. A
record of all such inspections shall be kept by the Chief or his/her designee.
§ 75-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-6-2006; 5-2-2017]
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or partnership who or which shall
violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a violation punishable
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) or not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.). Each day that the violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of record of any property
upon which a violation of this article occurs shall be held strictly liable for
any violation occurring on his/her or its property and shall be guilty of a
violation in the same manner as stated above.
§ 75-15. Sprinkler requirements for certain dwellings. [Amended
3-6-2007]
In addition to sprinkler requirements for structures under the provisions of
the applicable NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) code and/or any
other applicable law or regulation, all newly constructed duplexes, triplexes
and single-family dwelling unit combination structures that are attached to
(13) Listed agent: twenty-five dollars ($25.) per year, per restriction.
(14) False alarm, fire alarm activation: one hundred seventy-five dollars
($175.) after two consecutive, per calendar year.
B. The fine for working without a permit or license is one hundred seventyfive
dollars ($175.).
§ 75-10 ROCHESTER CODE § 75-15
1:104
each other shall be sprinklered in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) code standards as contained in the New Hampshire
State Fire Code.
§ 75-16. Fireworks. [Added 3-4-2008; amended 11-9-2010;
4-2-2013]
A. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 160-C, it shall be illegal for
any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, purchase, possess, use, explode or display any
permissible fireworks within the City of Rochester, except as
specifically provided for in this section.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPLAY — The use, explosion, activation, ignition, discharge, firing or
any other activity which is intended to cause or which causes a firework
to do what it was manufactured to do.
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the City of Rochester or his/her
designee.
PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS — Those consumer firework devices
defined as "permissible fireworks" in RSA 160-C, as the same currently
exists or as, from time to time, hereinafter amended.
POLICE CHIEF — The Police Chief of the City of Rochester or his/her
designee.
C. Permit required. No person shall use, discharge or explode any
permissible fireworks without a permit issued by the City of Rochester.
[Added 2-14-2017]
(1) Any person wishing to obtain a permissible fireworks display
permit shall apply to the Licensing Board at least 15 days prior to
the display. The time frame may be waived at the discretion of the
Police and Fire Chiefs. [Amended 5-2-2017]
(2) The applicant shall provide the following information:
(a) Date of application.
(b) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant.
(c) Address of location where the display will be held.
(d) Diagram of the display location, showing the location of all
nearby property lines, nearby buildings, public ways, nearby
trees, electrical and telephone lines or other overhead
obstructions, and the location of any nearby storage of
flammable or combustible liquids or gases.
(e) Name of the owner of the property where the display will be
held.
§ 75-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-16
1:105
(f) Intended date and time of display, including a possible rain
date.
(g) Written authorization of the property owner, if different from
the applicant.
(h) Signature of the applicant.
(3) Permit fee. The fee for a permissible fireworks display shall be five
dollars ($5.) per event. The fee shall be paid at the time of
application and is nonrefundable.
(4) Site inspections.
(a) Prior to issuing a permit, the Police Chief or the Fire Chief may
conduct an inspection of the display site to determine whether
a permissible fireworks display can be held in a safe manner.
(b) If, in the opinion of the Licensing Board, the proposed site is
not suitable for the safe display of permissible fireworks, the
application for a permit shall be denied. [Amended 5-2-2017]
D. Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 160-C of
the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated it shall be lawful to
possess and/or display permissible fireworks upon compliance with the
following requirements:
(1) A person who is 21 years of age or older may display permissible
fireworks on private property with the written consent of the owner
or in the owner's presence, subject to the provisions of this section
and RSA 160-C and any other applicable ordinance, regulation or
statute.
(2) No display of permissible fireworks shall be permitted within the
City except between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on the
following holiday: Fourth of July (including the evening of July 3
beginning at 6:00 p.m., including from such time until 12:00
midnight on any rain date established for the annual City-wide
fireworks display held at the Rochester Fairgrounds), after
obtaining a permit. [Amended 6-6-2013; 2-14-2017]
(3) The display of permissible fireworks shall be of such a character,
and so located and conducted, that it shall not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person. In accordance with the
provisions of RSA 160-C, permissible fireworks shall not be
permitted on public property and must be at least 50 feet from
nearby buildings, nearby trees, electrical and telephone lines or
other overhead obstructions, and the location of any nearby
storage of flammable or combustible liquids or gases.
(4) No permissible fireworks may be used, discharged, exploded, or
displayed during periods of very high or extreme fire danger as
§ 75-16 ROCHESTER CODE § 75-16
1:106
determined by the Fire Chief or the New Hampshire Division of
Forests and Lands.
(5) Permissible fireworks may be used, discharged, exploded, or
displayed in a manner such that any and all discharge debris shall
remain within the property lines of the lot on which the display
originates.
(6) Anyone using permissible fireworks shall be responsible for
removing any debris accumulated due to the discharge of fireworks
that fall onto the public way, public property, and any private
property within 24 hours. Anyone failing to remove such debris
shall be financially responsible for its cleanup. [Amended
3-5-2019]
(7) Display of permissible fireworks shall be permitted on public
property the evening of July 3 beginning at 6:00 p.m., including
from such time until 12:00 midnight on any rain date established
for the annual City-wide fireworks display held at the Rochester
Fairgrounds, provided that such display shall be authorized in a
duly issued block party application/permit from the City's Licensing
Board covering the public property on which the display is to occur.
[Added 6-4-2013]
E. A violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for
in § 75-14 of this article.
F. This section shall be construed consistently with New Hampshire Code
of Administrative Rules Chapter Saf-C 2600, as made applicable by
state statute and as adopted by reference in § 75-4 of this article, and is
not meant to repeal any section thereof. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted so as to conflict with the provisions of Chapter 160-B or
160-C of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as currently
written, or as from time to time hereafter amended. If any subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct, independent provision
and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
G. The Police Chief or Fire Chief may suspend the use of permissible
fireworks for any of the following reasons:
(1) Unfavorable weather conditions, including but not limited to
lightning storms or high wind conditions exceeding 20 miles per
hour or higher.
(2) If any person under the age of 21 possesses, uses, discharges or
explodes or used, discharged or exploded any permissible firework
device.
§ 75-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-16
1:107
§ 75-17. Listed Agent Program. [Added 3-3-2015]
In accordance with NFPA 1:2009 1.13, or the applicable adopted section
of the current code, the Rochester Fire Department enacts the Listed
Agent Program. The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall promulgate
administrative rules for the management of the Listed Agent Program.
§ 75-18. Regulation of fire alarms. [Added 3-3-2015]
The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall promulgate administrative rules for
the management of the installation and maintenance of fire alarms.
(3) If any person who is using, discharging, exploding, or displaying
the permissible fireworks appears to be under the influence of
alcohol or drugs.
(4) If, in the opinion of the Police Chief or Fire Chief, the use,
discharge, exploding, or display of permissible fireworks would
create a threat to public safety.
H. The Police Chief and/or Fire Chief is authorized to seize, take, remove
or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all firework
devices that are being discharged in violation of this section.
I. The City Manager, Mayor, and/or the City Council may declare a special
event of cultural or civic significance and authorize the display of
fireworks on the same terms as Subsection D(2) on particular days to
celebrate those special events. [Added 2-14-2017]
§ 75-16 ROCHESTER CODE § 75-18
1:108
Chapter 80
FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
§ 75-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-18
1:109

ARTICLE I
Food Service Establishments
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 25, Art. 3, of the 1995 Code; amended
8-4-1998; 6-15-2004; 5-1-2007]
§ 80-1. Food Code adopted. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City of Rochester hereby adopts the provisions of the Food Code of
the State of New Hampshire, Department of Health and Human Services,
Division of Public Health Services, as presently enacted and as may be
amended from time to time.
§ 80-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Health of the City of Rochester.
FOOD CODE — The State of New Hampshire, State Department of Health
and Human Services, Food Code as adopted by § 80-1 above, and as the
same shall be amended from time to time by the Department of Health and
Human Services.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant,
temporary food service establishment, cafeteria, coffee shop, cocktail
lounge, catering kitchen, sidewalk cafe, commissary, grill, luncheonette,
short-order cafe, sandwich shop, soda fountain, ice cream shop, mobile ice
cream truck, mobile lunch truck, tearoom, drive-in theater, mobile theater,
drive-in restaurant, nightclub, roadside stand, grocery store, meat market,
bakery, warehouse, juice bar, industrial feeding establishment, food vending
operation (whether attended or unattended), private, public or nonprofit
organization or institution serving the public, or similar place in which food
is prepared for sale or consumption or any establishment where food is
stored, manufactured and/or processed or packaged or any other eating or
drinking establishment where food or drink is served or provided for the
public with or without charge.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Rochester or his/her
designee.
SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food service
establishment as defined above, fixed or mobile, which operates within the
City of Rochester for a period of time longer than 14 days but no longer than
six months during any fiscal year, and provided, further, that the applicant
seeking a license for a seasonal food service establishment shall be required
to designate in writing, at the time of filing an annual application for such
license, the six months in which such seasonal food service establishment
shall be operated, and such months shall be noted on the license issued to
such applicant.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:111
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food service
establishment as defined above which operates at a fixed location for a
temporary period of time, not to exceed 14 days, in connection with a fair,
carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar transitory gathering.
§ 80-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment
within the City of Rochester who does not possess a valid license for that
purpose issued to him/her by the Board. Only a person who complies with
the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such
a license. Licenses shall not be transferable from one person to another
person or another place. A valid license shall be conspicuously posted
in every food service establishment. Licenses for temporary food service
establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days.
§ 80-4. Issuance of license; fees. [Amended 9-3-2013; 3-5-2019]
Every applicant for a license to operate a food service establishment shall
make written application therefor on forms provided by the Board. Upon
receipt of an application and the designated license fee, and after inspection
to ensure compliance with the Sanitary Food Code, a license shall be issued
to the applicant by the Board if the requirements of this article have been
met. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the first day of July in
each year.
A. Fees. Based upon highest classification.
(1) Class A. Food service establishments having a seating capacity of
200 persons or more; retail food store with four or more food
preparation areas: three hundred dollars ($300.).
(2) Class B. Food service establishments having a seating capacity of
100 through 199 persons; retail food store with two to three food
preparation areas: two hundred dollars ($200.).
(3) Class C. Food service establishments having a seating capacity of
more than 25 but fewer than 100 persons; retail food store with one
food preparation area; caterers; bar or lounge that serves food;
service/fraternal clubs with bar/liquor lounges; nursing homes: one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.).
(4) Class D. Food service establishments with a seating capacity of 25
or fewer (including but not limited to bakeries); food service
establishments with take-out service and no seating; drive-in movie
theaters; service/fraternities and sororities; group day-care
facilities; shared homes; rest homes; sheltered homes; boarding
homes; home food manufacturers; and mobile food operators: one
hundred dollars ($100.).
(5) Class E. Bed-and-breakfast; ice cream vendors - scooping; lodging
facilities serving continental breakfast: eighty-five dollars ($85.).
§ 80-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 80-4
1:112
§ 80-5. Suspension of license.
(6) Class F. Retail food store - no preparation areas; wholesalers/
distributors of TSC* food; vending machines serving TSC* foods;
bakeries which do not serve TSC* food or have seating; food
service establishments selling only pre-packaged products:
seventy-five dollars ($75.). (*TSC - Time/Temperature Control for
Food Safety)
(7) Class G. Bar or lounge with no food preparation area that serves
alcohol; arena/theater concessions serving non-TSC* food; retail
food stores serving pre-packaged ice cream only; institutions;
private schools; senior meal sites; sellers of pre-packaged frozen
USDA meat or poultry; temporary food establishments; vending
machine operators per location that do not dispense TSC* food;
social clubs; residential day-care facilities: fifty dollars ($50.).
(*TSC - Time/Temperature Control for Food Safety)
(8) Class H. Nonprofit charitable organizations not holding a liquor
license and not serving meals on a daily basis; public and private
schools; government facilities: no fee.
(9) Class I. Seasonal food service establishments (open less than six
months of the year): fee is 1/2 the annual fee for corresponding
nonseasonal Class A through Class H establishments set forth
above.
(10) Class J. Food establishments at Rochester Fair: sixty-five dollars
($65.).
B. All applications for food service establishment licenses shall be filed
with the Board on or before June 20 of each year. In addition to the fees
provided for in this section, there shall be a late fee of ten dollars ($10.)
for any renewal application received after June 20 of any year.
A. If in the judgment of the Health Officer a licensee has failed to comply
with any provision of this article, the licensee shall be notified in writing
by the Health Officer of such failure of compliance and the licensee
shall thereafter immediately bring his/her food service establishment
into compliance with this article. If the licensee fails to bring his/her
food service establishment into compliance with this article, the Health
Officer may petition the Board in writing that the license be suspended
and the Board shall give the licensee at least seven days' notice of the
scheduling of the hearing on said petition. As a result of said hearing,
the Board may suspend the license during such a period of time as the
failure of compliance exists.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, whenever the
Health Officer or Board finds unsanitary or other conditions in the
operation of a food service establishment which, in his/her or its
judgment, constitute a substantial and immediate hazard to the public
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:113
§ 80-6. Reinstatement of suspended license.
Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
license. Within five days following receipt of a written request, including
a statement signed by the applicant that in his/her opinion the conditions
causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the Health Officer
shall make a reinspection. If the Health Officer shall find that the food
service establishment is in compliance with the requirements of this article,
he/she shall so certify in writing to the Board and the license shall be
reinstated forthwith.
§ 80-7. Revocation of license. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article
or for interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his/her
duties, the license may be permanently revoked after opportunity for
hearing has been provided by the Board. Prior to such action, the Board
of Health shall notify the licensee in writing, stating the reasons for which
the license is subject to revocation and advising that the license shall be
permanently revoked at the end of five business days following the service
of such notice, unless a request for hearing is filed with the Board by the
licensee within such five-day period. A license may be suspended for cause
pending its revocation or hearing relative therein.
§ 80-8. Hearing.
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the Board at
the time and place designated by it. The Board need not make a record of
such hearing beyond that required by the Right To Know Law.10 The Board
shall make its finding based upon the evidence and testimony presented at
the hearing and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order
in issue at the hearing. The Board may make any further findings, orders or
rulings it shall deem necessary and appropriate as a result of such hearing.
A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the licensee
by the Board.
health, the Health Officer or any member of the Board may issue a
written notice to the licensee citing such condition and the corrective
action to be taken and specifying the time period within which such
action shall be taken. Any person to whom such order is issued shall
immediately comply therewith but upon written petition to the Board
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible and not later than
seven days from submission of such petition. Pending a hearing on such
petition, if the Health Officer finds an immediate and substantial hazard
to public health, he/she may order that the license be immediately
suspended and all food service operations immediately discontinued.
10.Editor's Note: See RSA 91-A.
§ 80-5 ROCHESTER CODE § 80-9
1:114
§ 80-9. Inspection of food service establishments.
At least annually the Health Officer shall inspect each food service
establishment located in the City of Rochester and shall make as many
additional inspections and reinspections as are necessary for the
enforcement of this article.
§ 80-10. Access to establishments.
The Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter
at any reasonable time any food service establishment for the purpose of
making inspections to determine compliance with this article. He/she shall
be permitted to examine the records of the establishment and to obtain
pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received,
or used, and persons employed.
§ 80-11. Service of notices.
Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been
properly served when the original of the inspection report form or other
notice has been delivered personally to the licensee or person in charge of
the food service establishment or such notice has been sent by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
licensee. A copy of such notice and return receipt shall be filed with the
records of the Health Officer.
§ 80-12. Food from food service establishments outside City.
Food from food service establishments from outside the City of Rochester
may be sold within the City of Rochester if such food service establishment
conforms to the provisions of this article or to substantially equivalent
provisions. To determine the extent of compliance to such provisions the
Health Officer may accept reports from responsible authorities in other
jurisdictions where such food service establishments are located.
§ 80-13. Review of future construction.
When a food service establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively
remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food
service establishment, plans and specifications for such construction,
remodeling or alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction
materials or work areas and the location, size and type of fixed equipment
and facilities, shall be submitted to the Health Officer for approval with
respect to compliance with this article before such work is begun. No
building permit shall be issued until such approval has been given by the
Health Officer.
§ 80-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-13
1:115

ARTICLE II
Outdoor Dining Establishments
[Adopted 1-12-2016 (§ 26.10 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 80-14. Requests for use of City property.
Requests for use of City property for outdoor dining providing food and
alcohol service shall be made in writing to the City Manager on an annual
basis by February 1 with no expectation of continued year-to-year use of
the City property on a continuing basis. Requests will only be accepted by
businesses licensed to serve food to the public. In the event that a new
business opens during the outdoor dining season and wishes to incorporate
outdoor dining in its plans, an application will be allowed for the remainder
of the dining season only.
§ 80-15. Site plans required.
Such requests shall include a dimensioned site plan of the existing
conditions, including a depiction of public infrastructure such as curblines,
light poles, bike racks, street trees, tree grates, manhole covers, meters,
licensed A-frame signs, adjacent on-street parking and loading zones,
adjacent accessible sidewalk curb cuts and the like. Such requests shall also
include a dimensioned site plan depicting the proposed table/chair layout
plan for outdoor dining, dimensioned routes of travel within the outdoor
dining area and on the adjoining public sidewalk, as well as detail sheets for
the proposed enclosure system, tables, chairs, lighting, trash receptacles,
and the like. These plans will be reviewed by the Technical Review Group
and suggestions forwarded to the City Manager.
§ 80-16. Area service agreement; season. [Amended 3-1-2016]
The terms and conditions of any such requests that are approved by the
City Manager in any given year shall be described in an annual area
service agreement, which includes a clear depiction of the area approved
for outdoor dining use and the time period of approved use ("season"), with
said area service agreement to be signed by the City Manager and the party
or parties making the request. The season shall run from April 1 through
October 31.
§ 80-17. Fee.
A minimum fee for the season of twenty-five dollars ($25.) shall be required
even if the size of the area subject to the agreement is less than 100 square
feet. A fee of one dollar ($1.) per square foot will be charged for the area
A. Area service agreements shall not be assignable to other parties.
B. Use of the area subject to the area service agreement (the "area") may
be precluded, modified or made subject to any such terms and
conditions as may be determined by the City Manager at any time
during the season in order to accommodate special municipal events.
§ 80-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-17
1:117
subject to the agreement for all square feet above 100 square feet. The fee
shall be due and payable to the City of Rochester prior to authorization to
use the area.
§ 80-18. Restoration of area. [Amended 3-1-2016]
The area specified for outdoor dining use in the area service agreement
shall be restored upon termination of the area service agreement at
season's end. Specifically, at season's end, the enclosure system, tables,
chairs and all other materials in their entirety shall be removed from the
City-owned area with the area left in an unobstructed, undamaged, clean
and sanitary condition at no cost to the City. Semi-permanent objects may
remain in the area at season's end at the discretion of the City Manager.
§ 80-19. Indemnification; insurance.
Outdoor dining establishments on City property shall indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Rochester and shall maintain and provide insurance of
the types and amounts specified by the City's Legal Department and shall
list the City as additional insured. A certificate of insurance documenting
said types and amounts of insurance is to be submitted to the City's Legal
Department before the start of the season.
§ 80-20. Damaging or obstructing public facilities.
Outdoor dining establishments shall not damage sidewalks, curbing, bike
racks, street trees, light poles, trash containers, utilities or any other City
amenities or infrastructure, or make the same inaccessible for public use
(other than within the approved area) or maintenance purposes.
§ 80-21. Hours of operation.
Outdoor dining establishments may utilize the area for outdoor dining
during their normal business hours, except that all tables within the area
shall be cleared of all food and alcoholic beverages by 11:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday and by 10:00 p.m. on Sunday with no alcohol served
within the area subsequent to 1/2 hour before the foregoing closure times.
§ 80-22. Alcoholic beverages.
A. Outdoor dining establishments shall agree at all times to comply with
all laws, rules and regulations of the New Hampshire State Liquor
Commission and all other local, state and federal laws. Approval of the
area service agreement by the State Liquor Commission is required.
Alcoholic beverage violations shall be self-reported to the State Liquor
Commission and the City Manager. See RSA 178:24 and 179:27.
B. Outdoor dining establishments shall only serve alcoholic beverages to
patrons who are seated at a table and who are ordering food with
service at tables conducted by wait staff only.
§ 80-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 80-23
1:118
§ 80-23. Accessibility.
Outdoor dining establishments will agree that they shall be solely
responsible for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
§ 80-24. Suspension of area service agreement.
The area service agreement may be suspended at the sole discretion of the
City on an administrative basis.
§ 80-25. Revocation of area service agreement.
The area service agreement may be revoked in its entirety, excepting for
indemnity provisions, by the City Manager at any time.
§ 80-26. Site design standards for establishments with alcohol
service.
Outdoor dining establishments with alcohol service should meet the
following site design standards:
A. Outdoor dining establishments shall be separated from the public
pedestrian space on the adjacent municipal sidewalk by an enclosure
system consisting of heavy-duty black decorative metal materials or
equivalent as approved by the City Manager or his/her designee;
special attention shall be paid to the method used to support the
enclosure system in order to avoid damage to public property and
ensure public safety; the minimum height of the enclosure system shall
be 30 inches and the maximum height shall be 36 inches.
B. Outdoor dining establishments shall not have live entertainment of any
type located outside, and no visual entertainment shall be situated on
the inside of the building in such a manner that it is directed toward
patrons in the outdoor dining area.
C. Seating shall be appurtenant and contiguous to a doorway accessing
the main restaurant facility with service provided within the area
approved by the City Manager. Exceptions to this provision will be
allowed consistent with New Hampshire State Liquor Commission
approval for particular licensees. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. The internal dimensions and table/chair layout of the outdoor dining
area must allow for the passage of customers and wait staff and shall, in
any event, meet ADA requirements.
E. Outdoor dining establishments must provide a five-foot radius
clearance from the center of restaurant doorways (exterior), and
doorways shall be kept clear at all times and a five-foot minimum clear
pedestrian path in front of restaurant doorways (exterior) shall be
maintained at all times.
§ 80-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-26
1:119
§ 80-27. Rules and regulations.
Outdoor dining establishments shall agree at all times to comply with all
local laws, rules, regulations and orders, including but not limited to the
following:
F. The enclosure system, tables and chairs shall be movable/
nonpermanent.
G. In all areas where outdoor dining establishments are allowed the width
for the pedestrianway adjacent to the area shall, at a minimum, be
three feet and, in any event, meet ADA requirements, but will depend
on site conditions. The pedestrianway in both instances shall allow for
and provide clear unimpeded passage and access along the area. The
pedestrianway shall be located entirely on the public sidewalk and shall
meet criteria that ensure pedestrian safety, usability and ADA
compliance. In no event shall the area interfere with accessibility or
public safety, including safe lines of sight for motor vehicles.
H. Canopies over the outdoor dining areas shall not be allowed unless they
are completely supported by hardware on the building structure, that
is, there shall be no vertical supports in or around the outdoor dining.
Table umbrellas are allowed, but must not extend beyond the area.
I. No object strictly related to advertising shall be allowed in the area.
J. No improvements or personal property located within the area shall
extend on or over any City property located outside the area.
A. The Health Department shall approve outdoor food service operations
and cleaning operations, with the area to be left in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times, and no outdoor garbage containers will be
permitted. The area shall be left in clean condition at close of business
with all garbage removed in its entirety from the area, and any ground
debris swept up, at close of daily business. No food prep, grilling,
service windows, service counters, wait stations, or bus buckets shall
be allowed in the area and no condiments, paper products or the like
shall be stored on the tables in the area. The Health Department shall
review/approve that kitchen facilities are sufficient to support
additional seating.
B. The Director of Buildings, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall review/
approve that bathroom facilities are sufficient to support outdoor dining
seating.
C. Only decorative lighting shall be permitted.
D. A place of assembly inspection and updated place of assembly permit
shall be required from the Fire Department, and the Fire Department
shall review/approve means of egress as part of the Technical Review
Group process.
§ 80-26 ROCHESTER CODE § 80-28
1:120
§ 80-28. Approval of agreement.
No area service agreement should be approved by the City Manager except
in conformance with the foregoing.
§ 80-29. Other terms and conditions.
The above are policy guidelines that will serve as the basis for area service
agreements, which may include other terms and conditions deemed by the
City Manager to be in the public interest.
§ 80-30. Number and location of establishments.
The number and location of outdoor dining establishments on City property
shall be at the sole unfettered discretion of the City Manager acting in the
public interest, and no entitlement is created by this policy for any party to
have outdoor dining at any location.
§ 80-31. Use of property other than sidewalks. [Added 4-5-2016]
Use of City property, other than sidewalks, for outdoor dining as defined in
this article and the terms of said use must be separately negotiated with the
City outside of the above-delineated permitting process.
§ 80-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-31
1:121
Chapter 94
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Fires and fire safety — See Ch. 75.
Food and food service — See Ch. 80.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Water — See Ch. 260.
§ 80-31 ROCHESTER CODE § 80-31
1:122
ARTICLE I
General Public Health Regulations
§ 94-1. Overcrowded housing.
No owner, lessee, or keeper of any tenement house, lodging house, or
boardinghouse shall cause or allow any such house to be overcrowded or
allow so great a number of persons to dwell or sleep in such house or houses
or any portion thereof so as to cause danger to health, and no such place or
room shall be so overcrowded that there shall be less than 500 cubic feet
of air or a floor space of less than 50 square feet to each occupant of such
place, building or room. No room as a living or sleeping room shall hereafter
be built without direct opening to the outdoor air.
§ 94-2. Multifamily dwellings; posting of contact information
required.
A. Purpose. The provisions of this section are adopted pursuant to the
authority granted by RSA 47:17 and are intended to promote public
health, safety and general welfare by providing a means by which City
officials, tenants residing in multifamily dwellings and others
concerned with matters of public health and safety relating to
multifamily dwellings shall be kept informed as to the name, address,
and telephone number of the owner and/or individual responsible for
addressing public health, safety and welfare issues arising with respect
to such multifamily dwelling units.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building designated or used for more
than one dwelling unit.
OWNER — The record title holder(s) of a multifamily dwelling as
disclosed by the appropriate records of the Strafford County Registry
of Deeds or Strafford County Probate Court and/or the records of the
Rochester City Tax Collector.[Amended 3-5-2019]
C. Posting of information regarding owner and individual responsible for
multifamily dwelling required. The owner of any multifamily dwelling
located within the City shall, at all times, have posted in a conspicuous
place on the inside of the front door of each dwelling unit within a
multifamily dwelling the name, current mailing address and current
telephone number of the owner of said dwelling unit and the name,
current address, and current telephone number of an individual
designated by the owner as being responsible for matters of public
health, safety and welfare arising with respect to such multifamily
dwelling. The owner shall also be responsible for filing the information
specified in the preceding sentence with the Department of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services of the City of Rochester and for keeping
said information current at all times. In the event that a multifamily
dwelling is such as to contain a lobby or other similar common area
§ 94-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:123
§ 94-3. Residential solid waste and refuse. [Amended 1-15-2002;
3-5-2019]
No person shall place or leave or cause to be placed or left, in or near
any highway, street, alley, or public place, or in any pond or other body of
water where the current will not remove the same, any residential solid
waste, dirt, soot, ashes, hay, shreds, oyster, clam or lobster shells, manure,
swill, tin cans, decaying fruit or vegetables, wastewater, seeds, or any
refuse animal or vegetable matter whatsoever, nor keep in or about any
vacant lot, dwelling house, barn, shed, store, shop or cellar any of the
aforesaid substances after the same shall have become putrid or offensive
or a menace to the public health.
§ 94-4. Drains, privies and sewers.
No person shall suffer or permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, sink,
privy, sewer, or other place upon any premises or grounds belonging to
or occupied by such person to become offensive or injurious to the public
health.
§ 94-5. Nuisances in lots, buildings and other places.
No person or occupant or any person having control or charge of any lot,
tenement, premises, building, or other place shall cause or permit any
nuisance to be or remain in or upon said lot, tenement, building, or other
place, or between the same and the center of the street, lane or alley
adjoining.
§ 94-6. Swill house in compact part of City.
No person shall erect, maintain or use within the compact part of any ward
of the City any swill house or building for rendering any offal, tainted or
damaged lard, tallow, or any putrid animal substance, or for the deposit of
green pelts or skins.
§ 94-7. Pigpens, goat pens, chicken coops and barnyards.
No person shall keep or use any pigpen, goat pen, chicken coop or barnyard
so near to any highway, park or public place as to be offensive or a menace
to the public health or offensive or a menace to any person residing on
an adjoining or abutting lot, nor shall a pigpen, goat pen, chicken coop or
barnyard be kept in such a condition as to allow the contents therefrom to
be discharged upon any adjacent or abutting lot or upon any street, lane,
park, alley or other public place.
open to the public and/or tenants of such multifamily dwelling, the
owner shall also post the information specified in the first sentence of
this subsection in said lobby or other similar area and shall keep said
posted information current at all times. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to owner-occupied multifamily dwellings of fewer than
three multifamily dwelling units. [Amended 10-15-2013; 3-5-2019]
§ 94-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 94-8
1:124
§ 94-8. Nuisances to be reported; investigations.
All petitions for the cleansing, removal, or abatement of any nuisance or
other activity prohibited in the foregoing sections shall be made to the
Health Officer, orally or in writing, stating distinctly the character of such
nuisance, the premises where the nuisance is situated, and the reason for
its removal or abatement. The Health Officer shall cause an investigation
of the alleged nuisance to be made and shall make an initial determination
as to whether the matters described in the petition constitute a nuisance
or violation of the foregoing sections and shall promptly serve notice to
abate nuisance as set forth below. If it becomes necessary to institute legal
proceedings against the party complained about, the complainants shall,
before such proceedings are instituted, file a complaint in writing with the
City Solicitor who shall prosecute the same in his/her discretion.
§ 94-9. Service of notice to abate nuisance.
A notice served on an owner, agent, or occupant of any property, or left
at the private residence of the owner, agent, or occupant, or, if after due
search neither can be found, posted on the front door or wall or fence of
such property, and a like notice sent to the last known post office address
of such owner, agent, or occupant of the property, shall be considered
sufficient and ample notice to abate nuisance.
§ 94-10. Board of Health rules and regulations.
The Board of Health shall make such rules and regulations for the
prevention and removal of nuisances and for the control and restriction of
infections and contagious diseases and such other regulations relating to
the public health as, in its judgment, the health and safety of the people
may require. Promulgation and publication of such rules and regulations
shall be in accordance with the provisions applicable to other boards and
commissions of the City.
§ 94-11. Stockpiling or land application of septage and sludge.
[Amended 10-15-2013; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Purpose. The provisions of this section are adopted pursuant to the
authority granted by RSA 47:17 and are intended to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Rochester
and to control noxious odors and/or other nuisances which may occur
from the stockpiling and/or land application of septage or sludge, as the
same are herein defined, within the City of Rochester through the
promulgation of this section regulating such activities. The purpose of
this section is to ensure that the beneficial use or disposal of septage
and sludge does not pose a threat to public health and safety, by
supplementing the requirements for removal, transportation and
disposal of septage and sludge found in 40 CFR Part 503 and at New
§ 94-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-11
1:125
Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wq 800, Sludge
Management.
B. Applicability of federal and state regulations. All stockpiling, land
application, or other use, management or handling of septage or sludge
within the City of Rochester shall be conducted subject to and in
accordance with the requirements of all applicable federal, state and
local statutes, rules, regulations and/or ordinances, including, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the provisions of 40 CFR Part
503 and New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wq
800, Sludge Management. For the purpose of section, words defined in
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wq 800,
Sludge Management, shall retain such meaning herein.
C. Additional regulations of septage and sludge. In addition to the rules,
regulations and restrictions imposed upon the stockpiling, land
application and/or other use of septage or sludge referred to in
Subsection B above, the stockpiling, land application and/or other use
of septage or sludge within the City of Rochester shall be subject to the
following restrictions and/or requirements:
(1) No use of septage or sludge requiring a facility permit as provided
for in Chapter Env-Wq 801 shall be permitted.
(2) No stockpiling of sludge shall be permitted except in connection
with land application of sludge; provided further, however, that no
stockpiling of sludge in connection with land application of sludge
shall be permitted between January 1 and April 1 or between
November 15 and December 31 of any calendar year.
(3) Any person stockpiling sludge for longer than 12 hours shall cover
the stockpile with an odor control material, such as lime, wood ash
or cement kiln dust, to minimize odors.
(4) Sludge shall be fully incorporated into the soil within eight hours of
spreading,
(5) The practice of so-called "top dressing" of soil shall be prohibited.
(6) No land application or spreading of sludge shall be permitted on
any hydric soil as defined in Section Env-Wq 1014.02 or in areas
exhibiting seasonal ponding. (For the purposes of this subsection,
the determination of the existence and/or location of hydric soils
shall be made based upon the results of an order No. 1 soil study to
be submitted to the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services by or on behalf of the site operator.)
(7) Every site operator shall file a copy of all materials required to be
filed with the State of New Hampshire with respect to a site
application pursuant to Section Env-Wq 806.01 with the
Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services at the time
such documents are filed with the State of New Hampshire.
§ 94-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 94-11
1:126
D. Random testing. Any sludge used within the City of Rochester and
subject to the terms of this section shall be subject to random collection
and/or testing for the presence of fecal coliform at the discretion and
under the direction of the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.
E. Permit fee. Before any operator shall receive sludge for stockpiling and/
or land application purposes as permitted pursuant to this section in
any calendar year, such operator shall pay to the Department of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services an annual sludge land
application permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.).
F. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not apply to any septage or sludge which is
managed at a solid waste facility permitted by the Waste
Management Division of the Department of Environmental Services
pursuant to RSA 149-M and Chapters Env-Hw 100 to 1100, Env-Sw
200 to 1800 and Env-Or 300 to 700.
(2) This section shall not apply to exceptional quality domestic sludge,
that is, sludge other than industrial sludge which meets all of the
following:
(a) The pollutant concentrations contained in 40 CFR
503.13(b)(3);
(b) The Class A pathogen reduction requirements contained in 40
CFR 503.32(a); and
(c) One of the vector attraction reduction requirements contained
in 40 CFR 503.33(b)(1) through (8).
§ 94-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-11
1:127

ARTICLE II
Removal or Transportation of Putrefied Animal or Vegetable
Substances
§ 94-12. Periodic removal of putrefied animal or vegetable
substances.
The owner, agent, occupant, or other person having care of any stable,
barn premises, or any other place where manure, swill, garbage, or any
other animal or vegetable substances accumulate shall cause the same to
be removed at such stated periods as the Health Officer may designate, and
in the event the Health Officer shall have designated such stated periods,
such substances shall be removed with such frequency and regularity that
such substances shall not be offensive or a menace to the public health and
welfare.11
§ 94-13. Vessels to be used in transporting.
No person shall transport fat, bones, or decayed, putrefied or vile smelling
animal or vegetable substance within the City limits except in watertight,
securely covered vessels from which no odor can escape.
11.Editor's Note: Original § 25.12, Licenses required, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 5-1-2007.
§ 94-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-13
1:129
Chapter 110
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 162.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 171.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — A person, firm or corporation engaged in the purchase,
sale or barter of old iron, steel, chain, aluminum, brass, copper, tin, lead or
other base metals, belting, wastepaper, old rope, old bags, bagging barrels,
piping, rubber, glass, empty bottles and jugs of all kinds and quantities
of less than one gross, and all other articles discarded or no longer used
as manufactured articles composed of any one or more of the materials
hereinbefore mentioned.
SECONDHAND DEALER — A person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of selling, exchanging, dealing in or dealing with secondhand
articles, including but not limited to firearms, opera glasses, telescopes,
watches, clocks, diamonds or other precious metals, jewelry, furs, fur coats,
or other kinds of wearing apparel, antique furniture, furnishings, glass
and dishes, musical instruments, radios, automobile accessories, office and
store fixtures and equipment, gas and water meters, and all classes of
fixtures and their connections. For purposes of this definition, yard sales,
flea markets, garage sales, attic sales or a similar commercial activity
established as a business for the sale of other people's property as
described in this chapter or such a sale that exceeds three days' duration
or is held more than three times a year shall be considered a secondhand
dealer. In the event any such articles are taken in trade for another or
similar article by a retail or wholesale establishment, such transactions
shall not be considered as coming within the requirements of this chapter.
§ 110-2. License required. [Amended 10-15-2013]
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of junk dealer
or secondhand dealer as herein defined unless licensed therefor by the
Licensing Officer who shall be the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services.
§ 110-3. Procedure for issuance of license. [Amended 2-3-2015;
6-2-2015]
§ 94-13 ROCHESTER CODE § 110-3
1:130
A. Formal application required. Applications for licenses shall be made to
the Licensing Officer. The application shall:
(1) Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided by
the Licensing Officer; such forms shall include such affidavits to be
sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or justice of the
peace of this state as the Licensing Officer shall deem necessary.
(2) Contents of application. Require the disclosure of any information
which the Licensing Officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to
the fair administration of this chapter.
(3) Payment of fees. The application shall be accompanied by the full
amount of fees chargeable for such license. The fee for a junk
dealer's license or secondhand dealer's license or any renewal
thereof granted under the provisions of RSA 322 shall be fifty
dollars ($50.) a year, payable in advance. [Amended 3-5-2019]
B. Renewal of license procedure. The applicant for renewal of a license
shall submit an application to the Licensing Officer. The application
shall:
(1) Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided by
the Licensing Officer; such forms shall include such affidavits to be
sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or justice of the
peace of this state as the Licensing Officer shall deem necessary.
(2) Contents of application. Require the disclosure of any information
which the Licensing Officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to
the fair administration of this chapter and the disclosure of such
information concerning the applicant's conduct and operation of
the licensed activity during the preceding licensed period as is
reasonably necessary to the determination by the Licensing Officer
of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license.
C. Fitness investigation. Upon receipt of any license application or
application for license renewal, the Licensing Officer shall forward said
application to the Chief of Police who shall cause an investigation to be
made of the fitness of the applicant to engage in the business of a junk
dealer or secondhand dealer and report his/her findings to the
Licensing Officer prior to the Licensing Officer's acting upon said
application.
D. Notice. The Licensing Officer shall notify any applicant of the
acceptance or rejection of his/her application and shall, upon his/her
refusal of any license, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver
them to the applicant.
E. Non-approval of license. The Licensing Officer shall, upon disapproving
any application submitted under the provisions of this chapter, refund
to the applicant all fees paid in advance, provided the applicant is not
otherwise indebted to the City.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:131
§ 110-4. Right of appeal. [Amended 2-3-2015; 6-2-2015]
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Licensing Officer shall have the
right to appeal to the Licensing Board by filing a written appeal with the
City Manager within three business days following the effective date of the
action or decision complained of.
§ 110-5. License expiration and revocation.
Such license shall expire on April 1 of each year, unless sooner revoked, and
shall not be assigned or transferred, but it may be revoked at any time by
the Licensing Board after notice and hearing for just cause.
§ 110-6. Purchases from minors.
No junk dealer or secondhand dealer shall, directly or indirectly, either
purchase or receive, by way of barter or exchange, any of the articles
aforesaid of a minor under the age of 18 years, knowing or having reason to
believe him/her to be such, except when said minor shall be accompanied by
a parent or legal guardian who shall sign the transaction record in person
before said dealer.
§ 110-7. Records. [Amended 10-15-2013]
F. Compliance pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is
denied and any action is instituted by the applicant to compel its
issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the activity for which the
license was refused unless a license is issued to him/her pursuant to a
judgment ordering the same.
A. Contents of appeal. The appeal shall set out a copy of the order or
decision appealed from and shall include a statement of facts relied
upon to void such order together with any defenses, legal objections or
explanations which the appellant wishes the Board to consider.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
B. Notification of Licensing Officer. At the time of filing the appeal, a copy
thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the Licensing Officer.
C. Hearing. The City Manager shall fix a time and place for hearing the
appeal and shall serve a written notice upon the appellant informing
him/her thereof. The City Manager shall also give such notice to the
Licensing Officer and the officer shall be entitled to appear to defend
such order.
D. Effect of decision. The findings of the Licensing Board shall be served
upon the appellant as required herein.
A. Secondhand dealers. Every secondhand dealer, upon acquisition of any
article, either by purchase or exchange, enumerated in the definition of
"secondhand dealer" in § 110-1 hereof, shall prepare and keep a written
record of the transaction stating the full name, address, month, day and
§ 110-3 ROCHESTER CODE § 110-7
1:132
§ 110-8. Exclusions.
Specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter are the following:
§ 110-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions
of this chapter, in addition to the revocation of his/her or its license, shall be
liable to a fine or penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for
each offense.
§ 110-10. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions herein, and if any provision of this chapter is declared invalid, all
other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
Chapter 123
LICENSING BOARD
§ 123-1. Licensing Board established.
There is hereby established a Licensing Board for the City of Rochester
which shall consist of the City Manager, Chief of Police, and Chief of the Fire
Department, or their designee. The Licensing Board shall have such powers
and duties as are prescribed in RSA 286.
year when the transaction took place, and a full, accurate, and detailed
description of each article so purchased or exchanged, with the price
paid therefor, and cause said record to be signed by the seller in person.
A copy of said record shall be available for inspection by any Rochester
police officer or the Rochester Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department at any and all times.
B. Junk dealers. Every junk dealer, upon the acquisition of any items
enumerated in the definition of "junk dealer" in § 110-1 hereof, shall
keep a permanent record of such transactions which shall include a full,
accurate, and detailed description of the item with the full name and
address of the seller, together with the registration number of any
vehicle used by said seller in delivery of said items and the month, day
and year of said transaction. A copy of said record shall be available for
inspection by any Rochester police officer or the Rochester Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department at any and all
times.
A. Antique dealers.
B. Purchases from private residences.
C. Wearing apparel stores.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-1
1:133
Chapter 135
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 135-1. Purpose and intent. [Amended 2-3-2015]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
construction in and maintenance of mobile home parks existing (as of April
22, 2014) in the City of Rochester. The intent of this chapter is that mobile
home parks existing (as of April 22, 2014) shall provide a healthful, safe,
pleasant, and attractive residential atmosphere for their occupants, while
at the same time being compatible with existing and anticipated future
development in the surrounding areas.
§ 135-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by the Rochester City Council in accordance with
the provisions of New Hampshire RSA 47:17.
§ 135-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure which is an addition to or supplements the facilities provided by a
mobile home, such as an awning, cabana, storage structure, carport, porch,
fence, skirting, windbreak, or screened room.
BUILDING — A roofed structure erected for permanent use.
COMMON AREA — An area or space designed for joint use by residents of
a mobile home park, principally for recreation purposes.
DENSITY — The number of mobile home lots per acre of gross land area in
a mobile home park.
GARAGE — A building for the shelter of automotive vehicles.
GROSS LAND AREA — The total land area included within the perimeter
boundaries of a mobile home park.
LIVING UNIT — A residential unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal land area within the boundaries of a lot,
exclusive of any land area designated for street purposes, and reserved for
exclusive use of the occupants of a mobile home.
§ 123-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-3
1:134
LOT LINE — The line identifying a lot boundary.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square
feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating
systems contained therein (in conformance with the definition in RSA
674:31, as amended).[Amended 2-3-2015; at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
MOBILE HOME — A form of manufactured housing which conforms with
the definition of "manufactured housing" above.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a mobile home
and for the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any parcel of land under single or common
ownership or control which contains, or is designed, laid out, or adapted
to accommodate, two or more mobile homes. The term "mobile home park"
shall not be construed to apply to premises used solely for storage or display
of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION — An approved subdivision of two or more
lots designed to be occupied by mobile homes only and where the lots will
be sold rather than rented or leased.
PARK ROAD — A private road within the boundaries of a mobile home park
which is owned and maintained by the mobile home park owner, and which
provides vehicular access to mobile home lots.
PERMANENT BUILDING — Any building except a mobile home or a mobile
home accessory building or structure.
PUBLIC SYSTEM — A water or sewage system which is owned and operated
by a local government authority or by an established public utility which is
adequately controlled by a governmental authority.
STORAGE BUILDING — A building located on a mobile home lot which is
designed and used solely for the storage and use of personal equipment and
possessions of the occupants of the mobile home on that lot.
STREET — A public highway as defined in RSA 229:1, except a Class VI or
discontinued highway, or a private road within a subdivision as platted and
recorded in the Strafford County Registry of Deeds, including the full width
of the right-of-way.
YARD — An unoccupied space open to the sky on a mobile home lot.
§ 135-4. General requirements.
A. Location and access.
(1) Mobile home parks shall be permitted only within the area defined
as an Agricultural Zone by Chapter 275, Zoning, of the City Code.
§ 135-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:135
(2) Mobile home parks shall be located with access onto a publicly
maintained Class V or better street.
(3) Since mobile home parks are a relatively intensive form of
residential development, the soil characteristics of a site proposed
for mobile home park development shall be adequate to support
that development.
B. Density. The number of mobile home lots in a mobile home park shall
not exceed 2.9 per acre of gross land area contained within the mobile
home park.
C. Setbacks.
(1) The minimum distance between any mobile home and mobile home
park boundary line shall be 50 feet.
(2) Minimum setbacks on mobile home lots shall be: front yard, 20
feet; side and rear yards, 15 feet.
(3) There shall be a minimum of 30 feet clearance between mobile
homes on adjoining lots. No mobile home shall be located closer
than 30 feet to any community building within the park.
D. Screening and landscaping.
(1) A twenty-foot buffer strip shall be maintained along all public
streets and along all mobile home park boundaries which abut a
residential area. No part of this buffer strip shall be included within
the boundaries of individual mobile home lots or within common
areas. Within this twenty-foot buffer strip, a dense visual screen of
shrubs or trees shall be planted, at least four feet high at the time
of planting, of a type that will form a year-round screen at least six
feet high within three years. Where existing natural growth or
topography can provide the required screening, it may be utilized
to fulfill all or part of this requirement.
(2) Lawn and ground cover shall be provided where needed to prevent
erosion of slopes and on other areas to obtain usable yards.
(a) Trees, shrubs, and vines shall be required to the extent needed
to provide for:
[1] Screening of objectionable views;
[2] Adequate shade; and
[3] A suitable setting for mobile homes and other facilities.
(b) During the development of any mobile home park, that portion
of said park used, occupied, and/or made available for use and
occupation of mobile homes shall be subject to these
standards.
§ 135-4 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-4
1:136
E. Construction.
(1) The provisions of this chapter and of the building regulations of the
City of Rochester shall apply to all construction, alterations, repairs
and additions to mobile homes and structures within a mobile home
park unless otherwise modified herein.
(2) The skirting of mobile homes is permitted to achieve better
heating, but skirting shall not provide a harborage for rodents, nor
create a fire hazard. Skirting, cabanas, awnings, porches, or other
additions shall not be attached to a mobile home unless they are
approved by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.12
(3) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or liquefied petroleum
gas cylinders to a mobile home shall be copper or other acceptable
metallic tubing mechanically connected and shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place. All liquefied petroleum gas
cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be
located inside or beneath a mobile home or within five feet of a
mobile home exit. Racks to hold liquefied petroleum gas cylinders
shall be of a design which will prevent tipping or accidental
overturning. All oil tanks shall not be located inside or beneath a
mobile home. If a mobile home is provided with a full basement,
fuel storage tanks may be located within the basement. All outside
installed oil tanks shall have a foundation made of concrete or
masonry. Tank foundations shall be designed to minimize the
possibility of uneven settling of the tank and to minimize corrosion
in any part of the tank resting on the foundation. Oil tanks shall be
screened by adequate shrubs or fencing.
(4) Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used on
individual mobile home lots unless the containers are properly
connected. Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely
fastened in place and shall be adequately protected from the
weather.
(5) The storage of firewood, coal, coke, other fuels and/or equipment
shall be done in a manner so as not to constitute a fire hazard.
(6) Only one single-story storage building may be installed on any one
mobile home lot. The maximum size shall not exceed 12 feet by 14
feet by 10 feet wall height. Roofs shall be either pre-finished metal,
fiberglass, or shingles. The exterior shall be of a permanent
building material. Plans must be approved by the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services and a building permit
obtained prior to erection on the mobile home lot.
12.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the Code Enforcement Department
were amended to the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department 10-15-2013.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:137
F. Board of Health requirements. All mobile home parks shall be located in
areas free from marshes, swamps, stagnant pools, or other potential
breeding places for insects or rodents.
G. Fire protection.
(1) The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and
regulations of the City of Rochester Fire Department.
(2) Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, residential solid
waste, and other flammable materials. [3-5-2019]
(3) Where a municipal water system is available to a mobile home
park, standard City fire hydrants shall be spaced not more than 500
feet apart within the boundaries of the park. [Amended 3-7-2000]
(4) Fires shall be made only in stoves and other equipment intended
for such purposes. No open fires shall be permitted except in
specified areas approved by the Rochester Fire Department.
(5) The City of Rochester Fire Department may take whatever
additional measures for adequate fire and safety conditions as it
feels are necessary for each mobile home park.
H. Refuse disposal.
(1) The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in mobile home
parks shall be managed so as to create no health hazards, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards, or air
pollution.
(2) Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent
containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container
deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them.
(3) All garbage and residential solid waste shall be collected at least
once weekly only from a location(s) designated by the Health
Officer. Mobile home park owners shall be responsible for seeing
that garbage and residential solid waste are deposited at the
collection location(s). [3-5-2019]
I. Pets. No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, or other pet animal
shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the
limits of any mobile home park (pursuant to RSA 466:30-a).
J. Management.
(1) Any person responsible for the operation of a mobile home park
shall maintain a current register of all mobile homes located within
the mobile home park and their owners. Such register shall be
available for inspection to/by City officials.
§ 135-4 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-4
1:138
§ 135-5. Design standards. [Amended 2-3-2015; 3-5-2019]
During the development of any mobile home park, that portion of said park
which is used, occupied, and/or made available for use and occupation of
mobile homes shall be subject to these standards, and to the applicable
standards of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
and the Sanitary Laws and Regulations of the New Hampshire Division of
Public Health Services.
(2) Said register shall contain pertinent information to properly
identify the mobile home, location, and owners of each mobile
home in the mobile home park, including the dates of arrival and
the dates of departure of any mobile home which has arrived or
departed within the past year.
(3) According to the provisions of RSA 73:16-a, the owner of a mobile
home park shall be responsible for filing with the City Assessor's
office an inventory (description) of all mobile homes which locate in
a park within 15 days of their arrival. Also under the provisions of
RSA 73:16-a, the owner of a mobile home park may be held
responsible for the payment of taxes due on individual mobile
homes located within the park which have not been paid by their
owners.
(4) The management of a mobile home park shall assume responsibility
for maintaining in good repair all buildings, streets, walks, sanitary
facilities and utilities within the park and shall take such action as
is necessary to eject from the grounds any person who willfully or
maliciously fails to comply with these and other applicable
regulations.
A. Mobile home lots.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square
feet in area and shall have minimum frontage of 75 feet on a park
road.
(2) No mobile home with accessory buildings, garage, structures,
storage building and paved parking spaces shall occupy in excess
of 35% of a mobile home lot.
B. Park roads.
(1) Mobile home park roads shall provide safe and convenient
vehicular access from abutting public streets to all mobile home
lots and community facilities. Driveway access to all mobile home
lots shall be only from park roads, with no driveway access
permitted directly from City streets.
(2) Roads shall be adapted to topography, shall have suitable
alignment and gradient for traffic safety, and shall have a properly
designed storm drainage system. Except as herein modified, the
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:139
design standards for minor streets in the Agricultural Zone
contained in the Rochester Subdivision Regulations shall apply to
the design of mobile home park roads.
(3) Roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 40 feet and a
minimum paved width of 22 feet. Roadway pavement shall be in
accordance with the standards for minor streets in the Agricultural
Zone contained in the Rochester Subdivision Regulations.
(4) Road systems shall be developed with consideration given to the
reasonable movement and placement of mobile homes on
individual lots.
(5) All mobile home parks shall be graded to ensure proper drainage.
The drainage system shall take into consideration not only proper
channelizing of stormwater within the mobile home park but
minimization of adverse effects on surrounding property and public
streets.
C. Parking.
(1) Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile
home lot. Each parking space shall be paved and graded to provide
drainage away from the mobile home in conformance with the
overall drainage plan for the mobile home park.
(2) Each off-street parking space shall have a minimum width of nine
feet and a minimum length of 18 feet.
(3) Garages shall be permitted, provided that they are either directly
attached to a mobile home or separated by a distance of at least 10
feet. Garages shall also conform to the setback provisions in
§ 135-4C(2).
D. Common area.
(1) At least 7% of the gross land area in a mobile home park shall be
reserved as a common area for recreation and other open space
purposes.
(2) Each mobile home park shall provide at least one common area
restricted to the use and enjoyment of the residents of the park. No
single common area shall contain less than 15,000 square feet.
Where more than one area is provided, the areas shall be spaced
and located in the mobile home park in such a manner that will
provide maximum usefulness for park residents.
(3) All equipment contained in recreational areas within common areas
shall be kept in good repair. Common areas shall be kept free of all
debris.
(4) The land included within common areas shall be of such character
that it is capable of supporting recreational use and shall not
§ 135-5 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-5
1:140
include land with poor drainage, excessive slope, or land which is
subject to flooding.
(5) Common areas shall be separated from park roadways, City streets,
and parking spaces by an adequate fence.
E. Water supply.
(1) A water supply meeting current New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services drinking water standards shall be provided
to each mobile home lot in a mobile home park.
(2) The design and construction (including materials) of the water
supply system, whether public or private, for a mobile home park
shall comply with the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services Design Standards for Small Public Water
Systems and with all requirements and regulations of the City of
Rochester.
(3) Where a public water system exists within 200 feet of any boundary
of a mobile home park, all lots within the park shall be connected to
the public system, unless such connection is specifically denied by
the City. Where a public water system is not available, any other
source of water must be approved by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services.
(4) All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with state and local law; the water piping system shall not be
connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies.
(5) Individual water service connections which are provided for direct
use by mobile homes shall be so constructed that they will not be
damaged by the parking of mobile homes.
(6) A mobile home park water system shall be adequate to provide 20
pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile home lots.
F. Sewage disposal.
(1) Where a public sewage system exists within 200 feet of any
boundary of a mobile home park, all lots within the park shall be
connected to the public system, unless such connection is
specifically denied by the City.
(2) Where a public sewage system is not available, the sewage disposal
system for all mobile home lots in the mobile home park shall be
approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services.
(3) Each mobile home shall be provided with sewer connections which
comply with all statutory requirements and regulations of the State
of New Hampshire and appropriate agencies of the State of New
Hampshire and the City of Rochester.
§ 135-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-5
1:141
§ 135-6. Application for approval.
§ 135-7. Licensing.
(4) The design and construction (including materials) of the sewage
disposal system, whether public or private, for a mobile home park
shall comply with all statutory requirements and regulations of the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and the
City of Rochester.
G. Electricity.
(1) A secured electrical outlet supplying 220 volts shall be provided for
each mobile home lot. This installation shall comply with all
applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such
electrical outlets shall be weatherproof.
(2) All power lines within a mobile home park shall be underground
and shall be laid with sufficient cover to prevent damage from
traffic.
H. Telephone system. Where telephone service to mobile home lots is
provided, the distribution system shall be underground and shall be in
general conformance with the placement of the electrical distribution
system.
I. Cable television system. Where cable television service to mobile home
lots is provided, the distribution system shall be underground and shall
be in general conformance with the placement of the electrical system.
A. Procedure.
(1) Before formal submission of a plan for a new mobile home park, a
developer proposing construction of a mobile home park may first
meet with the Planning Board to informally discuss the project.
(2) A formal application for construction of a new mobile home park
shall be submitted to the Rochester Planning Board. In reviewing
the application, the Board shall follow the procedures and
standards for the review of a major subdivision as spelled out in
Section 2.3 of the Rochester Subdivision Regulations.
(3) The Board shall submit the application to the Commissioner of the
Rochester Department of Public Works for review of all road and
utility plans which are a part of the proposed mobile home park.
B. Submission requirements. The application for approval of a mobile
home park plan shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and
requirements contained in Section 4 of the Rochester Subdivision
Regulations. The application shall include all those items listed in said
Section 4.
A. General provisions.
§ 135-5 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-7
1:142
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a mobile
home park within the limits of the City of Rochester unless he/she
holds a valid license issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services in the name of such person for the specific
mobile home park.
(2) Licenses shall be issued annually, and each license shall be in effect
for a period of one year beginning January 1 of each year.
(3) An application for an initial mobile home park license shall be filed
with the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department. The application shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of the person making the application.
(b) The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
(c) Plans and specifications of all improvements, buildings,
streets, recreational areas, walks, sewer, water, and other
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the park.
(d) The area and dimensions of the tract of land whereon the park
is located.
(e) Written approval of the following City of Rochester officials
indicating that the mobile home park complies with the
requirements of this chapter:
[1] Planning Board.
[2] Commissioner of Public Works.
[3] Fire Chief.
[4] Health Officer.
[5] Police Chief.
[6] Zoning Administrator. [Amended 3-5-2019]
[7] City Manager.
(f) Such further information as may be requested by the Director
of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department to
enable him/her to determine if the park complies with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable legal
requirements.
(4) The application and five copies of all accompanying plans and
specifications shall be filed with the Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department; two of said copies
shall be filed with the Planning Office.
B. Issuance of license.
§ 135-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-7
1:143
(1) The Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department shall inspect the application and plans and
specifications.
(2) If the mobile home park is in compliance with all of the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statutes, and
regulations, the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department shall approve the application; provided,
however, that if the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department does not act to approve or deny within 90
days of receipt of the application, the application shall be
automatically approved.
C. Renewal of license.
(1) Application for the renewal of a license shall be made in writing on
or before the first day of November of each year to the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department by the
holder of the license and shall contain the following:
(a) Any change in the information submitted since the time the
original license was issued or the latest renewal granted.
(b) Copies of as-built plans for any and all sections of a mobile
home park developed during the year in which application for
renewal is made.
(c) Such other information as the Director of the Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services Department may require.
(2) All mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of this
chapter shall within six months thereafter comply with the
requirements of this chapter, except that the Director of the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department, upon
application of a park operator, may waive such requirements that
require prohibitive reconstruction costs if such waiver does not
alter the health and sanitation requirements herein provided.
(3) At his/her discretion, the Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department may issue a conditional license
renewal, subject to the license holder complying with certain
conditions as determined by the Director of the Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services Department. In such a case, the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department shall list
the specific conditions upon which the renewal is based and set a
time for compliance with these conditions. Costs associated with
enforcement of owner compliance with said specific conditions
requiring correction shall be assessed by the Director of the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department. If not in
compliance, twenty-five dollars ($25.) per inspection shall be
assessed; said charge shall be in addition to any other penalty.
§ 135-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 135-7
1:144
§ 135-8. Administration and enforcement.
(4) If the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department does not act on an application for the renewal of a
license by December 31, it shall automatically be approved.
(5) Not more than four annual license renewals shall be issued for an
approved mobile home park in which no substantial development
has taken place.
D. Responsibility of the license holder.
(1) The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office of,
or on the premises of, the mobile home park at all times.
(2) A license shall be transferable after the holder of a valid license
gives notice in writing to the Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department 15 days prior to any proposed sale,
transfer, gift, or other disposition of interest or control of any
mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address
of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile
home park.
A. Enforcement. Upon determination by the Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, he/she shall initiate enforcement procedures. If
necessary, the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department shall refer the matter to the City Solicitor for appropriate
legal action.
B. Inspection. The Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department, Police Chief, Health Officer, Fire Chief,
Commissioner of Public Works, the Zoning Administrator, and other
agents of the City as certified by the City Manager are hereby
authorized to make periodic and reasonable inspections to determine
the condition of mobile home parks within the City of Rochester and to
determine if the requirements of this chapter are being observed.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
C. Violations and penalties; revocation of license.
(1) A violation of, or violation from, the terms and conditions of this
chapter and/or the conditions of the license to operate or maintain
a mobile home park by the holder thereof or his/her agent shall be
cause for the revocation of said license. Such revocation shall be
made at the discretion of the Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department.
(2) After revocation of the license has been ordered by the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department,
additional violations shall result in a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars ($1,000.) in accordance with the provisions of
§ 135-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:145
Chapter 149
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 11.
Animals — See Ch. 28.
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Fires and fire safety — See Ch. 75.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
§ 149-1. Burning of refuse and garbage.
The use of outdoor portable incinerators, drums, barrels or other containers
for the burning of trash, garbage, or refuse is hereby prohibited within the
limits of the City of Rochester. This section shall not be construed, nor is
RSA 47:17. This provision shall be in effect even should an appeal
be taken from the Director's revocation order. [Amended
3-5-2019]
D. Appeals.
(1) Any party whose application for approval of a mobile home park
plan has been denied may appeal the decision of the Planning
Board to the Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 677:15.
(2) Any party whose application for a license has been denied or whose
license has been revoked may appeal the decision of the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 674:33.
E. Conflict with other ordinances. In any case where a portion of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with the provisions of any zoning,
building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code of the State of New
Hampshire or City of Rochester existing on the effective date of this
chapter, the provisions which, in the judgment of the Planning Board,
establish the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
F. Saving clause. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 135-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 149-1
1:146
it intended, to exclude the use of outdoor fireplaces or portable charcoal
cooking devices designed and used for cooking purposes.
§ 149-2. Noise; use of public address system.
§ 149-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.) for each offense unless herein otherwise provided. (For state statute
relative to prevention and removal of nuisances, see RSA 147.)
Chapter 158
PARKS, RECREATION AND ARENA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 167. Public buildings — See Ch. 183.
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Rochester Recreation and Arena Commission. See
§ 158-3.[Amended 3-5-2019]
DIRECTOR — The Recreation and Arena Director. See § 158-4.[Amended
3-5-2019]
PARK — Includes all parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, tennis courts,
swimming pools, band shells, music pavilions, recreation areas, parking
lots, and structures under the jurisdiction of the Director now owned or
A. No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall use or operate
or cause to be used or operated any mechanical device, machine,
apparatus, or instrument for the reproduction, intensification or
amplification of the human voice, music, or any sound or noise from any
public or private place in such manner that the peace and good order of
the neighborhood is disturbed or that persons owning, using or
occupying property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.
B. No person shall operate any sound or public address system upon the
streets, lanes, alleys or sidewalks of the City without first securing a
permit for the same from the Chief of Police. Such permit shall state the
time, place, nature of the material to be broadcast, and such other
details as the Chief of Police shall determine. The fee for such permit
shall be two dollars ($2.).
§ 149-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:147
hereafter acquired by the City of Rochester for park or recreation
purposes.[Amended 3-5-2019]
PERMIT — Any written authorization issued by or under the authority of the
Director permitting specified park privileges.
§ 158-2. Conduct prohibited in parks and Arena.
A. Disturbing the peace. No person shall disturb the peace at the Arena or
in any park by any act.
B. Immorality and indecency. No person shall do any obscene or indecent
act at the Arena or in any park; or display, expose or distribute any
picture, banner, or other object suggestive of sex in a lewd, indecent,
immoral way; or enter a comfort station or toilet set apart for the use of
the opposite sex; nor shall any person dress or undress at the Arena or
in an any park except in dressing rooms provided for such persons.
C. Solicitation. No person shall solicit money, subscriptions, or
contributions for any purpose or attempt to sell any wares of any nature
whatsoever at the Arena or in any park unless authorized by a permit of
the Director.
D. Improper admission. No person shall gain improper admission to, or
use of, or attempted admission to any Arena event or any park facility,
for which a charge is made, without paying the fixed charge or price of
admission.
E. Disobeying authorities and signs. No person shall, at the Arena or in
any park, disobey a proper order of a police officer or an employee of
the Arena or any park employee designated by the Director to give
orders, nor shall any person in any park disobey, disregard or fail to
comply with any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or
direction, posted or displayed by sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster, or
when notified or informed as to its existence by an employee of the
Arena or park employee(s) or other authorized person. [Amended
3-5-2019]
F. Defacing park property. No person shall cut, break, injure, deface, or
disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument,
fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property or pluck, pull up
or out, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower or mark or write
upon any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure, or
injure, deface or remove any property, real or personal, or any natural
growth, structure, equipment, animals, signs or other park or Arena
property.
G. Setting of fires. No fires shall be set at the Arena or in any park except
in areas where fires are designated as permitted or except as
authorized by permit issued under the authority of the Director.
§ 158-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 158-2
1:148
§ 158-3. Recreation and Arena Commission.
H. Discharging in bodies of water. No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop or
discharge into or leave in any body of water in any park, or in any storm
sewer, or drain flowing into said waters, or in any gutter, sewer or
basin, any substance, matter or thing, whatsoever.
I. Waste matter. No person shall deposit, drop or leave any papers,
bottles, debris or other waste matter or refuse of any kind in any park
or part thereof except in such receptacles as may be provided for that
purpose, nor shall any person urinate or defecate in or upon any part of
the Arena or any park grounds.
J. Drinking. No person shall enter the Arena or any park in an intoxicated
condition, nor shall any person drink any alcoholic beverages of any
kind or nature at the Arena or in any park or on any park grounds;
provided, however, that a temporary waiver from the prohibition of this
subsection may be granted to any Rochester-based nonprofit
organization upon written application to, and approval by, the Licensing
Board and the Rochester City Council, which application and approval
shall specify the date and hours during which such waiver shall be
effective. [Amended 6-6-2006]
K. Dogs prohibited on the so-called Common. Dogs shall not be permitted
within the confines of the municipal park known as the "Common,"
situate off South Main Street between Common Street and Grant
Street. No person shall enter or remain upon said Common with a
leashed dog, nor shall any person allow a dog to run at large within the
confines of said Common at any time. [Amended 5-7-2002; 3-5-2019]
L. Smoking on the Rochester Common. No person shall smoke on the
portion of the so-called Rochester Common between northeasterly side
of the path bisecting said Common, at the Civil War Memorial, and the
northeasterly fence line surrounding said Common where it adjoins the
South Main Street right-of-way, at any time; provided, however, that a
temporary waiver from the prohibition of this subsection may be
granted upon written application to, and approval by, the Licensing
Board, which application and approval shall specify the date and hours
during which such waiver shall be effective. [Amended 10-15-2013]
A. This Commission shall consist of 13 members to be nominated by the
Mayor and elected by the Council, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter, as follows: one member from
the City Council, one member from the School Board, and 11 interested
citizens. Up to two members of the Commission may be a nonresident of
the City of Rochester, provided that at the time of election of such
individual to the Commission such individual is associated with
communities or organizations utilizing the Rochester Arena facilities or
has other specialized skills related to the provision of recreational
services. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 158-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:149
§ 158-4. Recreation and Arena Director. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The City Manager, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 15 and
18 of the Rochester City Charter, shall appoint the Recreation and Arena
Director for the City of Rochester, who shall be the department head of
the Rochester Recreation and Arena Department. The Director shall be
responsible for the direction of all phases of the City's recreation programs
and parks owned or controlled by the City subject to the supervision of the
City Manager. The Director shall be responsible for hiring and supervising
all personnel as may be required to carry out Recreation and Arena
Department programs. The Director, with the consent of the Commission,
shall have the power to promulgate reasonable written rules and
regulations to govern the use of the City's parks and equipment and to issue
permits for the use thereof as set forth in this chapter.
§ 158-5. Use of Arena and parks.
The Arena and all City parks are open for the general use of the public
and in particular of the residents of the City of Rochester, subject to the
following exceptions:
B. The terms of the City Council and School Board Commissioners shall be
commensurate with their terms of service on their respective boards.
Commencing January 2016, the 11 Commissioners shall be appointed
for one-, two- and three-year terms as determined by the City Council.
Thereafter, all appointments and reappointments shall be for a term of
three years. The Mayor shall appoint the Chairperson and the
Commission shall, from its own members, elect a Secretary and other
necessary officers to serve for one year or until their successors are
elected. [Amended 9-4-2007]
C. The Commission shall:
(1) Act as advisory body to the Director.
(2) Aid, assist, and advise the Director in formulating plans for
maintaining, equipping, operating, and regulating the recreational
facilities, related programs and the Arena facility and advise the
City Council in establishing a fee schedule for the use thereof.
(3) Inform itself of ways and means by which its plans and programs
for development and use of the recreational facilities and Arena
facility may best be achieved and may advise the Director, the City
Council, and public of the manner in which such objectives may
best be accomplished.
A. No person shall conduct, operate, present or manage, at the Arena or in
any park, a parade, drill, public meeting, ceremony, speech, public
contest, exhibit, or performance of any kind without a permit.
§ 158-3 ROCHESTER CODE § 158-5
1:150
§ 158-6. Appropriation; reports.
The City Council shall annually appropriate such sum of money as the
Council may determine for recreation and parks, such sum, together with
any moneys received by the Department from charges, donations, or other
sources, to be paid to the City Treasurer and by him/her placed in the credit
of the Department, subject to its expenditures therefrom for the purposes
as set forth herein. Annually, on or before the first day of the budget, the
Director shall make a detailed report in writing to the City Manager of
his/her acts and proceedings, of the condition of the facilities under his/
her jurisdiction, of the standing of his/her recreation and parks program,
and of his/her receipts and expenditures, together with an estimate of his/
her anticipated revenues and expenditures for the following fiscal year. The
Director shall make such other interim reports as from time to time may be
requested by the City Manager.
§ 158-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Any violation of this chapter or of the rules and regulations as provided for
hereunder shall be considered to be a violation and subject to a penalty as
provided in § 1-1 of this Code.
Chapter 162
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 110.
B. All organized picnics or outings for a group larger than 25 persons shall
require a previously obtained permit.
C. No person shall exhibit, sell, or offer for sale, hire, or lease any object,
service, or merchandise of any sort whatsoever except under a
previously obtained permit to do so.
D. All parks shall be open during the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 12:00 midnight
every day unless signs specifying more restrictive opening hours shall
be prominently posted around such park(s). Buildings or structures
within said park(s) shall be open in accordance with signs posted on
said buildings or structures by the Director specifying hours during
which such buildings and/or structures shall be open to the public.
[Amended 6-5-2001]
E. No person under 18 years of age and over six years of age shall loiter in
any City park during normal school hours on any day in which the
Rochester public schools are in session unless accompanied by a
parent, guardian or other suitable person.
§ 158-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-7
1:151
§ 162-1. Pawnbroker's license.
The provisions of RSA 398 relative to pawnbrokers are hereby accepted.
A pawnbroker's license shall designate the place where the licensee may
carry on his/her business and the licensee shall not carry on said business
at any other location within the City. The fee for a pawnbroker's license or
any renewal thereof shall be fifty dollars ($50.) a year, payable in advance.
Chapter 167
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 11.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 16.
Amusements and entertainment — See Ch.
22.
Animals — See Ch. 28.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
§ 158-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 162-1
1:152
ARTICLE I
Observances of Sundays
[Amended 2-7-2006]
§ 167-1. Activities permissible on Sunday.
It shall be lawful on Sunday to engage in play, games, sports, and
exhibitions of physical skill, provided that peace and quiet are not
unreasonably disturbed thereby. The City Council may regulate the time,
manner and areas of such play, games and sports, to the end that no
unreasonable disturbance of peace and quiet shall be caused thereby.
§ 167-2. License required.
No such play, game or sport shall be held without a license therefor from
the City Licensing Board, if required.
§ 167-3. Motion pictures, lectures, concerts and theatricals.
It shall be lawful on Sunday to conduct motion pictures, lectures, concerts,
theatricals and vaudeville performances, provided that no unreasonable
disturbance of peace and quiet is caused thereby. The City Council may
make regulations controlling such entertainments as do not now require to
be licensed, to the end that nothing in this section shall be construed to
permit without license any such entertainment now requiring a license.
§ 167-4. Retail establishments.
It shall be lawful on Sunday for any retail establishment to be open for
business provided that no unreasonable disturbance of peace and quiet is
caused thereby.
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:153

ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Police Regulations
§ 167-5. Damaging streetlights.
No person shall willfully or mischievously injure in any way any lamppost
or streetlight, and no person, except the authorized agents of the lighting
company, the City Manager, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and the persons
acting under their authority, shall in any way interfere with any of said
lights.
§ 167-6. Games and loitering on City parking lots.
No person, without the permission of the City Manager, shall throw, cast,
catch, kick, play with, or strike any game ball whatsoever or engage in any
sport, game or competition on any City-owned or -controlled parking lot, nor
shall any person loiter in any City-owned or -controlled parking lot.
§ 167-7. Disturbing funeral processions.
No person shall willfully interrupt, interfere with, or in any way disturb a
funeral assembly or procession.
§ 167-8. False alarms and tampering with fire alarm apparatus.
No person shall pull a false alarm, break a fire alarm key box glass or chain,
or otherwise tamper with any fire alarm appurtenance or disfigure a fire
alarm pole.
§ 167-9. Possession or consumption of liquor on City property.
§ 167-10. Consumption of liquor on private property.
No person shall consume any liquor or beverage as defined by RSA 175:1
within the limits of any privately owned land or within the common area of
any privately owned building without the permission of any owner or person
in control thereof.
A. No person shall consume any liquor or beverage or possess any open
container thereof as defined by RSA 175:1 within the limits of any
public land or public building owned or under the control of the City of
Rochester except with the written permission of the City Manager, nor
shall any person consume any liquor or beverage or possess any open
container thereof on any public street, highway, sidewalk, or municipal
parking lot within the limits of the City of Rochester.
B. For state statute relative to alcoholic beverages, see RSA 176:11.
§ 167-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-11
1:155
§ 167-11. Loitering on school property and Hanson Pines
Recreation Area.
No person shall loiter on school property or the Hanson Pines Recreation
Area before, during, or after school hours. For purposes of this section and
other related sections of this Code, "loitering" shall be as defined in RSA
644:6 as presently enacted or amended in the future.
§ 167-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.) for each offense unless herein otherwise provided.
§ 167-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 167-12
1:156
ARTICLE III
Use of Air Rifles
§ 167-13. Use in compact part of City.
No person shall, within the compact part of the City of Rochester, fire or
discharge an air rifle/pistol. The compact part of the City shall be that part
of the City zoned other than agricultural.
§ 167-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 167-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-14
1:157

ARTICLE IV
Overnight Parking or Camping on City-Owned Property
[Added 3-6-2018 (Ch. 45 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 167-15. Authority.
In accordance with and under the authority of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 41:11, 41:11-a and 47:17, the City Council of the City
of Rochester hereby adopts the following ordinance for the regulation of
overnight parking or camping on all City-owned property.
§ 167-16. Purpose.
This purpose of this article is to protect the public peace, preserve public
law and order, promote safety and welfare and ensure proper and decent
conduct for the residents of the City of Rochester and the general public in
the use of City-owned properties.
§ 167-17. Acts prohibited.
From and after the effective date of this article it shall be unlawful for
any person to camp, or to park, with occupancy by one or more persons,
any vehicle or recreational vehicle, either overnight or for any two-hour
period between dusk and dawn, on any City-owned lands within the City of
Rochester.
§ 167-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
CAMP — Includes pitching a tent, placing or erecting any other camping
device, or sleeping in or on the City-owned property.
CITY-OWNED PROPERTY — All properties owned by the City of Rochester.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle fitting the definition in RSA
216-I:1, VIII.
§ 167-19. Exceptions.
Restrictions in this article shall not apply:
§ 167-20. Responsibility.
All violations of parking restrictions and charges accompanied therewith
shall be deemed the responsibility of the registered owner of said vehicle.
A. When permission has been granted by the Chief of Police or designee
for official or emergency purposes.
B. When permission has been granted by the City Manager or Chief of
Police in conjunction with a performance at the Rochester Opera House
or with a written special event permit.
§ 167-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-20
1:159
Such registrations may be proven as set forth in RSA 261:60. Said
registered owner shall be conclusively presumed to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the parking violation, and no evidence of actual
control or culpability needs to be proven as an element of the offense in
accordance with RSA 231:132-a.
§ 167-21. Removal of vehicle.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this article may be ordered towed by the
Rochester Police Department at the expense of the owner or custodian of
said vehicle.
§ 167-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 167-23. Severability.
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or part thereof is, for any reason, held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or parts of this article.
A. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and
shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.).
B. Any duly appointed police officer for the City of Rochester may enforce
this article by utilizing any process authorized by state law, including
but not limited to a local ordinance citation pursuant to RSA 31:39-d
and Chapter 54, Citations, of the City of Rochester Code.
C. All penalties collected for violations of this article shall be for the use of
the City and deposited into the City's general fund.
§ 167-20 ROCHESTER CODE § 167-23
1:160
Chapter 171
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 110.
§ 167-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-23
1:161

ARTICLE I
Hawkers, Peddlers and Itinerant Vendors
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 32 of the 1995 Code]
§ 171-1. Authority.
The provisions of this article are adopted pursuant to the authority granted
by RSA 31:102-a and are in addition to any requirements imposed by the
State of New Hampshire under either RSA 320 or 321.
§ 171-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of hawker,
peddler, or itinerant vendor as defined in RSA 320:1 and 321:1 in the City
of Rochester without first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 171-3. Definitions.
The words "hawker," "peddler," or "itinerant vendor" as used herein shall be
defined as in RSA 320:1 and 321:1 and shall include any hawker, peddler,
itinerant vendor, trader, farmer, merchant, or other person who sells, offers
to sell, or takes orders for merchandise from temporary or transient sales
locations within the City or who goes from town to town or place to place
within the City for such purposes.
§ 171-4. Application for license. [Amended 10-15-2013]
A. Applicants for a license under this article must file with the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services a sworn application in writing
(in duplicate) on a form to be furnished by the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services, which shall be filed with the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department no later than seven days
before the requested effective date of the license and shall give the
following information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant.
(2) Address (legal and local).
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold and, in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether
produced or grown by the applicant.
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of
the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship between them.
(5) The requested effective date of the license and the length of time
for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-4
1:163
§ 171-5. Restrictions on issuance of licenses. [Amended 12-3-1996]
No license shall be granted under this article to any hawker, peddler,
itinerant vendor, trader, farmer, merchant or other person who sells, offers
to sell, or takes orders for merchandise from any temporary or transient
sales locations within the City if such temporary or transient sales location
is or is related to a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle trailer weighing in
excess of 18,000 pounds when empty or the storage and display area of
which is more than 125 square feet. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to licenses for activities conducted at Cold Spring Park (Rochester
Fairgrounds) within the confines of said park.
§ 171-6. Licensing Board action.
The City Licensing Board shall have full power to grant all licenses
hereunder and shall consider whether, from the application and any
investigation the Board deems it advisable to make, it appears that all
provisions of state law and City ordinances have been and will be complied
with and whether the safety and convenience of the public will be adversely
affected.
§ 171-7. Transfer of license.
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any
time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 171-8. Revocation of license.
(7) A copy of the state license issued to the applicant pursuant to the
provisions of RSA 320:8 or a signed statement claiming exemption
therefrom under the provisions of RSA 320:3.
(8) If a specific stationary location is to be used, the written permission
of the property owner.
(9) A signed "release of information authorization" form authorizing
the Rochester Police Department to conduct a criminal record
check of the applicant and authorizing individuals to supply
information to the Rochester Police Department in connection with
such record.
B. At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.)
per week or one hundred dollars ($100.) per year shall be paid to the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services to cover the cost of
processing the license.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the Licensing Board, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
§ 171-4 ROCHESTER CODE § 171-8
1:164
§ 171-9. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Licensing Board in the denial of
any application for a license as provided in § 171-6 of this article, or in the
decision with reference to the revocation of a license as provided in § 171-8
of this article, shall have the right of appeal to the City Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after notice
of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.
The Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and
notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner
as provided in § 171-8 of this article for notice of hearing on revocation.
The decision and order of the Council on such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
§ 171-10. Exhibition of license.
Hawkers, peddlers, and itinerant vendors are required to exhibit their
licenses at the request of any citizen.
§ 171-11. Use of streets and sidewalks.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his/her business as peddler, hawker, or itinerant
vendor.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his/her last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for hearing.
A. No hawker, peddler, or itinerant vendor shall have any exclusive right to
any location in the public streets and sidewalks, nor shall any be
permitted at a stationary location, unless the license specifically grants
a stationary location, nor shall any be permitted to operate in any
congested areas where his/her operations might impede or
inconvenience the public.
B. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 171-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-12
1:165
§ 171-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.). A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs.
§ 171-12 ROCHESTER CODE § 171-12
1:166
ARTICLE II
Soliciting Funds
[Adopted 6-6-1995 § 26.9 of the 1995 Code]
§ 171-13. Permits.
The actual issuance of permits in accordance with RSA 31:91 shall be
exercised by the Licensing Board. There shall be no fee for such permits.
§ 171-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-13
1:167
Chapter 176
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 176-1. Creation and composition.
That there be created hereby a City Planning Board, to consist of nine
members and up to five alternates appointed in accordance with the
provisions of § 7-28 of the Code of the City of Rochester.
§ 176-2. Compensation; holding other municipal offices.
All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
Appointed members shall not hold any other municipal office except that:
§ 176-3. Terms of office.
The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their respective official
tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by the
City Manager shall terminate with the term of the City Manager selecting
him/her. The term of each appointed member shall be three years, except
that the respective terms of the members first appointed shall be staggered.
§ 176-4. Removal of members.
Members of the Planning Board selected by the Council may, after a public
hearing, be removed by the Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
misfeasance in office. The City Manager may remove the administrative
official and/or designee appointed by him/her without cause. The Council
shall file with the City Clerk a written statement of reasons for such
removal.
A. One such appointed member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. Either one appointed or one ex officio member may be a member of the
Conservation Commission, if one exists in the City, in accord with RSA
36-A:3.
C. Either one appointed or one ex officio member may be a member of the
Historic District Commission, if one exists in the City, in accord with
RSA 674:46-a. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 171-13 ROCHESTER CODE § 176-5
1:168
§ 176-5. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the membership of the Planning Board occurring otherwise
than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the duration of the
unexpired term by the Mayor and Council in accordance with the provisions
of Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter in the case of members selected
or appointed by them, and by the Council in the case of the Councilor
member.
§ 176-6. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect its Chairperson from amongst the appointed
members and create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary for
its work. The term of the Chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for
reelection. The Planning Board shall hold at least one regular meeting in
each month and shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations,
which record shall be public.
§ 176-7. Staff and finances.
The Planning Board may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary
for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be
subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil
employees of the City. The Planning Board may also contract with the City
planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as
it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts,
shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council.
§ 176-8. Master Plan.
It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Board to make and to
perfect from time to time, so far as funds appropriated by the Council for
such purpose will permit, a Master Plan for the development of the City.
Such Master Plan, with the accompanying necessary maps, plats, charts and
descriptive matter, shall be designed with the intention of showing as fully
as is possible and practicable the Planning Board's recommendations for the
desirable development of the territory legally and logically within the scope
of its planning jurisdiction, including, on that basis, among other things,
the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, waterways,
waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, roadways in streets and parks,
playgrounds, squares, aviation fields, and other public ways, places,
grounds and open spaces; sites for public buildings and other public
property; routes of railroads, omnibuses and other forms of public
transportation; and the general location and extent of public utilities and
terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light,
heat, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes;
also the acceptance, removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating,
abandonment, change of use of, or extension of any of the foregoing ways,
grounds, places, open spaces, buildings, properties, utilities or terminals
§ 176-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-8
1:169
and other planning features, as well as a zoning plan for the control of
the height, area, bulk, location and use of private and public structures,
buildings and premises and population density; the general character,
layout and extent of any community center; and any other matter permitted
by RSA 36 of the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
§ 176-9. Miscellaneous duties.
A. Preparation of Master Plan. In the course of the preparation of such
Master Plan, the Planning Board may make careful and comprehensive
surveys and studies of existing conditions and of data and information
relative to the probable future growth of the City. The Master Plan shall
be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the City, which
will, in accordance with existing and probable future needs, best
promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, or the
general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of
development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for
traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other damages, adequate
provision for light and air, the promotion of good civic design and
arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the
adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements.
B. Adoption and amendment. The Planning Board may adopt the Master
Plan as a whole by a single resolution or may, by successive resolutions,
adopt successive parts of the plan, said parts corresponding with major
geographical sections or divisions of the City, or with functional
subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any
amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Such Master Plan
shall be a public record, but its purpose and effect shall be solely to aid
the Planning Board in the performance of its duties. The adoption of the
Master Plan or any amendment thereto shall be by resolution carried by
the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the members of
the Planning Board. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps,
descriptive matter and other matters intended by the Planning Board to
form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be
recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof adopted, by the
identifying signature of the Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning
Board, and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the
Council.
A. The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in, and
understanding of, the Master Plan and of any Official Map of the City
which may hereafter be established by the Council, and to that end may
publish and distribute copies of the Master Plan, or of such Official
Map, or of any report, and may employ such other means of publicity
and education as it may deem advisable.
B. Members of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by said Planning
Board, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city
planning institutes or hearings upon pending city planning legislation,
§ 176-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 176-9
1:170
§ 176-10. Zoning Commission. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Planning Board shall act as a Zoning Commission, to recommend to
the Council the boundaries of the various original districts provided for in
RSA 674, and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein. The Planning
Board shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon
before submitting its final report to the Council.
Chapter 183
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
and the Planning Board may, by resolution, spread upon its minutes,
pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance.
C. The Planning Board shall have authority to make such investigations,
maps and reports and recommendations in connection therewith,
relating to the planning and development of the City, as seems desirable
to do.
D. The Planning Board may, from time to time, report and recommend to
the appropriate public officials and public agencies programs for the
development of the City, for the erection of public structures and
improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of the
Planning Board's duties to consult and advise with public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional,
research and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to the
protecting or carrying out of the Master Plan, and to make
recommendations relating to the development of the City.
E. The Planning Board shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the
exercise of its functions.
F. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Board,
within a reasonable period of time, such available information as it may
properly require for its work.
G. The Planning Board, its members, officers, and employees, in the
performance of their functions, are authorized to enter upon any land
and make such examinations and surveys as are reasonably necessary
and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon.
H. In general, the Planning Board shall have such powers as may be
necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal
planning, or carry out the purposes hereof, provided the total
expenditures of said Board shall not exceed the appropriation for its
expenses.
§ 176-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-1
1:171
§ 183-1. Jurisdiction over public buildings.
Pursuant to Section 14 of the Rochester City Charter, the City Manager
shall exercise control over all City buildings, except the Public Library and
all school buildings, and shall make all necessary improvements and repairs
and attend to all matters committed relating thereto.
§ 183-2. Use of buildings.
The City Manager shall have control of the use of all or part of the buildings
owned by the City as described above, including their hours of operation.
§ 183-3. Use of buildings by Selectmen.
The Selectmen of the various wards, subject to the approval of the City
Manager, shall have the privilege of using any public building in their
respective wards for the purpose of holding caucuses, conventions and
elections for state or City officers.
Chapter 200
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 218.
Water — See Ch. 260.
§ 183-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 183-3
1:172
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
§ 200-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's pretreatment facility.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
stormwater or surface water.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee.
See § 7-18A of the City Code.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER or SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried
household and toilet waste or waste from sanitary conveniences, excluding
groundwater, surface water, or stormwater.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for specific use of land owned by
others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
GREASE — Includes the fats, oils, waxes and other related constituents
found in wastewater.
GRIT — Sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that have
subsiding velocities or specific gravities substantially greater than those of
the organic putrescible solids in wastewater. Grit also includes eggshells,
bone chips, seeds, coffee grounds, and large organic particles, such as food
or wastes.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of the introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:173
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal
and therefore causes a violation of the City's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit or prevents sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with applicable federal, state or local statutes, or
with regulations or permits issued thereunder.
MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATION — The highest allowable
discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any twenty-fourhour
period that reasonably represents a calendar day.
MAY — Is permissive (see "shall").
MONTHLY AVERAGE DISCHARGE LIMITATION — The highest allowable
average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum
of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the
number of daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
effective as of the date of discharge containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq., which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which
appear in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation effective as of
the date of discharge containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA under Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1317, applicable to industrial users.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any facility from which there is or may be a discharge
of pollutants, construction of which began after the publication of proposed
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water
Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., which will apply to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated, provided that:
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
A. The facility is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
The facility totally replaces the process or production equipment that
causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
B.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the facility are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.
C.
§ 200-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-1
1:174
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, cause a violation of the
City's NPDES permit.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
or group, including all federal, state, and/or local government entities and
any other legal entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10-7.
POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — A wastewater
treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality. This definition
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW wastewater treatment works. The term also means
the municipality which has jurisdiction over discharges to and the
discharges from such a treatment works.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRIVATE SEWER — That portion of the sewer defined as the "building
drain."
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Wastewater that excludes sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface
water that are not admitted intentionally.
SCREENING LEVEL — That concentration of a pollutant which under
baseline conditions would cause a threat to personnel exposed to the
pollutant or would cause a threat to structures of wastewater facilities. To
be administered as limits applicable to a particular discharge, the screening
levels must be adjusted to account for conditions at the point of discharge
which differ from baseline conditions.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:175
SEWER SERVICE — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer; also called "house connection," "building sewer," or "sewer lateral."
SHALL — Is mandatory (see "may").
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Any industrial user subject to a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and any other industrial user
that discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater
to the POTW, contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5%
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW, or is designated by the Environmental Protection Agency, the State
of New Hampshire or the City on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's operation or to violate
a pretreatment standard or requirement.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any industrial user who violates one
or more of the criteria outlined at 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A) to (H).
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from
any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as
"nonfilterable residue."
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause a violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER RATES AND CHARGES — A separate listing of all deposits,
water rates, charges, and fees and can be obtained from the Department of
Public Works or the Business Office.
§ 200-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-1
1:176
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 200-2. Plan of sewer systems.
It shall be the duty of the Commissioner to keep a chart or plan upon
which shall be represented the streets and places in and through which
the sewer pipes are laid, and upon which chart shall be designated, by
appropriate figures and characters, the exact size and length of the pipes,
the precise location in such streets, and places of each pipe and each
connection therewith, each branch Y, T, manhole and flush tank.
§ 200-3. Use of public sewers required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable
waste in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Rochester, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Rochester, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with federal, state and local
requirements.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within the sewer
service area. When a private wastewater disposal system is found to be
in failure, it is the duty of the owner and/or his/her agent to contact the
City to determine if the property falls within the sewer service area.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
D. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of
the City, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article,
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public sewer is within 100 feet of the building. [Amended 6-6-2017]
E. Structures within 100 feet of the public sewer and currently served by
private wastewater disposal facilities shall connect to the public sewer
within 90 days after an official notice to do so. The City may grant a
waiver to this requirement for properties with existing adequate
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:177
§ 200-4. Private wastewater disposal.
§ 200-5. Application for service.
sewage disposal systems which can be proven by the property owner
to comply with applicable state and local regulations, to have been
designed by a designer licensed in New Hampshire and to have been
approved for construction by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services after January 1, 1985. The cost of connection
to the public sewer shall be borne by the property owner; however, if
a sewer stub exists the cost of the portion of the connection within the
public right-of-way shall be borne by the Rochester Sewer Enterprise
Fund. For the purpose of this subsection, "structures" shall mean
houses, buildings, or property used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes. [Amended 2-14-2017; 6-6-2017]
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 200-3D, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of state law.
B. The type, capacities, location, layout and installation (including
inspection) of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with
all requirements of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (DES). No permit shall be issued for any new private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the lot area is less than is required by subdivision lot
size requirements of DES. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted
to discharge to any natural outlet.
C. At such time as public sewer becomes available to a property served by
a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in § 200-3D, after
connection to the public sewer any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and
filled with suitable material. [Amended 6-6-2017]
D. The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City. All
sludge removal from private disposal systems shall be performed by
licensed operators and disposed of at state-licensed facilities. At no
time should any quantity of industrial waste be discharged to a private
wastewater disposal facility.
E. No building permits or any final Planning Board approvals shall be
issued without prior state approvals and permits being issued.
F. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer pursuant to RSA 147:8.
A. All applications for sewer service must be made at the Department of
Public Works office on a work order form, stating fully and truly the
§ 200-3 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-5
1:178
§ 200-6. Service installation and repair.
character of the wastewater to be discharged into the sewer system.
The customer or his/her duly authorized agent must sign such
application. All applications shall be accompanied by payment of the
permit and inspection fee set forth in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and
Fee Schedule.
B. If any installation or repair work is to be performed by the Department
of Public Works or its agent, an estimate of the cost of the work will be
prepared by the Department of Public Works.
C. A deposit equal to the estimated cost or a payment agreement shall be
made with the Business Office before work is begun on a new service,
or a repair to existing service, to be applied against the cost of the work
necessary to successfully serve the property. Actual costs will be
determined upon completion of the work and the customer charged or
refunded as the case may be.
D. All financial obligations involved in such transactions shall be adjusted
immediately upon the completion of the work in the interests of all
parties involved.
E. The Commissioner may waive the deposit for emergency repair
purposes.
F. Applicants may enter into agreements, at the discretion of the City of
Rochester, to pay all costs in equal installments over a period of time.
Late payments shall accrue interest at the same rate charged by the
City for overdue property tax bills. Such agreements shall be recorded
with the Strafford County Register of Deeds at the expense of the
applicant. In the event property is conveyed, all monies owed to the City
of Rochester shall be remitted in full. [Amended 3-5-2019]
A. The Department of Public Works or its agent or the developer's or
property owner's contractor shall install all new sewer services.
B. The property owner is responsible for the costs incurred for the repair
and maintenance of all existing sewer services from the property line to
the building or structure.
C. If a developer or property owner installs new services, the Department
of Public Works must approve all materials and inspect the installation.
All charges incurred during this work are the responsibility of the
developer or property owner. If a developer's or property owner's
contractor's installation is found to be incorrect, it shall be the
developer's or property owner's responsibility to have it corrected.
D. Annually, before any contractor or company shall install or repair any
portion of a wastewater system within the City of Rochester, such
contractor or company shall obtain an installation and repair license
from the Department of Public Works authorizing such entity to
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:179
§ 200-7. Sewer services and connections.
perform installations or repairs to such system. Licenses shall be valid
from January 1 through December 31 for any given year. The
Department of Public Works shall issue such license only to contractors
or companies which demonstrate the ability to perform wastewater
system installation and repairs in a workmanlike manner, consistent
with standards maintained by the Department of Public Works. All
applicants shall be required to submit evidence of general liability
insurance. The City Manager shall establish an annual fee for such
license. This fee shall be listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee
Schedule. [Amended 3-5-2019]
E. Any contractor or company installing or repairing any portion of the
wastewater system must receive written authorization from the
Department of Public Works and may be required to provide a
performance bond or escrow account in the name of the City for the
total (100%) of the estimated cost of work.
F. The Department of Public Works shall have an easement 10 feet on each
side of the sewer service for its entire length for installation or repairs
to the service.
G. The customer shall be charged for all materials and labor associated
with initial installation or subsequent repairs due to the negligence of
the customer. The Department of Public Works shall do its best to
return the easement to its prior condition; however, it will be the
customer's responsibility to repair and replace any damaged property
within the aforementioned easement.
H. Ordinarily, no new service pipes or extensions of mains will be installed
between December 1 and March 31. An additional charge shall be
applied to the customer for road maintenance during these winter
conditions if service or extension is allowed, consisting of the minimum
charge listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee Schedule, or the
actual cost associated with such road maintenance, if greater.
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a license pursuant to § 200-6D and
written authorization pursuant to § 200-6E.
B. There shall be two classes of sewer permits: for residential service and
for service to establishments producing commercial and/or industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his/her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Commissioner.
A permit and inspection fee as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and
Fee Schedule, for a sewer permit shall be paid to the City at the time
the application is filed. This fee shall be paid regardless of whether the
§ 200-6 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-7
1:180
installation is to be accomplished by the Department of Public Works or
the developer or property owner. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. In addition to the permit requirements of Subsection B above, any new
construction or use other than a single-family home which exceeds 500
gallons per day of discharge, as estimated by New Hampshire
Administrative Rules Section Env-Wq 1008.03, Table 1008-1, shall be
required to also obtain a wastewater discharge permit and pay the
reserve capacity assessment. Application for such permit shall be made
to the Department of Public Works together with the wastewater
discharge permit fee as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee
Schedule. All such requests for a wastewater discharge permit are
subject to the approval of the Commissioner based on the existing
sewer line's ability to handle the increased discharge. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
D. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a
new sewer service shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the sewer service. If
installation and connection are accomplished at a location where the
City has previously installed a sewer stub, the Sewer Enterprise Fund
will bear the cost of installation of the sewer stub. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
E. A separate and independent sewer service shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
or can be connected to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
courtyard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. This
exception shall be allowed only when no other reasonable alternative
exists to provide a separate and independent sewer service for each
building. The City does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
F. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Commissioner, to
meet all requirements of this article.
G. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a sewer service,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the City.
H. Whenever possible, the sewer service shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:181
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the sewer service.
I. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a sewer service or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
J. The connection of the sewer service into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) and the Water Environment Federation Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Commissioner before installation. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
K. All public sewers shall be laid by the Commissioner or his/her
employees or by a licensed contractor, but the Commissioner shall have
authority to prescribe rules as to such other material to be used as is
not herein specified, and all work shall be done as directed by him/her
and subject to his/her inspection, and the pipe trench shall be kept open
until the work has been so inspected. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
L. The applicant for the sewer permit shall notify the Commissioner when
the sewer service is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision
of the Commissioner or his/her representative. A minimum of 24 hours'
notice is required. If the sewer service is buried prior to inspection, the
applicant may be required to uncover the sewer service and connection.
M. No private sewer shall pass under another house or within four feet of
the wall thereof except by written permission of the Commissioner.
N. In addition to the afore-described permit, the Commissioner may also
require, prior to commencing construction work for any private sewer,
a like certificate evidencing the deposit of any amount equal to the
estimated cost of such construction and/or a satisfactory guarantee that
the actual cost of such construction will be paid in full upon completion
of the work.
O. The Commissioner shall keep a written report of his/her inspection of
all such private sewer lines.
P. All excavations for sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City at the
expense of the owner.
§ 200-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-7
1:182
Q. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system, or a discharge
of listed or characteristic waste, or an increase in the volume or in the
strength or character of pollutants that are discharged into the system,
shall notify the Commissioner at least 60 days prior to the proposed
change or connection. Proposed new discharges from residential or
commercial sources involving loading exceeding 50 population
equivalents (5,000 gallons per day), any new industrial discharge, or
any alteration in either flow or waste characteristics in industrial
discharge must be approved by the New Hampshire DES.
R. The Department of Public Works will approve plans for new systems,
extensions, or replacement sewers. No plans will be approved which
allow rainwater from roofs, streets, and other areas and groundwater
from foundation drains to enter into the sanitary sewer system.
Separate storm drain systems must be provided.
S. Whenever any sewer service shall become clogged, broken, or
obstructed, out of order, or detrimental to the use of any public sewer,
or unfit for sewerage purposes in that part situated outside of any street
or private way in which public sewers are laid, the owner, agent,
occupant or person having charge of any building or premises in which
such sewer service is located shall, when directed by the Commissioner,
remove, reconstruct, alter, cleanse, or repair said sewer, as the
condition thereof may require. In case of neglect or refusal to comply
with such notice within five days after the same is given, the
Commissioner may cause such sewer to be removed, reconstructed,
repaired, altered, or cleansed, as he/she may deem expedient, at the
expense of such owner, agent, occupant or other person so notified,
who shall also be liable for a penalty in accordance with § 200-20,
Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
T. Reserve capacity assessments.
(1) Proposed multifamily dwellings, new subdivisions, and commercial,
industrial or business structures within sewer service area or
expansion of such structures.
(a) Property owner or applicant shall file a sewer connection
application with the Department of Public Works. All
applicants discharging over 500 gallons per day, as determined
by New Hampshire Administrative Rules Section Env-Wq
1008.03, Table 1008-1, are required to file for a wastewater
discharge permit. All property owners are subject to a reserve
capacity assessment fee as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate
and Fee Schedule, for all existing and projected future usage.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) If it is determined that insufficient capacity exists for the
projected flows, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:183
§ 200-8. Sewer only meters. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
for upgrading and improving the sewers necessary to serve the
project.
(2) Proposed multifamily dwellings, new subdivisions, and commercial,
industrial or business structures outside sewer service area or
expansion of such structures.
(a) Applicants must investigate all possible means to obtain City
sewer. If it is determined that a feasible means of providing
City sewer service is possible, the property owner or applicant
shall file a sewer connection application with the Department
of Public Works. All applicants discharging over 500 gallons
per day shall file for a wastewater discharge permit. All
property owners are subject to a reserve capacity assessment
fee as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee Schedule,
for all existing and projected future usage.
(b) If it is determined that insufficient capacity exists for the
projected flows, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs
for upgrading and improving the sewers necessary to serve the
project.
(3) The City Manager may waive the reserve capacity assessment if
deemed in the best interests of the City.
A. Sewer only properties may be metered via the private water supply line.
A common meter will be provided for rented units or lots. All meters will
be maintained by the Department of Public Works, but the customer will
be charged for any damage to meters caused by abnormal conditions,
i.e., freezing, fire, tampering, etc. The Department of Public Works will
set only one meter for any one service and the owner of the premises
shall be liable for the entire amount of wastewater generated on the
premises irrespective of leases of individual customers.
B. Meters are installed for measurement of all water used by the
consumer. Customers shall provide a clean, dry, warm, safe, and
accessible place (always free from debris) for installation of a meter.
The location shall be easily accessible by a person in the upright
position for reading, maintaining, and changing.
C. All customers billed for wastewater must keep their own fixtures, and
service pipes within their property lines, in good repair and fully
protected from injury by frost, and all such pipes and connections shall
conform to the Rochester Plumbing Code.
§ 200-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-9
1:184
§ 200-9. Sewer deduct meter. [Added at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Upon application and approval by the Department of Public Works, a
customer may install a meter to measure water that will not be disposed of
in the City’s sewer system. The purpose of the meter would be to meter uses
including, but not limited to, in-ground sprinkler systems, outside spigots,
and commercial air-conditioning systems. The cost of the meter, inspection,
and installation by the City is entirely the responsibility of the customer. The
meter will fully meet the requirements of § 200-8 of this article.
§ 200-10. Meter repairs. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 200-11. Meter testing. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. All meters shall be kept in repair by the Department of Public Works
except when damaged by the customer or by his/her negligence,
including freezing. In case of any such damage, the cost of repairs shall
be charged to the owner of the premises.
B. If the reader is out of repair or fails to register, the customer will be
charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the reader when
in order or the flat rate structure, whichever is less. Subsequently, if the
actual amount of water metered is determined to be different than the
amount previously estimated, the charge will be on the subsequent
billing by the difference between the two.
C. If a customer, after being so notified, does not allow the Department of
Public Works access in order to test and/or correct a faulty meter or
reader, the customer's subsequent bill will be 1.5 times the average
daily consumption as historically shown on the meter.
D. No person, except the duly authorized agent of the Department of
Public Works, shall be allowed to reset, take off, or repair a meter.
A. Only the Department of Public Works shall replace or remove and test
all meters. No meter shall be placed in service or permitted to remain in
service if the error of registration exceeds 2% or as established by the
latest American Water Works Association (AWWA) meter standards,
whichever is less.
B. The Department of Public Works may test a meter for accuracy in
registration upon complaint of the sewer consumer. There shall be a
minimum service charge for any complaint-driven service call. The
minimum service charge shall be as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate
and Fee Schedule. Any meter found to be accurate in accordance with
this article will not be replaced by the Department of Public Works due
to a complaint.
§ 200-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-11
1:185
§ 200-12. Sealing of meter. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Upon completion of adjustment and test of any meter under the provisions
of these rules, the Department of Public Works shall affix thereto a suitable
seal in such a manner that the adjustment of registration of the meter
cannot be tampered with without breaking the seal. Disruption of the seal
will be cause for discontinuance of service.
§ 200-13. Tampering with meter. [Added at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. Should the meter in question be found to be within the accuracy limits
established by the latest AWWA meter standards, all applicable fees
associated with testing shall be paid by the customer. If the meter in
question is found to be inaccurate, all fees will be waived.
D. The percent of error of registration shall be taken as the average of the
error at the intermediate and maximum rates of test flow. Any
determination of charges shall be based on this average error.
A. No customer or his/her agent shall perform a tampering event with
regard to a meter without having first received written consent and
authorization of the Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee
to take such action. In the event that the Commissioner of Public Works
and/or his/her designee shall determine that a customer and/or his/her
agent has performed a tampering event with respect to a meter, such
customer shall be subject to the following charges:
(1) A charge in an amount based upon the actual metered usage to
such meter prior to the tampering event, if determinable.
(2) A charge in an amount based upon twice the estimated usage for
the premises serviced by the meter in question during the
preceding billing period(s) or the corresponding billing period(s)
during the year immediately preceding such tampering event,
whichever is greater.
(3) A charge for all costs associated with the repair and/or
replacement of such meter.
(4) A reconnection fee as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee
Schedule.
B. Anything in Subsection A above to the contrary notwithstanding, should
a customer or his/her agent, as a result of an emergency or other
circumstances beyond his/her control, perform a tampering event with
respect to a meter, without having received the prior written consent
and authorization of the Commissioner of Public Works or his/her
designee, such customer may, upon appeal to the Utility Advisory Board
in accordance with the provisions of § 200-30 and within its discretion,
be relieved of any and all of the charges listed in Subsection A(1)
§ 200-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-13
1:186
§ 200-14. Outside reader. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
All customers shall be required to have an outside reader with radio read
capability for their meter. The outside reader shall be installed at a place
on the premises acceptable to the City and according to the specifications
available at the Department of Public Works. The customer shall be
responsible for repairs or replacement of damaged outside readers and
associated wiring when damage is due to abuse, neglect, and/or negligence
of the customer. The City shall render a bill for labor, equipment, and
materials for all such repairs or replacement. The outside reader and
appurtenances shall be the property of the City. The customer shall be
responsible for providing safe access to City personnel for reading. The
customer shall remove potential hazards and nuisances such as snow, ice,
vegetation, and dogs from the outside reader's access. Exceptions may be
granted by the Commissioner of Public Works, in which case reasonable
access shall be granted to Department of Public Works personnel for the
purposes of reading and maintenance. If satisfactory access is not provided,
the City reserves the right to produce an estimated bill.
§ 200-15. Inspections. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The Department of Public Works employees or its agents shall be allowed
access to the customer's premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. for examination of pipes, fixtures, connections, the quality of water
used, and manner of use.
§ 200-16. Illicit connection to public sewers.
through (4) above, provided that such customer shall have notified
the Department of Public Works, in writing, of the tampering event in
question within three business days of the occurrence of such event.
A. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water to any sewer.
B. Stormwater and unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or a natural
outlet approved by the Commissioner. Industrial cooling water or
process waters require an NPDES permit prior to discharge to a storm
sewer or natural outlet. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas, including, but not limited to, waste
§ 200-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:187
streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C.
using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment processes,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
wastewater works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(5) Any pollutant(s) released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant
concentration which will cause pass-through or interference.
(6) Wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting
oils, or products of mineral oil in concentrations of more than 25
milligrams per liter or in such other amounts that will cause
interference or pass-through.
(7) Wastewater sufficiently hot to inhibit biological activity in the
POTW resulting in interference or to cause the influent at the
wastewater treatment facilities to exceed 104° F. (40° C.), unless
the EPA Regional Administrator, at the request of the
Commissioner, approves alternate temperature limits.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter, or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 0° C. (32° F.) and 16° C. (60° F.).
(9) If the person is a significant industrial user, wastewater containing
any pollutant specified in Schedule A, annexed hereto and
incorporated herein by reference, in excess of the limitations for
each of said pollutants as specified in Schedule A (Local Discharge
Limitations).13 These limitations may be applied on a mass basis to
allow for a reduction in water use.
13.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 200-16 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-16
1:188
(10) Any trucked or hauled wastes, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW.
(11) Any medical wastes except as specifically authorized in a discharge
permit.
D. The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall
be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, or public property, or
constitute a nuisance. The Commissioner may set limitations lower than
the limitations established in the regulations below if in his/her opinion
such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability, the
Commissioner will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of
treatability of the waste in the wastewater plant, and other pertinent
factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of
waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not
be violated without approval of the Commissioner are as follows:
(1) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of
food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or
when served by caterers.
(2) Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, solvents, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any
such material discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits
established by the Commissioner, the New Hampshire DES or EPA
for such materials.
(3) Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Commissioner.
(4) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Commissioner in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(5) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug"
as defined herein.
(6) Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:189
E. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or posses the characteristics enumerated in Subsection D, and which in
the judgment of the Commissioner may have a deleterious effect upon
the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance,
the Commissioner may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates for discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes.
F. If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the pretreatment facilities shall be subject to
the review and approval of the City and New Hampshire DES and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws. Such facilities shall not be connected until said approval is
obtained in writing.
G. Plans and specifications for a proposed treatment facility shall be the
result of the design of a professional engineer. Such approval shall not
relieve the owner of the responsibility of discharging treated waste
meeting the requirements of this article.
H. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Commissioner, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Commissioner and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In maintaining
these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper
removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material
and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the Commissioner. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be
performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
I. All industrial waste shall be pretreated in accordance with federal and
state regulations and this article to the extent required by applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, National Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards established by the New
Hampshire DES or by the Commissioner, whichever is more stringent.
The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, found in 40 CFR
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471, are hereby incorporated
§ 200-16 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-16
1:190
into this article by reference. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner(s) at his/her expense.
J. When required by the Commissioner, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes.
(1) Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Commissioner. The structure shall be installed by
the owner at his/her expense and shall be maintained by him/her so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(2) All industrial users discharging into a public sewer shall perform
such monitoring as the Commissioner or duly authorized
employees of the City may reasonably require, including
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Commissioner.
(3) Such records shall be made available upon request by the
Commissioner. Such records shall be made available upon request
of the Commissioner to other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
K. The Commissioner may require an industrial user of sewer services to
provide information needed to determine compliance with this article.
These requirements may include:
(1) Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
(2) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
(3) Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quantity.
(4) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or
other materials important to sewer use control.
(5) A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
(6) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(7) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:191
L. The Commissioner may require any significant industrial user to
develop a plan to control slug discharges. If the Commissioner
determines that such a plan is needed the plan shall include at a
minimum:
(1) A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
(2) A description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for notifying the POTW of slug discharges; and
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills.
M. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the EPA-approved methods published in
the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (40 CFR 136), or
alternate test procedures approved by EPA. Sampling methods,
location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an
individual basis subject to approval by the Commissioner.
N. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangements between the City
and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment,
provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of
existing federal or state laws and/or regulations promulgated
thereunder, are compatible with any user charge system in effect, and
do not waive applicable pretreatment standards and requirements,
including local limits and National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
O. Septic tank waste (septage) will be accepted into the sewer system at a
designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area,
provided that such wastes do not contain toxic pollutants or materials,
and provided that such discharge does not violate any other special
requirements established by the City. Permits to use such facilities shall
be under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner or his/her duly
authorized representatives. The discharge of industrial wastes as
"industrial septage" requires prior approval of the New Hampshire
DES. Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the user
charge system. The sewage treatment plant operator acting in behalf of
the City and its Commissioner shall have authority to limit the disposal
of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with the treatment
plant operation. Procedures for the disposal of such wastes shall be in
conformance with the operating policy of the City's sewage treatment
plant supervisor unless specifically permitted otherwise.
P. It shall be illegal to meet requirements of this article by diluting wastes
in lieu of proper pretreatment.
§ 200-16 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-16
1:192
§ 200-17. Industrial pretreatment rules.
Q. A dental practice or any other similar practice or business that handles
or manages dental amalgams shall install and maintain an amalgam
separator and institute a management program in accordance with
federal and state regulations. [Added at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Applicability. All industrial users shall comply with applicable
requirements of federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations
(as amended), in addition to the requirements of these industrial
pretreatment rules.
B. Industrial discharge agreement (IDA).
(1) IDA required. Effective 180 calendar days after this provision is
adopted by the City, the discharge of any industrial process waste
to the City's wastewater works or to a public or private sewer
connected to the City's wastewater works is prohibited without a
valid industrial discharge agreement (IDA).
(2) IDA application. Within 60 days after the effective date of these
industrial pretreatment rules, industrial users subject to these
rules shall submit an application for an IDA containing information
required under applicable federal and state industrial pretreatment
reporting regulations. Such information, as a minimum, shall
include:
(a) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
(b) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
(c) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production,
and Standard Industrial Classification of the operations carried
out at such facility.
(d) An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
(e) An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge.
(f) Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer
from regulated process streams and from other streams.
(g) A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge
limitations.
(h) Additional information as determined by the City may also be
required.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-17
1:193
(3) Provisions. The IDA issued by the City to each industrial user will
outline the general and specific conditions under which the
industrial process waste is accepted for treatment at the City's
wastewater treatment plant. Specifically included in the agreement
are the following:
(a) Pretreatment and self-monitoring facilities required.
(b) Type and number of samples and sampling frequency required.
(c) Effluent limitation on the industrial process waste.
(d) Reporting requirements.
[1] Periodic reports. Industrial users shall submit periodic
reports as required indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the
regulated processes governed by pretreatment standards
and the average and maximum daily flow for these process
units. The reports shall be certified by a qualified
professional and shall state whether the applicable
categorical pretreatment standards and effluent
limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation and maintenance practices and/
or pretreatment is necessary. Additional requirements for
such reports may be imposed by the City.
[2] Notification of violation/resampling. If sampling
performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of any
National Pretreatment Standard, National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, or any pretreatment standard
established by the Commissioner, the industrial user shall
notify the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation and shall repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the report analysis to the City within
30 days of becoming aware of the violation.
[3] Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes. Industrial
users shall notify the City, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director and the state hazardous
waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
[4] Signature for reports. Reports submitted under this
section shall be signed by an authorized representative. An
authorized representative may be:
[a] A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
§ 200-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-17
1:194
[b] A general partner or the proprietor, if the industrial
user is a partnership or sole proprietorship; or
[c] A duly authorized representative of either of the
individuals designated above, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the subject
facility.
(e) Monitoring records.
[1] Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements
under this section shall maintain records of information
resulting from monitoring activities required to prepare
such reports. Such records include for each sample:
[a] The date, exact place, method and time of sampling
and the name of the person or persons taking the
sample.
[b] The dates analyses were performed.
[c] The laboratory performing the analyses.
[d] The analytical techniques and methods used.
[e] The results of such analyses.
[2] Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of five
years and shall be made available for inspection and
copying by the City. This period shall be extended during
the course of any unresolved litigation, or upon request by
the EPA or the Commissioner.
(f) Additional conditions.
[1] The agreement will be in effect for five years. At the
expiration of the five-year period, the industrial user must
apply for and be issued a new IDA.
[2] The agreement may not be transferred without the written
consent of the Commissioner and may be revoked by the
City for noncompliance or modified so as to conform to
discharge limitation requirements that are enacted by
federal or state rules and/or regulations.
[3] An industrial user proposing a new discharge or a change
in volume or character of its existing discharge must
submit a completed IDA application to the City at least 60
days prior to the commencement of such discharge. The
submitted application must include plans and engineering
drawings, stamped by a registered professional engineer,
of the proposed pretreatment facilities. Upon approval of
the application by the City, a discharge permit request is
§ 200-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-17
1:195
submitted by the community to the New Hampshire DES
on behalf of the industry. Upon approval of the discharge
permit request by the DES, the City will issue to the
industrial user a new or amended IDA in accordance with
the procedure outlined in this section.
(g) Annual fee. Each industrial user shall be assessed a fee to
cover the administration costs of the Industrial Pretreatment
Program (IPP), plus the costs of sample collection and
laboratory analysis. The fee will be billed on a quarterly basis
and assessed as follows:
[1] All costs associated with self-monitoring shall be borne
directly by each industrial user.
[2] All costs associated with municipal monitoring of each
industrial user (sample collection and laboratory analysis)
shall be billed directly to that industrial user.
[3] All administrative costs associated with operation of the
IPP (labor costs for City staff, equipment purchase and
maintenance, consulting fees, etc.) shall be paid by the
industrial users on a pro rata basis.
(h) Penalties and cost of enforcement. Any industrial user which
violates any provision of this article or any National
Pretreatment Standard, National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, or any pretreatment standard established by the
Commissioner shall be subject to applicable civil and/or
criminal penalties as set forth in said IDA and shall pay all
costs incurred by the City in enforcing or assuring compliance
with such provision or standard and in responding to or
investigating such violation.
C. Local discharge limitation. Significant industrial users shall be
prohibited from discharging wastewater containing any pollutant
specified in Schedule A , annexed hereto and incorporated herein by
reference, in excess of the limitations for each of said pollutants as
specified in Schedule A (Local Discharge Limitations).14 Compliance
with these limitations shall be assessed on the basis of samples of the
industrial user's process wastewater discharge, not to include sanitary
or any other dilution wastewater flows. If a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, a National Pretreatment Standard, or the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services establishes
limitations for industrial users in a particular industrial subcategory
which are more stringent than the limitations specified in Schedule A,
those more stringent limitations shall immediately apply to those
industrial users subject to such limitations. [Amended 10-4-2005;
14.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 200-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-17
1:196
5-6-2008; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
D. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(1) Notification. The City shall provide timely notification to
appropriate industries of applicable categorical pretreatment
standards.
(2) Compliance date for categorical standards. Compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards shall be achieved within three
years of the date such standards are effective, unless a shorter
compliance time is specified in the standards. The National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471, are hereby incorporated into this
article by reference.
(3) Amendment to IDA required. An industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards shall not discharge wastewater
directly or indirectly to City wastewater works after the compliance
date of such standards unless an amendment to its IDA has been
issued by the City.
(4) Application for IDA amendment. Within 120 days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, an industrial user
subject to such standards shall submit an application for IDA
amendment. The application shall contain the information noted
under Subsection B(2) of this section.
(5) Baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, existing industrial users
shall submit to the City a report setting forth the information
required in 40 CFR 403.12(b). At least 90 days prior to the
commencement of discharge, new sources or sources that become
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard shall submit to the City a report setting forth
the information required in 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(6) Categorical compliance report. Within 90 days following the date
for final compliance with an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard or, in the case of a new source, following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall
submit a report on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards deadlines in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). If a
compliance schedule is established, the City may require
compliance schedule progress reports in accordance with 40 CFR
403.12(c).
(7) Compliance determination. Compliance with National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards shall be assessed in accordance with the
§ 200-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-17
1:197
requirements set forth at 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5). [Amended
5-6-2008]
(8) Periodic compliance reports. Any industrial user subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall submit to the
City, during the months of June and December, unless required
more frequently by the pretreatment standard or by the City,
periodic compliance reports in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(e).
E. Slug discharge notification and control plan.
(1) Industrial users shall immediately notify the City of any discharges
that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug, as
defined under § 200-1, of process waste discharged by such user to
the City system. [Amended 5-6-2008]
(2) The Commissioner may require any user to develop and implement
an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Commissioner shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan
during the initial permit application or during permit renewal. Any
user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/
slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a
minimum, the following:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any
accidental or slug discharge; and
(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include but are not limited to
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
F. Imminent endangerment. The City may, after informal notice to the
industry discharging wastewater to the public sewer, immediately halt
or prevent any such discharge reasonably appearing to present an
imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of person, or any
discharge presenting, or which may present, an endangerment to the
environment, or which threatens to interfere with operation of the
public sewer or wastewater treatment facilities. Actions which may be
taken by the City include ex parte temporary judicial injunctive relief,
entry on private property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public
sewer to halt such discharge, or demand of specific action by the
industry.
§ 200-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-17
1:198
§ 200-18. Arrest provision.
No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s)
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 200-19. Powers and authority of inspectors.
G. Monitoring and surveillance. The City shall as necessary sample and
analyze the wastewater discharges of contributing industrial users and
conduct surveillance and inspection activities to identify, independently
of information supplied by such industries, occasional and continuing
noncompliance with industrial pretreatment standards. All industries
discharging to the City system shall allow unrestricted access to City,
DES, and EPA personnel for the purposes of investigating and sampling
discharges from the industries. Each industry will be billed directly for
costs incurred for analysis of its wastewater. [Amended 5-6-2008]
H. Investigations. The City shall investigate instances of noncompliance
with industrial pretreatment standards and requirements.
I. Public information. Information and data submitted to the City under
this section relating to wastewater discharge characteristics shall be
available to the public without restriction. Other such information shall
be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR
2.302. The City shall comply with the maintenance and records
requirements of 40 CFR 2. [Amended 5-6-2008; 3-5-2019]
J. Public participation. The City shall comply with the public participation
requirements of 40 CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial
pretreatment standards and requirements, which shall include annual
public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the City,
of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirements.
A. The Commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. The Commissioner and other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewer. The
industrial user may request that the Commissioner withhold from
public disclosure any information deemed confidential in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.14. The industrial user must establish that the
revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors.
§ 200-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-19
1:199
§ 200-20. Violations and penalties.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A, the Commissioner or duly authorized employees of the
City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the City employees, and the City shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by the City employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§ 200-16J. [Amended 6-26-2007]
D. The Commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved.
A. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article except
§ 200-18, Arrest provision, including any National Pretreatment
Standard, National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or other
pretreatment requirement shall be served by the City with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Violation of more than
one standard or requirement shall be deemed a separate violation for
each standard or requirement. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City
may, after informal notice to the person discharging wastewater to the
public sewer, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge
reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the
health and welfare of person, or any discharge presenting, or that may
present, an endangerment to the environment, or which threatens to
interfere with the operation of the public sewer or wastewater
treatment facilities. Actions which may be taken by the City include ex
parte temporary judicial injunctive relief, entry on private property to
halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge,
or demand of specific action by the person. In addition, the City may
terminate the sewer service and/or revoke the industrial discharge
agreement of any person who violates any provision of this article.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article, including any
National Pretreatment Standard, National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, or other pretreatment requirement, may be fined in an
amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for each violation,
§ 200-19 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-20
1:200
§ 200-21. Repealer; severability.
§ 200-22. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
even if he/she corrects such violation within the time period set forth in
the notice issued pursuant to Subsection A. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Reference:
RSA 31:39, I(f); RSA 47:17; RSA 149-I:6.
C. In addition to the foregoing, any person who violates any provisions of
this article which results in an increase in costs to the wastewater
facility or wastewater treatment works, or which interferes with or
harms treatment plant personnel, equipment, processes, or operation,
shall be liable to the City in an amount equal to the additional costs
incurred by the City as a result of such violation, including but not
limited to court costs, attorneys' fees and fees related to sampling and
analysis to assure compliance with applicable limitations. Such liability
exists even if the person corrects such violation within the time set
forth in the notice issued pursuant to Subsection A.
A. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
B. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article which
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 200-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-22
1:201

ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
§ 200-23. Establishment of wastewater rates and fees.
§ 200-24. Rates, charges and fees. [Amended 5-6-2008]
A separate listing of all deposits, wastewater rates, charges, and violation
fees can be obtained from the Department of Public Works or the Business
Office. Wastewater user charges shall be assessed as follows:
A. Process. Wastewater rates and fees shall be reviewed and updated
periodically by the City Council. Such wastewater rates shall be
computed based on the total amount budgeted for the Department of
Public Works, Division of Sewage and Waste Treatment Works,
operations and maintenance, plus any debt service and capital outlays
determined by the City Council, and projections of estimated sewer
consumption, number of accounts, and/or other such factors.
Wastewater rates shall be recommended to the City Council by the
Utility Advisory Board and/or the City Manager and shall be established
to provide sufficient revenue to at least pay the expenses of operating
and maintaining the wastewater treatment works, collection system,
and appurtenant facilities. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Exemptions. The City Council may authorize elderly exemptions for
users qualifying for property tax exemptions in the City, but such
exemptions shall not result in charges lower than those necessary to
recover operation and maintenance costs. Only the portion of the
wastewater rates that recovers the debt service or capital outlays may
be exempted.
C. Implementation of new wastewater rates and fees. Before new rates
and/or fees are effective, there shall be two readings before the City
Council. In addition, a public hearing shall be held between the first and
the second readings. The public hearing shall be held at least 10
calendar days before the rates and fees are effective.
A. Metered water customers. All customers that are supplied by the City of
Rochester water system shall be charged based upon water usage. The
rate shall be listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee Schedule.
B. Unmetered residential customers. All unmetered residential
wastewater customers shall pay a flat rate quarterly wastewater user
charge. The rate shall be as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and Fee
Schedule. Each unit of a multi-unit dwelling or mobile home park shall
be considered a residential customer. The property owner shall be
billed for each dwelling unit even if the property has only one service
(i.e., the owner of a ten-unit apartment building shall be billed the
residential flat rate times 10). [Amended 6-6-2017]
§ 200-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-24
1:203
§ 200-25. Billing and payment.
C. Unmetered industrial customers. Any industrial wastewater customers
not connected to the City of Rochester water system shall install an
appropriate meter to measure discharges into the City sewer system.
The rate charged shall be as listed in § 200-33, Wastewater Rate and
Fee Schedule.
D. Minimum fee. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, any
metered industrial/commercial or residential wastewater user shall pay
a minimum quarterly wastewater user's charge as listed in § 200-33,
Wastewater Rate and Fee Schedule.
E. TKN surcharge. Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) is a pollutant found in
most wastewater and is subject to a surcharge where discharges
exceed a ceiling limit, as listed in § 200-33. Where an individual user
discharges greater than the ceiling limit, then the user shall be
assessed a fee for every pound in excess of the ceiling limit. The total
pounds of TKN discharged will be determined quarterly and be based
on continuous flow records maintained by the user and the quarterly
water quality testing conducted by the City. Supplemental water quality
data, in addition to that collected for industrial pretreatment
monitoring, can be provided by the user at no cost to the City and may
be used in calculating the surcharge fee, as approved by the
Commissioner. The surcharge fee is in addition to the wastewater rate
and fee for commercial and industrial customers.
A. Wastewater bills shall be rendered to all customers at least quarterly
and may be rendered more frequently at the discretion of the Business
Office with the approval of the City Manager.
B. Wastewater bills are due and payable upon presentation and shall
become delinquent after 30 days after the date of issuance. Interest
shall accrue on bills not paid when due at the same rate charged by the
City for overdue property tax bills.
C. Checks shall be made payable to the City of Rochester and submitted to
the Tax Collector. When bills are overdue, the customer will be sent a
notice. Bills not paid when due become a lien on the property by New
Hampshire statutes. [Amended 9-4-2007]
D. The failure of a customer to receive wastewater bills does not relieve
the customer of responsibility for making prompt payment. [Amended
5-6-2008]
E. The Department of Public Works in collecting and treating wastewater,
doing work, or furnishing materials shall deal with only the customer
and the premises, and such customer shall keep the Business Office
advised of the address to which bills, notices, and communications may
be forwarded. Although the payment for service may be assumed by an
agent or tenant, the owner of the premises will be held personally
§ 200-24 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-25
1:204
§ 200-26. Appeals.
Users aggrieved of bills rendered under this article have the following
rights of appeal:
§ 200-27. Agreements.
An agreement between the City Finance Director and the customer may be
signed, on a form provided in the Business Office, if the customer is unable
to satisfy his/her wastewater bill in full at the due date. An agreement
procedure shall be established by the Finance Director and approved by the
City Manager.
§ 200-28. Miscellaneous bills. [Amended 9-4-2007]
Charges for labor and material, including installation costs, shall be billed
upon completion of the work which the bill covers. If such bills are not
paid within 30 days or a payment agreement has not been made with the
Business Office, a lien may be placed on the property. All late payments shall
include interest charges. Collection procedures will be taken and any costs
will be charged to the customer.
responsible for the same. A change in ownership will not relieve the
premises from payment of back bills.
A. Notification. The aggrieved user shall notify the Business Office in
writing that said bill is contested before the next billing for this
wastewater service. The notification shall explain why the bill is
contested and provide the information necessary to determine the
validity of the claim. The Finance Director may require the use of forms
to expedite the appeals process. [Amended 3-5-2019]
B. Resolution. Upon receipt of a notification under Subsection A, the
Finance Director shall submit the claim to the Utility Advisory Board
with a recommendation on the validity of the claim. The Utility Advisory
Board shall act on all appeals received at a regularly scheduled
meeting. The determination of the Utility Advisory Board shall be final,
except that the City Manager shall have the authority to veto or modify
any action of the Utility Advisory Board. Aggrieved parties shall be
allowed only one appeal per claim. [Amended 3-5-2019]
C. Disposition of appeals. For appeals found to be valid, the date of the
billing shall be revised to the date of the Utility Advisory Board's
decision. Revised charges shall become due and payable as specified in
§ 200-25. For appeals not found to be valid, the date of the billing shall
be as originally issued, and charges and interest shall be as computed
as specified in § 200-25.
§ 200-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:205
§ 200-29. Sale or transfer of property.
On sale or transfer of property, the customer must give notification of such
sale or transfer to the Business Office in order that a final meter reading
can be taken and proper charges made to the proper owner. A minimum of
24 hours' notice is required.
§ 200-30. Utility Advisory Board. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 200-31. Construction/extension of public sewers for new
development.
§ 200-32. Extension of existing public sewers in accepted roadways.
A. The Utility Advisory Board shall periodically make recommendations to
the City Council on the level of wastewater rates to be established
under this article, but such recommendations are not binding on the
City Council. The Utility Advisory Board shall rule on appeals of user
and other charges and fees and perform other such duties that may be
assigned by City Council.
B. The membership and terms of the Utility Advisory Board shall be as
provided in § 260-28 of the City Code.
A. Applications for the construction/extension of public sewers shall be in
the form of a petition addressed to the Commissioner of Public Works in
compliance with the rules established by the Department of Public
Works.
B. The Commissioner may require that an applicant file with the City Clerk
such rights-of-way, releases, performance surety, or any other
instruments reasonably consistent for any such construction, and the
City of Rochester shall be grantee, guaranteed insured, or payee of any
such instrument.
C. The applicant shall pay full costs for any such construction and
installation of public sewers, as well as all costs associated with
extensions of existing public sewers in existing public rights-of-way.
Full title to the same shall, upon acceptance, be the property of the City
of Rochester. All construction of public sewers shall be under the direct
supervision of the Department of Public Works.
A. Upon petition by citizens of the City or when deemed necessary or
desirable for the protection and well-being of the City, the extension of
existing public sewers in accepted roadways may be approved by a vote
of the City Council.
B. Where the construction and installation of public sewers is to be made
in and upon existing streets and roads, and the public good requires it
and/or undue hardships would result if cash payment were made, then
and in such case the City may finance the construction through
issuance of bonds or other financing method and pay the full costs. The
§ 200-29 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-32
1:206
§ 200-33. Wastewater Rate and Fee Schedule. [Amended 7-1-2000;
6-26-2007; 2-5-2008; 5-6-2008; 6-10-2008; 6-16-2009; 8-18-2009;
6-21-2011; 11-20-2012; 11-1-2016; 2-6-2018; 3-5-2019]
proportionate share of each abutter along the line of construction and
installation based on the actual cost of construction per running foot
or other equitable distribution of cost when petition, application, or
late petition is made and granted shall become a lien on such abutting
property as real estate taxes until payment of said proportionate share
of full costs, including financing, is made.
C. Payment may be as follows:
(1) The affected party may pay its proportionate share in cash for the
full amount, at the time the obligation is incurred.
(2) The affected party may enter into an agreement with the City that
said proportionate share of all costs may be paid in equal
installments over a period of time equal to the term of the bond or a
lesser period. Such agreement is to be recorded with the Strafford
County Register of Deeds at the expense of the affected party. In
the event property is conveyed, the new owner(s) will be
responsible for all unpaid bills and liens.
(3) All funds relating to public sewer extensions under these provisions
may be placed in a special fund for payment of bonds, interest, and
charges pertaining thereto.
D. Any affected party dissatisfied with the determination of his/her
proportionate share of costs may appeal said assessment as outlined in
§ 200-26.
A. Quarterly wastewater rates.
(1) Residential customers without exemption: six dollars and seventyfive
cents ($6.75) per 100 cubic feet of water use.
(2) Residential customers with exemption: four dollars and forty-nine
cents ($4.49) per 100 cubic feet of water use.
(3) Commercial and industrial customers: six dollars and seventy-five
cents ($6.75) per 100 cubic feet of water use.
(4) High-volume customers (i.e., customers using more than 5,000
units** monthly): six dollars and eight cents ($6.08) per 100 cubic
feet of water use. **Note: For purposes of this section the word
"unit" shall mean 100 cubic feet or 748 gallons of water use.
(5) Unmetered residential customers:
(a) Per quarter per unit without exemption: two hundred fifteen
dollars and ninety-one cents ($215.91).
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-33
1:207
(b) Per quarter per unit with exemption: one hundred seven
dollars and ninety-four cents ($107.94).
(6) Sewer metered customers: six dollars and seventy-five cents
($6.75) per 100 cubic feet.
(7) Minimum fee:
(a) Per quarter per unit without exemption: thirty-two dollars and
twenty-eight cents ($32.28).
(b) Per quarter per unit with exemption: twenty-five dollars and
seventy cents ($25.70).
B. Septage discharge: fifty-two dollars ($52.) per 500 gallons or portion
thereof.
C. RV septage discharge: fifteen dollars ($15.) flat fee.
D. Graywater disposal: twenty-eight dollars ($28.) per 2,000 gallons or
portion thereof.
E. TKN surcharge:
(1) Ceiling limit: 60 pounds per day TKN.
(2) Surcharge fee: one dollar and eighteen cents ($1.18) per pound of
TKN.
F. Fees.
(1) Permit and inspection fee: fifty dollars ($50.).
(2) Wastewater discharge permit fee: fifty dollars ($50.).
(3) Reserve capacity assessment: two dollars ($2.) per gallon.
G. Installation fees.
(1) Installation by City: three hundred dollars ($300.) minimum or
estimated cost of installation in advance.
(2) Charge for road maintenance for service installed between
December 1 and March 31: two hundred dollars ($200.) minimum
or estimated cost of road maintenance in advance.
(3) Installation and repair license: one hundred dollars ($100.) per
year.
(4) Meter repair or testing: minimum charge of thirty dollars ($30.) for
the first half hour per visit plus cost of transportation of meter to
testing facility and cost of testing.
(5) Meter damage: fifty dollars ($50.).
§ 200-33 ROCHESTER CODE § 200-33
1:208
H. Temporary service. See installation fees; wastewater charges will be
billed at above rates.
I. Backflow prevention devices. All costs associated with installation,
repair or inspection to be paid by owner. Inspection costs shall be not
less than minimum service charge.
J. Violations: All costs associated with investigation, enforcement and
correction of violations to be paid by owner.
K. Bad check: twenty-five dollars ($25.) plus all associated fees.
§ 200-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-33
1:209
Chapter 210
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 110.
Nuisances — See Ch. 149.
§ 210-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ACCEPTABLE CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Any
material generated from minor renovation or demolition activities on
primary personal residences within the City. Debris generated at apartment
or condominium units not used as primary personal residence of the
taxpayer shall not be accepted for free. Residents must bring any material
to the dropoff themselves. Letters of authorization on the owner's behalf
brought to the dropoff by nonresidents will not be accepted, unless
approved by the City's contracted solid waste management company (the
City's waste collection contractor). Residents requesting approval must
submit an application to the Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.[Amended 10-15-2013; 3-5-2019]
BAGS — Specially marked bags (or stickers for bags up to 30 gallons in size)
designed for refuse as approved by the City of Rochester Commissioner of
Public Works. Bags (stickers) shall be sold by the City for waste that will
not fit into the cart provided by the City's waste collection contractor for
residential solid waste.[Amended 3-5-2019]
BULKY WASTE — Any acceptable municipal solid waste that is not capable
of being placed in an approved container. Said waste shall include such
items as oversized furniture, carpeting, large metal items and appliances.
Bulky wastes must be less than 200 pounds, capable of being collected by
two people and of a dimension no larger than six feet by six feet by four feet.
Bulky waste shall not include appliances that contain or once contained
CFCs.
BUNDLE — Bulky waste materials securely tied together forming an easily
handled package not exceeding four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight.
CFCS (CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS) — Refrigerants used in appliances
such as dehumidifiers, water coolers, freezers, refrigerators, and air
conditioners.
CITY — Refers to the City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
§ 200-33 ROCHESTER CODE § 210-1
1:210
CONTRACTOR — The individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or association performing refuse collection and disposal under
contract with the City.
DISPOSAL SITE — A refuse depository for the processing or final disposal
of refuse, including but not limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations,
incinerators and waste processing separation centers, licensed, permitted
or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction.
DUMPSTER — A commercially designed large metal container for refuse
that has a closable top lid(s) and/or side slide doors.
FOOD WASTES — Animal, vegetable or mineral matter derived from the
preparation or packaging of foodstuffs.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food and
including food containers.
HAZARDOUS WASTE and UNACCEPTABLE WASTES — Wastes classified
as hazardous under federal, state or local law, and/or waste the acceptance
of which in the City's waste collection contractor's judgment would pose
a nuisance or threat to human health or the environment, and/or waste
that cannot be accepted under the City's waste collection contractor's
waste acceptance policy (waste acceptance policy) as amended from time to
time.[Amended 3-5-2019]
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Hazardous waste generated from
noncommercial usage by persons in their residence.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure used and occupied
for human habitation or intended to be so used which contains five or more
suites of one or more rooms each suite having facilities for regular cooking.
It also includes combinations of buildings upon a given property with five or
more units.
NORMAL HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES — Any activity occurring at a
household located within the City that may generate material that requires
disposal, not including new home construction or demolition of primary
personal residences.
PRIMARY PERSONAL RESIDENCE — A unit that a resident taxpayer claims
as his/her residence for voting.
PUBLIC STREET — Refers to all streets and highways maintained by the
City or state. Class VI and private roads are specifically excluded.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any material, including various glass, paper,
cardboard, metal cans, plastics or other materials, that can be processed
or treated at the Waste Management Material Recovery Facility in order to
produce reusable materials.
REFUSE — Discarded waste materials in a solid or semi-liquid state,
consisting of garbage, residential solid waste or a combination
thereof.[Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-1
1:211
RESIDENCE — A dwelling unit such as a home, manufactured housing,
or multifamily dwelling and condominium, but not including commercial
establishments, businesses, hotels, motels or campgrounds, that is located
within the City.
RESIDENTIAL DROPOFF CENTER — Facility located at TREE for City
of Rochester residents to bring acceptable waste from normal household
activities. Hours for residential dropoff center shall be publicized. Recycling
is mandatory at the residential dropoff center.
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING CART — A specifically designated wheeled
container or cart distributed by the City's waste collection contractor to be
used for the storage of acceptable recyclables in the automated collection
process. No other receptacles will be permitted for collection by the City's
waste collection contractor.[Amended 3-5-2019]
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — All nonhazardous garbage, food wastes,
and trash resulting from the normal household activities.[Amended
3-5-2019]
RESIDENTIAL WASTE RECEPTACLE — The specifically provided or
designated container distributed by the City's waste collection contractor.
No other receptacles will be permitted.[Amended 3-5-2019]
TRASH — Combustibles such as paper, wood, fabric, etc., and
noncombustibles such as metal, glass, stone, dirt, sawdust, etc.[Amended
3-5-2019]
SPECIAL WASTE — As defined in 40 CFR 240.101(z).[Added 3-5-2019]
TREE — Turnkey Recycling and Environmental Enterprises facility located
on Rochester Neck Road in the City of Rochester.
WHITE GOODS and SCRAP METAL — Materials include the following:
YARD WASTE — Any soft leaf, grass, brush or vegetable wastes generated
from residences within the City of Rochester. The City will operate
semiannual roadside collections of leaves, brush, grass clippings and other
yard wastes. The Commissioner of Public Works will announce the
collection schedules. Brush shall be properly bundled as defined
above.[Amended 3-5-2019]
A. Light iron; a magnet will stick to it.
B. White goods: stoves, washers, dryers, etc.
C. Aluminum.
Metals with contaminants attached, including but not limited to
bicycles, small motors with fluids drained, and small appliances that do
not or have not contained CFCs.
D.
E. Metal strapping.
§ 210-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 210-2
1:212
§ 210-2. Placement of residential solid waste and waste material for
collection. [Amended 3-5-2019]
No person, firm or corporation shall place any residential solid waste,
cans, iron, wood, special or hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
flammables, toxic or rubber dust, liquid or fecal waste, sludge, demolition
materials, animals and animal parts, yard waste and other waste material
upon or near a City street or highway for collection except in accordance
with the following provisions of this chapter.
§ 210-3. Residential solid waste collection. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The City of Rochester shall only collect residential solid waste on public
streets or highways. For those properties served by streets other than
public streets or highways, including but not limited to mobile home parks,
condominiums, or streets not yet accepted by the City, residential solid
waste shall not be placed within the public street for collection unless
agreed to by the Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee and the
City's waste collection contractor.
§ 210-4. Unauthorized placement of residential solid waste on
private property. [Amended 3-5-2019]
No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed garbage,
refuse or residential solid waste, yard waste, bulky waste or construction
and demolition debris in or on private property unless authorized by the
owner of the property and except in accordance with any applicable state
law.
§ 210-5. Collection schedule; restrictions. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Residential solid waste collection will be made Monday through Friday
of each week, except those weeks in which a holiday occurs, when a
revised pickup schedule will be announced by the Commissioner of Public
Works. Residents shall place their residential solid waste and recycling to
be collected along the roadside or street side where normally the curbing
would be no earlier than the evening before, or by 7:00 a.m. on their
scheduled pickup day.
§ 210-6. Receptacles for residential solid waste. [Amended
3-5-2019]
All residential solid waste shall be placed in suitable receptacles, as defined
under § 210-1. Residential solid waste that does not fit in the approved
receptacle shall not be collected unless such waste is recyclable materials
as defined in § 210-1 and placed at roadside as described in § 210-17.
§ 210-7. Use of approved containers required.
The contractor shall not be required to collect solid waste unless it is in
approved containers, as described in § 210-1 of this chapter.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-8
1:213
§ 210-8. Storage of containers and dumpsters. [Amended 3-6-2018]
Except on the day scheduled for collection and during the time period
provided in § 210-5 of this chapter, no person shall place or store any refuse
in any street, alley or other public place or upon any private property within
the City of Rochester unless such refuse is placed in proper containers/
dumpsters.
§ 210-9. Prohibited activities.
It is prohibited to bring materials from outside of Rochester into the City of
Rochester for disposal or recycling by the City.
§ 210-10. Removal of empty containers and debris. [Amended
3-5-2019]
Residential solid waste containers, once emptied, must be removed by the
owner from the roadside within 24 hours. Any debris strewn from this
residential solid waste by animals, wind, etc., will be cleaned up by the
owner within 24 hours. Residential solid waste collection crews will be
responsible for any debris they drop or spill on the ground and will clean it
up before moving on to the next stop.
§ 210-11. Construction and demolition debris. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Acceptable construction and demolition debris as defined in § 210-1 may
be brought to an approved residential dropoff center at no cost. Debris
generated at apartment or condominium units not used as the primary
personal residence of the taxpayer shall be charged the same fees as any
other commercial user.
§ 210-12. Collection for multifamily dwellings.
The owners of any multifamily dwelling as defined in § 210-1 of this chapter
shall supply a dumpster or cart sufficient to provide storage for all solid
waste generated within the multifamily dwelling. The owner is responsible
for cost of collection.
§ 210-13. Bulky waste collection. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Bulky waste, white goods and scrap metal as defined in § 210-1 may be
placed at roadside for collection by the contractor. The schedule shall be as
determined by the Department of Public Works and publicized.
§ 210-14. Hazardous waste and unacceptable wastes. [Amended
3-5-2019]
Hazardous waste and unacceptable wastes, as defined in § 210-1, the
definition of "hazardous waste and unacceptable wastes," will not be
accepted for roadside pickup by the contractor.
§ 210-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 210-15
1:214
§ 210-15. Enforcement. [Amended 10-15-2013]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, the Public Works
Department or the Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
or their duly authorized agents.
§ 210-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a civil penalty up to
three thousand dollars ($3,000.).
§ 210-17. Residential roadside recycling. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Recyclable material will be collected from residences (as defined by § 210-1)
on the same day as residential solid waste collection. Recyclable material
must be placed in the approved residential recycling receptacles (as defined
by § 210-1). The approved residential recycling receptacles must be placed
at the roadside on the evening before or by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled
pickup day. Unacceptable material found in the approved residential
recycling receptacles will not be collected.
§ 210-18. Residential dropoff center. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Rochester residents may purchase the City's approved bags (stickers) for
residential solid waste to be brought to an authorized residential dropoff
center. Recycling is mandatory at the residential dropoff center.
§ 210-19. Yard waste and brush. [Amended 3-5-2019]
Residential roadside collection of leaf and yard waste shall be scheduled in
the spring and fall. The schedule shall be determined by the Public Works
Department and shall be publicized. Such materials shall be placed in paper
bags or bundled as defined in § 210-1 of this chapter.
§ 210-20. Scavenging prohibited. [Amended 3-5-2019]
No person other than an agent of the City acting in the course of his/her
employment shall collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any recyclable material, as defined in § 210-1, placed at roadside.
§ 210-21. Severability.
Should any provision or section of this chapter be held invalid for any
reason, such holding shall not be constructed as affecting the validity of the
remaining provisions or sections.15
Chapter 218
15.Editor's Note: Original § 19.22, Savings clause, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 3-5-2019.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-21
1:215
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
§ 218-1. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Rochester through the regulation
of discharges into the City's stormwater drainage system, water bodies,
streams, and wetlands in a manner compliant with the requirements of
state and federal law, including the provisions of the federal stormwater
management legislation for municipal separate storm sewer systems
(MS4s), as amended. The objective of this chapter shall be to:
§ 218-2. Authority; when effective.
§ 218-3. Jurisdiction.
A. Prohibit unpermitted discharges into the stormwater drainage system;
B. Set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection,
monitoring, and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance
with this chapter and applicable state and federal law; and
C. Establish, for new construction, design and construction standards for
stormwater drainage systems that will result in the construction of
systems that will be compliant with this chapter and state and federal
law and to have such standards incorporated into the existing standards
and review processes governing new construction in site plan and
subdivision review, as well as building permits that implicate the
requisite disturbance of the site.
A. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in:
(1) The City Council pursuant to RSA 47:13, 47:17, 38:26, 149-I:3 and
149:1:6; [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(2) The Planning Board pursuant to RSA 674:35, 674:36, 674:44 and
155-E:11; and
(3) The Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department pursuant
to RSA 147:1 and 147:14.16 [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. This chapter shall become effective upon adoption by the City of
Rochester City Council, in accordance with the statutory sections
identified above.
A. This chapter shall pertain to all land within the boundaries of the City of
Rochester, New Hampshire.
16.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the Code Enforcement Department/
Director were amended to the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department/
Director 10-15-2013.
§ 210-21 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-3
1:216
§ 218-4. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause,
phrase, or word of this chapter shall not be held to invalidate any other
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this
chapter.
§ 218-5. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by the approval of the several boards or
entities identified in § 218-2 above, provided that each such agency
complies with any applicable statutory or local procedures governing its
authority to adopt such ordinance. Amendments to zoning aspects must be
approved by City Council.
§ 218-6. Applicability. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
This chapter shall apply to any action that will hinder, interfere with,
alter, or modify the existing stormwater flow, drainage, or infrastructure
constructed for such purpose. It shall apply to any discharges into the City's
stormwater drainage system, water bodies, streams, and wetlands.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any other ordinance, regulation, code, or covenant in
effect in the City of Rochester or with any state statute, with particular
reference to RSA 676:14, 674:16 and 674:17 and the relevant
subsections therein, the provision which is the more restrictive shall
prevail.
A. Permit required. Except as permitted by this chapter, no person shall
alter land or engage in any activity which causes or contributes to
stormwater runoff discharge without first having obtained a
stormwater permit (SWP) for land proposed to be altered or which will
be affected by such activity. The owner shall be required to apply to the
Commissioner of Public Works and obtain such permit from the
Commissioner of Public Works, or his/her designee, as his/her
jurisdiction warrants, prior to undertaking any such action. This
requirement shall apply to any activity that will disturb or impact a land
area greater than 5,000 cumulative square feet unless noted as an
exclusion in Subsection A(1) through (5) below:
(1) Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use
provided best management practices as established by New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES)
regulations are being observed.
(2) Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens, or lawn areas
associated with a single-family dwelling.
§ 218-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-6
1:217
(3) The construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or
drainage patterns.
(4) Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) other
than drainage, disturbing less than 20,000 contiguous square feet,
within the limits of an existing paved roadway, which will not
permanently alter terrain, ground cover, or drainage patterns,
where trenches are paved at the end of each working day.
(5) Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or
practice that poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed
necessary by the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department or the Commissioner of Public Works.
B. Requirement for stormwater management and erosion control plan.
The applicant for a permit required under Subsection A above shall be
required, additionally, as part of the application review process, to
design and submit a stormwater management and erosion control plan
(unique to the site) to the Commissioner of Public Works for distribution
to the City Engineer for any tract of land being developed, redeveloped,
or subdivided within the boundaries of Rochester, where one or more of
the following conditions are proposed:
(1) A cumulative disturbed area exceeding 20,000 square feet, unless
the disturbance is solely related to construction or reconstruction
of a street or road, which will allow up to one acre of disturbance
prior to requiring a complete stormwater management and erosion
control plan.
(2) A subdivision of more than three building lots.
(3) Phasing of greater than three lots per year of an existing or
proposed subdivision.
(4) Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.)
requiring contiguous ground disturbance of greater than 20,000
square feet unless the disturbance is proposed within the limits of
an existing paved roadway utilizing a contractor with no history of
erosion concerns.
(5) Proposed work in or adjacent to a critical area (see definitions).
C. Standards and requirements of plan submission. Such plans shall be
submitted to the Commissioner of Public Works for distribution to the
Planning Board, Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department,
and Director of Planning and Development, or designees, for review
and approval to the extent that the proposed use involves areas of their
jurisdiction. The Planning Board, Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department, and Commissioner of Public Works, or designees,
may, if in their judgment they deem it necessary or helpful to assist
them in their review of such plan, require that the plan be reviewed by a
registered professional engineer or other professional consultant
§ 218-6 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-6
1:218
§ 218-7. Definitions and abbreviations.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A proven or accepted structural,
nonstructural, or vegetative measure, the application of which reduces
erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of
stormwater runoff.
BMP — Best management practice.
CEASE AND DESIST — Document issued related to a parcel or activity in
violation of this chapter and/or the City of Rochester site plan, subdivision,
or other land use regulations or ordinances, or plans approved thereunder.
CERTIFIED SOIL SCIENTIST — A person qualified in soil classification and
mapping who is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural
Scientists.
CITY — The City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
CITY ENGINEER — Intended to refer to and identify the City Engineer
or his/her designee or any qualified engineering consultant which the City
Council, City Manager, Planning Board, Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department, Commissioner of Public Works, or their designee(s)
engage(s) for the purpose of reviewing any application or plan submitted
in accordance with this chapter or determining compliance herewith, when,
in their judgment, such review is appropriate or necessary in order to
ensure compliance with this chapter or determine if the provisions hereof
have been violated.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
CITY INSPECTOR — A City representative from the Department of Public
Works, Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, or
Department of Planning and Development, or their designee.[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
CRITICAL AREAS —
acceptable to them, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.
The plan, which shall be unique to the site, shall contain all information
required by §§ 218-8 and 218-9 below.
Disturbed areas of any size:
Within 35 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of a permanent or
intermittent vernal pool, stream, bog, or water body (including but
not limited to the named streams and surface waters specifically
identified as part of the Conservation Overlay District); or
(1)
(2) Within 35 feet of poorly or very poorly drained soils; floodplain;
A.
B. Disturbed areas exceeding 2,000 square feet in highly erodible soils; or
§ 218-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-7
1:219
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or land disturbance or grading
activities other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices.
DISTURBED AREA — An area where the natural vegetation has been
removed exposing the underlying soil or where vegetation has been
covered.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The federal agency
of the United States responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act,
including the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
program.
EPA — (United States) Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS — Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor)
greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-1 of the
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM — An EPA
Clean Water Act permit program.
NOI — Notice of intent.
NOPV — Notice of probable violation.
NOT — Notice of termination.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI) — Document to apply for coverage under the
EPA's construction general permit for stormwater discharges from
construction activities.
NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION (NOPV) — Document describing
nonconformance with this chapter.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT) — Document to end coverage of a
construction activity under the EPA's construction general permit.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PROJECT AREA — The area within the subdivision or site plan boundaries
plus any areas with associated off-site improvements.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community.
STABILIZED — When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed
soils. Soils which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered
with a healthy, mature growth of grass, or a good covering of straw mulch
Disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes
greater than 15%.
C.
§ 218-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-7
1:220
or other equivalent (seedless) mulch (two tons/acre). Mulch is only a
temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN (SWMP)
— A plan which may be required by the City which outlines project features,
proposed temporary and permanent erosion control features, maintenance
schedules and practices, and design basis used to establish temporary
and permanent stormwater design features. If a SWPPP is required under
federal law, the applicant may completely incorporate SWMP requirements
into the SWPPP and request that the SWPPP cover both the SWPPP and
SWMP requirements.
STORMWATER PERMIT (SWP) — A permit issued by the City of Rochester
per the requirements outlined in this chapter.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
required by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that clearly
describes appropriate pollution control measures that includes a
description of all pollution control measures (i.e., BMPs) that will be
implemented as part of the construction activity to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges and describes the interim and permanent
stabilization practices for the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The water from precipitation that is not
absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage
area.
STREAM — Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop
and maintain defined channels but which may not flow during dry portions
of the year. Includes, but is not limited to, all perennial and intermittent
streams located on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
SWMP — Stormwater management and erosion control plan.
SWP — Stormwater permit.
SWPPP — Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
UA — Urbanized area.
URBANIZED AREA (UA) — An area as defined by the EPA (based upon data
collected from the United States Census Bureau) serving a population of
10,000 or greater and a population density of 1,000 people per square mile.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water flowing in an identifiable channel or
course at least six months of the year.
§ 218-8. Design standards.
A. Temporary/construction stormwater management design. The following
standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and
erosion control as related to construction: (These standards are in
addition to requirements that may be found in this and other sections of
the site plan, subdivision, and other land use regulations or
ordinances.)
§ 218-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:221
(1) All measures in the plan shall meet as a minimum the best
management practices set forth in the Stormwater Management
and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County
Conservation District, New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the
Natural Resources Conservation Service), August 1992, as
amended. Additional BMPs are available at the following locations:
http://www.des.state.nh.us/factsheets/wqe/wqe-6.htm – NHDES
Environmental Fact Sheet WD-WQE-6 (Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control on Construction Sites, 1996)
http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm –
EPA National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
[Stormwater Menu of Best Management Practices (BMPs) and
Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control]
Note: The website links in this section are provided for information
and are subject to change. The most current link reference should
be utilized.
(2) Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected, or supplemented. The stripping of vegetation shall be
done in a manner that minimizes soil erosion.
(3) Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be
installed. The City Engineer or his/her designee shall review and
approve installation of the measures prior to land disturbance.
(4) The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed
areas remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
(a) Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project
area. Sediment in runoff water shall be trapped and retained
within the project area using approved measures. Wetland
areas and surface waters shall be protected from sediment.
(b) Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall
be diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible or
carried non-erosively through the project area. Integrity of
downstream drainage systems shall be maintained.
(c) Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak
rate and volume of runoff so that it does not exceed predevelopment
runoff rates or volumes for the two-, ten- and
twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm events and for
additional storm event frequencies as specified in the design
criteria of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas
in New Hampshire.
§ 218-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-8
1:222
(d) Priority should be given to preserving natural drainage
systems, including perennial and intermittent streams,
wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches for conveyance of
runoff leaving the project area.
(e) All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
maintained in functioning condition until final site stabilization
is accomplished.
(f) All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and
other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of
temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30
days unless conditions dictate otherwise.
(g) Naturally occurring streams, channels, and wetlands shall be
used for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area only
after appropriate sedimentation control measures have been
employed.
B. Permanent stormwater management general design criteria. The
following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater
management and erosion control as related to long-term management
of municipal water quality:
(1) Under one acre of total disturbance (includes non-contiguous
areas) will require a basic stormwater quality management system.
At a minimum, all stormwater must pass through basic
pretreatment (beyond catch basin sumps) prior to leaving the site.
(2) Over one acre of total disturbance (includes non-contiguous areas)
requires a properly designed, systematic, permanent stormwater
quality management system. Latest technology and most up-to-date
performance data must be considered when selecting permanent
control measures. As noted above, catch basin sumps alone are not
considered a valid water quality control measure. Mechanical
devices may be required to supplement any proposal. Maintenance
programs and schedules will be required as part of the proposal. In
addition to the one-time maintenance bond at the time of road
acceptance, off-site water quality control measures may require
long-term escrow funds to cover future maintenance expenses
(including removal of erosion control measures not removed as
part of the project). Sites with appropriate separation to the
seasonal high groundwater table must also consider groundwater
recharge. All groundwater recharge systems will require on-site
test pit and percolation test data to be submitted as part of the
review.
(3) Adjacent to a critical area (any size disturbance).
(a) Any new project adjacent to a critical area will require
permanent water quality control measures.
§ 218-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:223
(b) Projects involving redevelopment or expansion will be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
(4) Municipal projects. All municipal projects will comply with water
quality control measures defined in this chapter. Nothing regarding
municipal projects is intended to impose any greater requirement
than is already required by RSA 674:54.
C. Permanent stormwater management technical design criteria.
(1) All measures in the plan shall, as a minimum, meet the best
management practices set forth in the Stormwater Management
and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County
Conservation District, New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the
Natural Resources Conservation Service), August 1992, as
amended.
(2) The design of proposed features must consider the following:
(a) Existing and proposed methods of handling stormwater runoff
so that there will be no increase in the rate or volume of runoff
that leaves the boundaries of the site. (The Planning Board may
permit an increase in off-site stormwater runoff on submission
of a detailed downstream study and on the recommendation of
the City Engineer.)
(b) Engineering calculations used to determine drainage
requirements based upon twenty-five-year storm frequency,
twenty-four-hour duration shall be provided. All closed
drainage systems, culverts, major ditches, swales, and
detention facilities must be sized for the twenty-five-year storm
frequency. All drainage pipes larger than 48 inches must be
designed to accommodate a fifty-year storm frequency event.
All structural measures such as detention/retention facilities
must be reviewed for fifty-year storm impacts.
(c) If the project will affect drainage flow to an existing roadway
culvert, or if a detention or retention area is proposed, a
minimum of a twenty-five-year storm shall be used to evaluate
potential off-site effects. If a state-owned or -maintained
culvert is affected by the development, State of New
Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) guidelines
shall be used for evaluation of the culvert. Written approval
from the NHDOT must be submitted before final approval is
granted.
(d) Access for maintenance of stormwater facilities must be
included as part of the design, where necessary. Access
easements may be required.
§ 218-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-8
1:224
(e) All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and
other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of
temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30
days unless conditions dictate otherwise. If local, state, or
federal authorities determine that the trapped sediment
contains pollutants, trapped sediment must be tested to
determine specific contaminants, then removed and disposed
of in a manner which satisfies federal, state, and local
regulations.
(f) Velocities of less than 10 feet per second are required prior to
entering a sedimentation swale. The maximum design velocity
within the swale shall be 1.0 foot per second during passage of
the twenty-five-year storm.
(g) Flows less than 10 cubic feet per second are required prior to
entering a sedimentation swale.
(h) All slopes equal to or steeper than 2:1 adjacent to a public
right-of-way must have special stabilization details provided
with the submission.
(i) Forebays for stilling and sediment trapment must be included
in all basin and swale designs.
(j) Velocities of 10 feet per second or less are desirable within a
closed drainage system. Higher velocities may be allowed
provided special design criteria have been used.
(k) A minimum velocity of two feet per second is required within a
closed drainage system.
(l) Proposed riprap within a public right-of-way shall be placed a
minimum of 12 inches deep.
(m) Seasonal high water table elevations must be accounted for in
all BMP design criteria.
(n) Drainage design should follow the guidelines presented in the
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire,
as published by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, Rockingham County Conservation
District and the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources
Conservation Service), and additional guidelines published in
the Manual on Drainage Design for Highways, as published by
the State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 218-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-9
1:225
§ 218-9. Application; plan review and approval.
A. Initial application requirements. The following minimum requirements
apply to all demolition or construction projects (§ 218-6A or B).
Additional requirements may be found in this and other sections of the
site plan, subdivision, or other land use regulations. If the project is
part of a formal Planning Board approval process, documents must be
submitted for consideration as part of final approval.
(1) Site drawing drawn to scale of existing and proposed conditions
including:
(a) A project narrative including a description of the development.
(b) Locus map showing property boundaries.
(c) North arrow, scale, and date.
(d) Property lines.
(e) Easements.
(f) Structures, utilities, roads, and other paved areas.
(g) Topographic contours at an interval agreed to by the City
Engineer.
(h) Critical areas, as defined herein.
(i) Surface water and wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed
boundaries within 200 feet of the site.
(j) Vegetation.
(k) Limits of work.
(2) Soils information for design purposes or for determining highly
erodible soils shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil
Survey (NCSS) soil series map. A high intensity soil map of the site,
prepared in accordance with the Society of Soil Scientists of
Northern New England (SSSNNE) Special Publication No. 1, can
only be used for design purposes and not for determining highly
erodible soils.
(3) Construction details and/or application procedures for temporary
and permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(4) Areas and timing of soil disturbance.
(5) A schedule for self-inspection and maintenance of all BMPs. (The
schedule must be included within the plan set.)
§ 218-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-9
1:226
(6) Narrative section including discussion of each measure, its
purpose, construction sequence, and installation timing as they
apply to the site.
(7) If infiltration or exfiltration is proposed as part of the drainage
solution, test pit information including estimated seasonal high
water table elevations shall be provided at the location and
approximate elevation of the proposed infiltrating or exfiltrating
device.
(8) Calculations for the infiltration or exfiltration system. These
calculations should also account for frozen ground conditions,
when the devices may not function at their optimal design.
(9) Any other specific study, calculation, or investigation as requested
by the City.
(10) The drainage plans and calculations portion of the SWMP or
SWPPP shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer,
registered in the State of New Hampshire.
B. Final application requirements. The following additional requirements
shall be required (in paper and electronic form) as part of the final plan
unless the project is deemed of sufficiently minimal impact to qualify for
the minimum requirements specified in § 218-8 (Design standards) of
this chapter as determined by the Commissioner of Public Works or City
Engineer. Applicants with projects approved prior to the effective date
of this chapter, whose submission(s) included an erosion control plan
and a stormwater management plan as a component of such
submission(s), may present such submission(s) in lieu of the
requirements of § 218-9A and B.
(1) Construction drawings/supporting documents:
(a) A project narrative including a description of the development.
(b) Locus map showing property boundaries.
(c) North arrow, scale, and date.
(d) Property lines.
(e) Easements.
(f) Structures, roads, and utilities.
(g) Topographic contours at two-foot intervals.
(h) Critical areas.
(i) Within the project area and within 200 feet of project boundary
surface waters, wetlands, and drainage patterns and
watershed boundaries.
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-9
1:227
(j) Vegetation.
(k) Extent of one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries if published
or determined.
(l) Soils information for design purposes from a National
Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map or a highintensity
soil map of the site, prepared in accordance with
Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New England (SSSNNE)
Special Publication No. 1. Highly erodible soils shall be
determined by soil series.
(m) Areas of soil disturbance.
(n) Areas of cut and fill.
(o) Locations of earth stockpiles.
(p) Locations of equipment storage and staging.
(q) Locations of proposed construction and/or permanent vehicle
or equipment fueling.
(r) Stump disposal plan.
(s) Highlighted areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils.
(t) Highlighted areas of poorly and/or very poorly drained soils
proposed to be filled.
(u) Construction and earth movement schedule including project
start and completion dates, sequence of grading and
construction activities, sequence for installation and/or
application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, and
the sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
(v) Locations, descriptions, details, and design criteria and
calculations for all structural, nonstructural, permanent, and
temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures and
BMPs. This information should include seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, methods of seedbed preparation, expected
seeding dates (or limitations on seeding time frames), type and
rate of lime and fertilizer application, and type and quantity of
mulching for temporary and permanent control facilities.
(w) Identification of all permanent control measures.
(x) Identification of permanent snow storage areas.
(y) Identification of snow management measures during
construction.
§ 218-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-9
1:228
(z) Description of the combination of sediment and erosion control
measures which are required to achieve maximum pollutant
removal such as:
[1] Sediment basins. For common drainage that serves an
area with 10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a
temporary (or permanent) sediment basin providing
storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a drainage
area from a two-year, twenty-four-hour storm, or
equivalent control measures, must be provided, where
attainable, until final stabilization of the site. Where no
such calculation has been performed, a temporary (or
permanent) sediment basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of
storage per acre drained, or equivalent control measures,
must be provided where attainable until final stabilization
of the site. When computing the number of acres draining
to a common location, it is not necessary to include flows
from off-site areas and flows from on-site areas that are
either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization
where such flows are diverted around both the disturbed
areas and the sediment basin. In determining whether a
sediment basin is attainable, the operators may consider
such factors as site soils, slope, available area on site, etc.
In any event, the operator must consider public safety,
especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for
the sediment basin, and alternative sediment controls
must be used where site limitations would preclude a safe
design. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
[2] For drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed
acres at one time and where temporary sediment basins or
equivalent controls are not attainable, smaller sediment
basins and/or sediment traps should be used. At a
minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
sediment controls are required for all downslope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed
appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions).
[3] Drainage locations serving less than 10 acres may utilize
smaller sediment basins and/or sediment traps. At a
minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
sediment controls are required for all downslope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed
appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions) of the
construction area unless a sediment basin providing
storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a two-year,
twenty-four-hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of storage per
acre drained is provided.
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-9
1:229
(2) Stormwater management and erosion control plan (SWMP) shall
include the following:
(a) Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural
control BMP measures.
(b) A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all
measures for the site prior to achieving final site stabilization.
Inspections must be conducted at least once every seven
calendar days, or once every 14 calendar days and within 24
hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inch or greater.
(c) Identification of all permanent control measures and
responsibility for continued maintenance.
(d) Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak
discharge, and velocity of present and future runoff for the
twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
(e) Plans showing the entire drainage area affecting or being
affected by the development of the site. Proposed lot
boundaries and drainage areas shall be clearly shown on the
plan.
(f) The direction of flow of runoff through the use of arrows shall
clearly be shown on the plan.
(g) The location, elevation, and size of all existing and proposed
catch basins, dry wells, drainage ditches, swales, retention
basins, and storm sewers shall be shown on the plan.
(h) When detention structures are planned to reduce future
condition peak discharge, the soil cover complex method shall
be used to compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for
designing the structure. The design will conform to the criteria
outlined for those types of structures given in the Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
(i) Copies of pertinent state and federal permits.
(j) An example SWMP table of contents is as follows:
[1] Project overview.
[2] Owner.
[3] Address of development.
[4] Location of the site.
[5] Description of receiving waters.
[6] Nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity.
§ 218-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-9
1:230
[7] Limits of disturbance.
[8] Construction schedule.
[9] Existing conditions summary.
[10] Definition of topography, drainage patterns, soils, ground
cover, critical areas, adjacent areas, upstream areas
draining through site, existing development, existing
stormwater facilities, on- and off-site utilities, construction
limitations, buffers, wetlands, streams, sensitive areas,
and other pertinent features.
[11] Include an existing conditions plan (drawing) showing the
above existing conditions and labeled per the narrative
above.
[12]Off-site analysis.
[13] Description of the tributary area (include at least 1/4 mile
downstream), drainage channels, conveyance systems,
and downstream receiving waters.
[14] Summary of a review of existing or potential problems
resulting from the development, including but not limited
to sedimentation, erosion, water quality issues, and
chemical spills.
[15] Demonstration that development of the site will not
negatively affect the downstream systems.
[16] Demonstrate adequate capacity of the downstream system
to handle flow conditions after development.
[17] As applicable, include an off-site drainage plan (the plan
may be part of the existing conditions plan).
[18] Special reports, studies, and maintenance information
related to any existing (to remain) or proposed treatment
devices.
[19] As applicable, include test pit log forms, soil conditions
data, and wetland delineation information.
[20] As applicable, include information regarding long-range
maintenance of any closed drainage systems, detention/
retention facilities, etc.
[21] Appendix (include copies of all tables, graphs, charts, and
test pit and percolation test data used in any of the above
calculations).
C. Plan approval and review.
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-9
1:231
§ 218-10. Responsibility for installation, construction and
inspection.
(1) The Department of Public Works or other agency having
jurisdiction (per § 218-6C) shall indicate approval of the SWMP, as
filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of this
chapter. As applicable, such approval shall be a component of
subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) Final SWMP approval shall be contingent upon collection of any
required fees or escrow amounts related to technical review of any
SWMP prepared under this chapter.
A. The applicant and the applicant's engineer (or technical representative)
shall schedule and attend a mandatory pre-construction meeting with
the City Engineer or designee at least one week prior to
commencement of construction. All required escrow deposits and
bonding must be in place prior to the scheduled meeting. Three copies
of the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and notice of
intent (NOI) (if required), the SWMP, up-to-date construction schedule,
and associated construction documents must be provided at that time.
The SWMP must bear the seal and signature of the New Hampshire
registered professional engineer preparing the documents. The SWMP
may be combined with the SWPPP if labeled as both, meeting the
requirements of both. Prior to commencement of construction, the
Department of Planning and Development will confirm that the
documents submitted meet the conditions of plan approval. An
appropriate notation will be made on the "official" construction set used
by the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department and Public
Works Department. (Note: Pre-construction conferences will typically
not be required for construction of one single-family home or one
residential duplex, not part of a larger plan of construction.)
B. The Department of Planning and Development and/or Department of
Public Works reserves the right to prepare and request the applicant's
acknowledgement of a pre-construction checklist.
C. The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation,
construction, inspection, and disposition of all stormwater management
and erosion control measures required by the provisions of this chapter.
D. The Department of Public Works or Department of Planning and
Development may require a bond or other security with surety
conditions in an amount satisfactory to the City, providing for the actual
construction, installation, and removal of such measures within a
period specified by the City and expressed in the bond or the security.
E. The Department of Planning and Development, Department of Public
Works, and/or Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department
may require the owner or his/her authorized agent to deposit in escrow
with the City an amount of money sufficient to cover the City's costs for
§ 218-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-10
1:232
§ 218-11. Maintenance and inspection.
inspection and any professional assistance required for site compliance
monitoring. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
F. Site development shall not begin before the SWMP and SWPPP (if
required) have been reviewed and approved by the City, a NOI has been
acknowledged by the EPA, and NHDES has been contacted regarding
impaired waters in accordance with a NOI (if applicable). Best
management practices shall be installed as designed and scheduled as
a condition of final approval of the SWMP.
G. Commercial and industrial development and/or redevelopment. The
applicant, owner, and owner's legally designated representative (if any)
shall all hold responsibility for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if
required).
H. Residential development and redevelopment. The applicant is
responsible for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if required).
Excluding any post-development requirements of plan implementation,
there are two ways for the City to consider an applicant to be removed
as the responsible party (the applicant may also be required to comply
with other regulating entities' additional requirements):
(1) The applicant completes the project in a manner satisfactory to the
City and files a notice of termination (NOT) with the EPA in
accordance with the terms of the federal requirements.
(2) The applicant passes legal responsibility for the plan to another
competent party. In the case of a new subdivision where lots may be
transferred to a different entity for construction of the buildings, it
is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that the applicant has a
legal basis to require compliance by the new entity.
I. Individual homeowner development. The homeowner or a homeowner
who has taken control of a subdivided property bears responsibility for
compliance with the approved SWMP and SWPPP (if required). If the
homeowner is contracting building services to another person or entity,
the homeowner may choose to pass legal responsibility of compliance to
the contracted entity. If the responsibility is not passed, the homeowner
remains the responsible party and must comply with the terms of the
original plan.
A. Planning Board approved projects. The following provisions shall
pertain and be applicable only to those plans which come under the
jurisdictional purview of the Planning Board (site plan/subdivision
review):
(1) A narrative description of ongoing construction and operational
maintenance requirements for water quality measures required by
the SWMP after final Planning Board approval shall be
§ 218-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:233
incorporated into the final plan and supporting documentation or
development agreement of the property on which such measures
are located and recorded at the Strafford County Registry of Deeds.
The narrative shall be in the form of a typical site plan management
or development agreement, or as otherwise set forth by the
Planning Board.
(2) If the applicant is unable to adequately provide the required
maintenance activities during construction, work may be stopped
and the City may require additional escrow funding to be used by
either the applicant or the City solely to repair, replace, and/or
maintain the required measures.
(3) The City may require periodic compliance inspections to verify
ongoing maintenance of water quality protection measures. Such
inspections shall be performed by the City or its designee at
reasonable times to the landowner. The City may also require the
developer to provide a maintenance agreement.
(4) As a condition of Planning Board approval, the owner, his/her
successor, and assigns shall consent to periodic compliance
inspections by the City Manager's designee for compliance with
this chapter.
(5) Self-inspections are to be performed in accordance with the SWMP
and SWPPP (if required).
(6) Self-inspection reports are to be filed on site in a location readily
accessible to a City inspector.
B. Other projects. The following provisions shall pertain and be applicable
only to those plans which do not come under the jurisdictional purview
of the Planning Board (site plan/subdivision review). [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Right to inspect. The Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department Director and/or Commissioner of Public Works or their
designees are authorized to conduct inspections of any site that is
the subject of a permit issued hereunder, irrespective of whether
such permit also required the approval of a plan in accordance with
§ 218-6B above, in order to ensure that any conditions of the
issuance of such permit are being maintained and that no violations
of any of the provisions of this chapter are taking place.
(2) Confirmation by registered professional engineer. Upon such
inspection, when the circumstances of any suspected breach of
condition or violation of this chapter involve standards that
implicate technical engineering criteria either included in this
chapter or as a condition of such permits, the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department Director and/or Commissioner of
Public Works or their designees shall seek confirmation that such
§ 218-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-11
1:234
§ 218-12. Other required permits.
In addition to local approval, copies of the following permits shall be
required if applicable:
§ 218-13. Post-construction operation.
circumstances constitute a violation of such criteria prior to taking
any enforcement action under § 218-15 of this chapter.
(3) Enforcement. Upon such confirmation by a registered professional
engineer, or when such confirmation is not required due to the fact
that the circumstances of such violation do not implicate technical
engineering criteria either included in this chapter or as a
condition of such permit, the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department Director and/or Commissioner of Public
Works or their designees may proceed to enforce the provisions of
this chapter or conditions of the permit in accordance with
applicable statutes, rules or regulations.
A. Terrain alteration (site-specific permit). RSA 485-A:17 requires a permit
from the Department of Environmental Services for "any person
proposing to significantly alter the characteristic of the terrain, in such
a manner as to impede natural runoff or create an unnatural runoff."
Regulations require this permit for any project involving more than
100,000 contiguous square feet of disturbance or 50,000 contiguous
square feet in the protected shoreland.
B. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater
discharge permit. A permit issued by the EPA or by the state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. For a cumulative
disturbance of one acre of land that EPA considers "construction
activity," which includes, but is not limited to, clearing, grading,
excavation, and other activities that expose soil typically related to
landscaping, demolition, and construction of structures and roads, a
federal permit will be required. Consult EPA for specific rules. This EPA
permit is in addition to any state or local permit required. To apply, the
entity or individual responsible for construction site operations shall file
a NOI with the EPA at least seven days prior to work beginning.
Discharge is authorized when the application status is listed as
"authorized" in the EPA public NOI database or when the applicant
receives an EPA authorization letter by mail.
C. Wetlands permit. RSA 482-A requires a permit from the Department of
Environmental Services for any person desiring to "excavate, remove,
fill, dredge or construct any structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or
swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state."
A. Stormwater discharges associated with commercial/industrial
activities. Each commercial and industrial facility approved under this
§ 218-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:235
§ 218-14. Illicit discharge and connection.
chapter is required to perform annual site inspections (at a minimum).
The site inspection must be documented and at a minimum should
include: review of stormwater flow paths; condition of any sediment or
contaminant control devices; water quality notations; corrective actions
and time frames if unacceptable water quality runoff is noted; and the
name and position of the inspector. All records of the inspections must
be made available to the City or authorized agent upon request.
B. Notification for spills or other non-stormwater discharges. As soon as
any person responsible for a facility, site, activity, or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater
discharges which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the City of
Rochester's municipal storm system, state waters, or waters of the
United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release as to minimize the
effects of the discharge. (If said individual is not competent to assess,
contain, or clean up, that person shall immediately notify another
competent individual or firm.) If the substance poses an immediate
health or safety concern, the City of Rochester emergency services
must immediately be notified. If the substance does not pose an
immediate concern, the City of Rochester Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department and Department of Public Works should
be notified. This notification should be made as soon as possible;
however, no later than next business day post event. This notification
does not preclude and must be made in addition to any federal or state
required notifications.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials,
including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as follows:
(a) Waterline flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing
drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems),
crawl space pumps, air conditioner condensate, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, material riparian habitat
or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool water (less
than one ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other
water source not containing pollutants.
§ 218-13 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-14
1:236
§ 218-15. Enforcement.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the City and other governing
bodies as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the Department of Public Works and other
pertinent governing bodies prior to the time of the test. Such
verbal notification shall be followed by written notification
within two business days to the Department of Public Works.
(d) Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
sewer system.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(2) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such
a connection to continue.
C. Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a
watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that
such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
A. The Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department, Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department Director, Commissioner of
Public Works, or their designee, as the case may be and subject to the
provisions below, shall be responsible for enforcement of all aspects of
this chapter. In that regard, said official(s) shall be empowered hereby
to invoke any and all statutory enforcement prerogatives that may be
applicable to the purported violation as it relates to the plan submitted
hereunder or activity regulated hereby. By way of illustration and not by
§ 218-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-15
1:237
way of limitation, it is contemplated that the following statutory
enforcement prerogatives would apply: [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Type of Proposal
Applicable Board or
Authority
Applicable
Enforcement Statute
Site plan/subdivision
proposals
Planning Board RSA 676:15, 676:16,
676:17, 676:17-a and
676:17-b
Proposals affecting
single existing tracts
Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services
Department/Health
Officer/Planning
Board
RSA 147:9, 676:17,
673:1, V, and 676
Proposals affecting
existing public roads
or public stormwater
systems in place
City Council/
Department of Public
Works
RSA 47:17 and 625:9,
V-a
Proposals affecting
any water/sewer
infrastructure in place
City Council/
Department of Public
Works
RSA 38:26, II, and
149-I:6, III
Proposals
implementing or
involving earth
material removal
permits or other
activities regulated by
RSA 155-E
Planning Board RSA 155-E:10
B. The Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department,
Commissioner of Public Works, Health Officer, or their designee is
authorized by means of this chapter to take any action to enforce the
conditions hereof and to act on behalf of the various boards or agencies
identified above, depending on the nature or form of the conduct
constituting the alleged violation. It is intended that said Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department, Commissioner of Public
Works, Health Officer, or their designee shall have the authority to seek
individual specific remedies, including, where appropriate, injunctive
relief, the issuance of notices of violation, the pursuit of civil and/or
criminal sanctions, or, without limitation, any other sanction as
authorized by applicable law, regulation or statute, and said officer(s) is
hereby designated as the appropriate designee of any board or agency
having jurisdiction, whenever there is reason to believe that a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued hereunder
has taken place. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit or
otherwise curtail any statutory authority which such board or agency is
entitled to exercise independent of this chapter.
§ 218-15 ROCHESTER CODE § 218-15
1:238
§ 218-16. Mandatory regulated MS4s in urbanized areas; map.
Municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) within urbanized areas
(UA), as defined by the Bureau of Census, fall under mandatory regulation
under EPA Phase II Stormwater Management Regulations. Within the UA,
all roads and streets and associated drainage systems, both open and
closed, fall under regulation. Map 1 depicts the two urbanized areas in
Rochester. All land in Rochester shall comply with this chapter.
Chapter 223
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 22, Art. III.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 171.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 254.
C. Further, nothing in this section is intended to limit, in any way, the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department, Commissioner of
Public Works, Health Officer, or their designee from exercising any
authority that state law allows them to exercise on behalf of any state
agency which has preemptive or concurrent jurisdiction over any
conduct that would be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 218-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-16
1:239

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 15 and § 26.7 of the 1995 Code]
§ 223-1. Definitions. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The following definitions shall be applicable for the purpose of this article:
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee.
See § 7-18A of the City Code.
COMMITTEE — The subcommittee of the City Council (Public Works and
Building Committee) having responsibility for overseeing expenditures,
maintenance and control of public buildings, streetlights, public parks,
sewerage, streets and highways and residential solid waste/recycle
disposal. The Committee members shall be designated by the Mayor and
shall enjoy membership according to rules and regulations as established by
the City Council. The responsibilities of this Committee shall be enumerated
by the City Council and shall further be as set forth within this article, and
this Committee shall be referred to throughout this article as "Committee."
§ 223-2. Repair of highway, bridge or sidewalk. [Amended 3-2-2004]
Whenever any highway, bridge, or sidewalk shall, from want of necessary
repair, or because of any repairs or construction being made therein by the
Highway Division of the Department of Public Works, become unsafe for
travel, the Commissioner, upon instruction of the City Manager, shall erect a
suitable fence or railing to exclude all travelers from passing over the same
and shall maintain at night such lights as may be necessary to warn the
traveler of the hazard. If said repairs or construction is being made by any
other department or person, the head of such other department or person
shall erect and maintain the same guard fence, rails and lights.
§ 223-3. Prohibiting use of highways.
The Commissioner may make rules and regulations prohibiting the use of
any or all highways to such vehicles as he/she may prescribe in order
to prevent the use of said highways when said highways are unsuitable
for travel thereon. Such rules and regulations shall be posted on each
highway so regulated and at two other public places in the City. Any person
violating the provisions of such posted rules and regulations shall be fined
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) and shall be liable for all damage
occasioned thereby.
§ 223-4. Elevation.
The datum from which all elevations for street and other City work shall
be calculated shall be that of the U.S. Geodetic Survey, as given on the
standard discs of the survey.
§ 223-5. Permit for excavation upon highway or sidewalk.
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:241
A. No person shall break or dig up the ground, stone or concrete in any
street, lane or alley, or in any sidewalk or common in the City, or erect
any staging for building, or fence off any portion of said street or
sidewalk, or place or deposit any stone, brick, timber, or other building
material thereon, without first obtaining a written permit from the
Commissioner and complying in all respects with conditions said
Commissioner may impose. Whenever any street, lane, alley, sidewalk,
or other public place in the City shall, under any permit granted, be dug
up, obstructed or encumbered, and thereby rendered unsafe or
inconvenient for travelers, the person so digging up, obstructing or
encumbering shall put, and at all times keep up, a suitable railing or
fence around the section or parts of any street, lane, alley, or sidewalk
or other public place so dug up, obstructed or encumbered, so long as
the same shall be, or remain, unsafe or inconvenient as aforesaid, and
shall also keep such fence adequately illuminated every night from dusk
until dawn so long as such railing or fence shall be kept standing. He/
she shall also, at his/her expense, to the acceptance of the
Commissioner, and within such reasonable time as the Commissioner
shall direct, repair such street, lane, alley, sidewalk or public place.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
B. For a period of five years, beginning with the date of completion of the
final paving of a public street or way relating to the construction or
reconstruction of said street or way, no person, firm or corporation or
any agent or servant thereof shall excavate, construct or in any way
encumber the paved or traveled portion of the street or way in the City
of Rochester at any time, except for emergencies as may be deemed
necessary by the Commissioner of Public Works and then only upon the
posting by such entity of sufficient security, as determined by the
Commissioner of Public Works and the agreement of such entity, to pay
the cost of restoring such street or way to its original condition or with
the approval by majority vote of the City Council. For one year after
being notified of the completion of such restoration by such entity, the
Commissioner may reduce the amount of the security posted by such
entity; however, the Commissioner shall retain sufficient security to
ensure that such restoration has been performed in a manner that will
ensure that said street or way has been restored to its original
condition. One year after being notified of the completion of such
restoration, the Commissioner shall inspect the area restored and shall
release such security if, in the judgment of the Commissioner, such
restoration is satisfactory. [Amended 3-2-2004; 4-7-2015; 4-5-2016]
C. Any other provision of this article notwithstanding, any person, firm or
corporation or any agent or servant thereof that shall violate the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.).
§ 223-5 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-6
1:242
§ 223-6. Fire Chief to be notified.
Any person or corporation or department of the City, before digging up,
obstructing or encumbering in any way any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or
other public place in the City, shall, before beginning such work, notify the
Fire Chief as to where such work is to be done and shall, immediately upon
the completion of such work and the restoration of the place to its normal
condition, notify the Fire Chief.
§ 223-7. Moving of buildings through streets. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 223-8. Conduct on public streets and highways.
The following conduct with respect to the use of the City streets and
highways shall be regulated as more fully set forth below:
A. No person shall move, or assist in moving, any house, shop or other
building through any street, lane, or alley without first obtaining a
written license from the Licensing Board. Whenever the Licensing
Board shall as aforesaid grant permission to any person to encumber
any street, sidewalk, or public square for the purpose of erecting,
altering or moving buildings or to dig up or encumber the same in any
other manner, it may, as a condition to granting such permission,
require the party obtaining the same to furnish a bond of indemnity to
the City of Rochester, in such sum and with such securities as the
Licensing Board may deem proper.
B. The fee for such license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.).
A. No person shall place, establish, or maintain any sign, awning or shade
before his/her place of business, dwelling house or tenement, over any
part of any street or sidewalk, unless the same is safely fixed and
supported so as in no way to endanger persons passing upon such
street or sidewalk, and so that the lowest part of such sign, awning or
shade shall be at least seven feet above the sidewalk; nor shall any
person hang, affix, fasten, place or allow to remain upon the outer edge
of any sidewalk any sign or showcase whatever, or there display any
goods, merchandise, or samples of any business calling, trade, art or
craft, so as to obstruct the free passage and view to and from the street
and sidewalk.
B. No person shall sell at auction or otherwise upon any street or public
square in the City any furniture, goods, wares or merchandise
whatever, or place or in any manner encumber such street or square
therewith, without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager and
obtaining a secondhand dealer's/hawker's license from the Department
of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services. [Amended 5-1-2007;
10-15-2013]
C. No person shall draw or cause to be drawn, move or cause to be moved,
upon any public highway or street in said Rochester, any harrow, plow,
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-8
1:243
§ 223-9. Proposal for new street or highway or public
improvements; sewer and water assessments.
No proposed new street or highway or new public sewer, water, street
surfacing, or other public improvements, or any combination of the above,
shall be laid out, accepted or constructed on behalf of the City by the
City Council which is not subject to review by the Planning Board under
Rochester Subdivision Regulations until the following requirements have in
all respects been complied with:
or other instrument or implement liable to cause injury to the surface
of said public highway or street, unless the same is being carried or
transported upon a drag, vehicle or other conveyance.
D. No theatrical or dramatic representation shall be performed or
exhibited, and no parade or procession upon any public street or way,
unless a special license shall first be obtained from the Licensing Board.
(See Chapter 22, Amusements and Entertainment, Article III, Public
Dances, Circuses and Parades.) [Amended 3-5-2019]
E. Dumping on highways. No person shall deposit or dump bottles, glass,
crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, old automobiles,
automobile parts, or any other stones, snow, residential solid waste,
dirt, ashes, lumber or any other thing either in or upon any highway,
street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or other public place within the City limits
of Rochester. [Amended 12-5-1995; 3-5-2019]
A. The person or persons offering said street or highway layout or
requesting new public sewer, water, street surfacing or other public
improvements, or any combination of the above, shall proceed as
follows:
(1) Make written petition to the Planning Board, which shall provide
the following:
(a) A description of or reference to a map or plan, showing the
starting points, courses, and termini of the street or highway,
and requested sewer, water, street surfacing and other public
improvements, as may be necessary.
(b) A description of the lands affected by said street and public
improvements.
(c) The names of the owners of such lands.
(d) The estimated cost for the construction of said streets or
highways and other necessary public improvements.
(e) A separate form of sewer or water agreement, providing that a
person shall pay for the total cost of any sewer or water
extensions, which said costs shall be determined by the
Commissioner of Public Works, and each agreement shall
§ 223-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-9
1:244
further provide for the payment of the total cost of said sewer
or water extensions plus full payment of interest on account
of any debt to be incurred by the City in the construction of
said sewer or water extensions. Each agreement shall further
provide that the total cost of said sewer or water extensions
and payment in full of the interest on any debt to be incurred
by the City in the construction of said sewer or water
extensions shall be paid by the person desiring such
construction by means of a special sewer or water assessment
and shall constitute a lien on all land of said person. Said lien
shall be transferable upon the conveyance of said improved
land, provided that all prior installments thereon have been
paid. Each agreement shall further provide that said special
sewer or water assessment shall be based upon the total cost
of the construction plus the payment of interest on any debt
incurred by the City, and may further provide that said cost
and interest may be prorated over a period not exceeding 10
years. Each agreement shall further provide that in the event
of a transfer or sale by the original petitioner of the property
serviced by said extension, the balance then owing to the
City for said extension shall be paid in full. Said agreement
shall be recorded in the Strafford County Registry of Deeds,
and said lien shall have the full force and effect of a tax
lien and be collectable as such as provided by RSA 80:88 to
80:91 as presently enacted or the corresponding provisions
of any recodification or amendment of these sections. Said
agreement shall also be signed and shall be duly witnessed
and acknowledged. Any agreement for sewer or water shall
be limited to individual owners of residential homes only, who
shall be reimbursed for any payment made as above provided
in the event that Phase II of the Water Pollution Abatement
Program of the City of Rochester is adopted. Any commercial,
industrial or real estate development owners shall pay their
pro rata share of such sewer and water improvements in cash
prior to construction. [Amended 3-5-2019]
(2) Said street or highway shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width.
(3) Give a warranty or other satisfactory fiduciary deed of conveyance
describing said property to the City of Rochester.
B. The Planning Board shall review said petition and agreement and shall
report in writing to the City Council and to the Commissioner of Public
Works the following:
(1) The need of such street or highway and any necessary public
improvements.
(2) The character of the proposed street layout and necessary public
improvements and their relationship to the future development of
the City as a whole.
§ 223-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-9
1:245
(3) The necessity, if any, for sewer, water, street surfacing and other
public improvements.
C. The Commissioner of Public Works shall report in writing to the City
Council the following:
(1) The estimated cost of final surfacing for any of said street or
highway by the City.
(2) The estimated cost for any necessary sewer, water or other public
improvements.
(3) The estimated period of time required to complete said street or
highway surfacing and to construct said sewer, water and other
necessary public improvements.
D. The City Council shall proceed as follows:
(1) Review the petition and agreement of the person or persons
offering said street or highway and each person desiring necessary
sewer, water or other public improvements; review the action and
recommendations of the Planning Board; and examine the report of
the Commissioner of Public Works. The petition of the person or
persons, the action and recommendations of the Planning Board, if
any, and the report of the Commissioner of Public Works shall be
first accepted by the City Council by a majority vote of the entire
membership of the Council.
(2) If the above petition, action and report are all accepted by a
majority vote of the City Council, the City Council shall require
each person to provide the City with a written agreement, signed
and duly witnessed and acknowledged, in which each person
agrees to pay his/her pro rata share of the special assessment
hereinabove provided. No agreement and no deed shall be
accepted by the City without a two-thirds roll call vote of the
Council. Said two-thirds roll call vote shall be based upon the entire
membership of the City Council.
E. Any person who refuses to sign an agreement to pay his/her pro rata
share of the special assessment for new construction of said sewer or
water extension prior to said construction or any other person who shall
refuse to sign such an agreement at a later date to pay his/her pro rata
share of the special assessment shall be prohibited from joining in any
new sewer or water extensions in the City of Rochester without paying
his/her pro rata share of the special assessment, as the case may be, for
the construction of said sewer or water extensions in the City of
Rochester.
F. The pro rata share of each person shall be determined by dividing the
total cost of construction of said sewer or water extensions plus any
necessary interest to be incurred in financing of said sewer or water
construction by the number of lots as laid out on said plan or map in
§ 223-9 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-9
1:246
§ 223-10. Naming of public streets and rights-of-way.
order to determine each person's pro rata share of the special
assessment.
G. The funds received from the collection of such special sewer or water
assessments shall be kept as separate and distinct funds and shall be
known by their respective names as the "Sewer Fund" or the "Water
Fund" as the case may be. Any surplus in any such fund or funds may be
used for the enlargement or replacement of said sewer or water
extensions but shall not be used for the extension of said sewer or water
to serve unsewered or unwatered areas or for any purpose other than
for cost of construction and payment of interest on any said newly
constructed sewer or water extensions.
H. A copy of this amendment shall be recorded in the Strafford County
Registry of Deeds under the title of "City of Rochester Sewer or Water
Liens" and any other indexing as the Register of Deeds may deem
appropriate.
I. Any lien created by this amendment or by said original ordinance or
other prior amendment thereto shall also be deemed to be in the form of
a tax lien, and any default thereon shall also be collectable by an action
in debt, or other appropriate action, and said lien shall also have the full
force and effect of a real estate attachment, as well as a tax lien.
J. This amendment shall take effect upon its passage and no petition shall
be considered without complete compliance with said section and all
amendments thereto.
A. Every highway, street or right-of-way under the control of the City and
which is to receive, or has received, legal status by acceptance shall
have a name which shall be given it by the City Council in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 231:133, as presently enacted, or in
accordance with the corresponding provisions of any recodification or
amendment of such section. Said name shall be legibly marked on a
suitable signboard or other marker and placed in at least two
conspicuous places on said street. The City Council may change the
name of any such street, highway or right-of-way at any time when in its
judgment there is occasion for so doing.
B. The naming of any new street, highway or right-of-way shall form a part
of the return of the layout of the street or highway, or of the acceptance
of any dedicated way. The City shall not be bound by any name
previously assigned to the street, highway or right-of-way by any
private owner, developer, or dedicator. No name for a highway, street,
or right-of-way shall be selected which is already in use, or which is
confusingly similar to any other existing name, or which otherwise
might delay the locating of any street in an emergency.
§ 223-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-10
1:247
§ 223-11. Address numbers on streets, highways and rights-of-way.
[Amended 6-15-1999; 6-5-2001]
C. Whenever a name is assigned to any new street, highway or right-ofway,
or a change is made in the name of any street, highway or right-ofway,
the City Council shall make a return of the same to the City Clerk,
who shall make a record of a new name or name change and shall
forward a copy of such record to the Commissioner of Transportation,
in accordance with the requirements of RSA 231:133, as presently
enacted or in accordance with the corresponding provisions of any
recodification or amendment thereof. In the process of assigning names
to streets, highways and rights-of-way, the City Council shall follow the
following guidelines, to the extent possible: [Amended 6-5-2001]
(1) No name shall be assigned to a street, highway, or right-of-way
which shall duplicate the name of any other proposed or existing
street, regardless of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue,"
"boulevard," "drive" or the like.
(2) The extension of an existing street shall have the same name as the
existing street.
(3) Before a new street name is assigned to a street, highway or rightof-
way by the City Council, or an existing street is renamed by the
City Council, the proposed name of such street shall be reviewed by
a committee consisting of the City Clerk, Fire Chief, Police Chief,
Planning and Development Director, or their respective designees,
and the Rochester Postmaster, or his/her designee, who shall
submit their comments, if any, with regard to the proposed name to
the City Council. No proposed name which receives a negative
review by a member of the aforementioned committee shall be
utilized.
D. The Planning Board shall have the authority to assign a provisional
name to all streets, highways and/or rights-of-way shown upon
subdivision or site review plans being considered for approval by the
Planning Board; provided, however, that no such provisional name shall
be assigned to such street unless and until such time as the Planning
Board shall have followed the procedures set forth in Subsection C
above with respect to such proposed street name.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of RSA 231:133-a, the Planning and
Development Director of the City of Rochester, or his/her designee,
shall have the authority to assign numbers to all existing residential
and/or commercial structures and/or to vacant lots. In assigning
numbers to residential and/or commercial structures and/or vacant lots,
the Planning and Development Director, or his/her designee, shall
employ the following criteria: [Amended 10-15-2013; at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 223-10 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-11
1:248
(1) For every 10 feet of right-of-way frontage within the Special
Downtown District of the City of Rochester, as defined in Chapter
275, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Rochester, there shall be an
individual number assigned.
(2) For every 50 feet of right-of-way frontage outside of the Special
Downtown District of the City of Rochester, as defined in Chapter
275, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Rochester, there shall be an
individual number assigned.
(3) Streets shall be numbered so that even numbers are located on the
left side of the right-of-way and odd numbers are located on the
right side of the right-of-way. The right and left sides of the right-ofway
shall be determined by the relationship of the right-of-way to a
person facing away from the center of the City of Rochester at the
statue of Parson Main.
(4) The numbering for culs-de-sac shall begin at the intersection of the
cul-de-sac and the collector right-of-way and shall proceed from the
right-hand side of the collector right-of-way from right to left
around the cul-de-sac.
(5) Mobile home parks and condominium and apartment complexes
shall, to the extent possible, as determined by the committee
established in § 223-10C(3) above, name their private streets and
number each unit consistent with the E-911 standards set forth in
this section.
(6) Each apartment building shall be given one street number and each
apartment unit within such building shall be assigned that street
number and unit number.
(7) Existing numbering patterns for existing streets, highways and
rights-of-way which do not allow for the assignment of additional
numbers for future development may be assigned new numbers by
the Planning and Development Director or his/her designee.
(8) All new buildings and/or structures, as defined in Chapter 275,
Zoning, Article 2, of the Code of the City of Rochester, or additions
to existing buildings and/or structures, shall be required to obtain
and file with the Department of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services a foundation certification plan in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 40, Building Construction and Property
Maintenance, § 40-15.
(9) The beginning of a street shall be that end which intersects with a
collector street and, so far as possible, shall be that end closest in
distance to the statue of Parson Main.
(10) Any building or structure for which a number has been designated
shall have such number affixed thereto in such manner as to be
plainly visible from the street which abuts the main entrance to the
§ 223-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-11
1:249
§ 223-12. Construction of sidewalks.
All sidewalks built by the City of Rochester shall be constructed under the
supervision of the Commissioner. Preference in order of construction of
cement sidewalk shall be given to petitioners who by written application
shall agree to pay a portion of the cost of construction of said sidewalk, said
portion not exceeding 1/2 of the said cost, payment to be made over a period
not to exceed 10 years. The portion of the cost to be borne by the petitioner
shall be both reasonable and proportional to the benefits according to the
land upon which such assessment is made.
§ 223-13. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No person shall unnecessarily place any obstruction on any foot pavements
or sidewalks. No person shall be permitted to construct a ramp up to
and across the sidewalk adjacent to his/her property or place any other
obstructions thereon without first securing a permit from the Commissioner
to do so.
§ 223-14. Streetlighting. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The Commissioner shall have supervision of all municipal lighting and
location of electric light and utility poles within the City limits and is
authorized to prescribe rules and regulations for the marking or painting
of any poles, crossarms or supporting fixtures which are located within
the public highway. All persons owning or using said poles, crossarms or
supporting fixtures shall paint or mark at their own expense said poles,
crossarms, or supporting fixtures in accordance with the rules, regulations
and directions of said Commissioner.
property. Such numbers shall be a minimum height as to meet
current Fire Code requirements.
(11) The owner of any building or structure who shall fail to affix an
assigned number to his/her mail box and building or structure
within 30 days of written notice from the Planning and
Development Director shall be fined not more than twenty-five
dollars ($25.) for each day that such number is not affixed. Any
number affixed in accordance with this subsection shall be visible
from the street. With respect to new structures, failure to display
an assigned number in the manner set forth above shall be grounds
for denial of a certificate of occupancy.
B. The assignation or alteration of numbers by the Planning and
Development Director pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A above
shall be provisional only until such time as such assignation or
alteration of numbers shall be confirmed by the Planning and
Development Director after the holding of a public hearing by the City
Council in accordance with the provisions of RSA 231:133-a.
§ 223-11 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-15
1:250
§ 223-15. Prohibited use of poles.
No person shall use said poles for the posting of bills or other advertising
purposes or for any other purpose except that for which permission is given
by the Commissioner.
§ 223-16. "Adopt-A-Spot" areas. [Amended 3-2-2004; 5-1-2007]
The City Manager, in the exercise of duties relative to the oversight of all
real and personal property owned by the City of Rochester, as specified
in Section 14 of the Rochester City Charter, from time to time, designates
certain areas of the City, primarily areas included within or closely related
to the highways servicing the City of Rochester, as "Adopt-A-Spot" areas.
"Adopt-A-Spot" areas are maintained, landscaped and/or otherwise
beautified by designated individuals and/or entities that volunteer to
perform such functions for the purpose of improving the appearance of the
"Adopt-A-Spot" areas, as well as the appearance of the City of Rochester
as a whole. The City Manager shall annually, on or about May 1 of each
year, establish a list of "Adopt-A-Spot" areas for the ensuing calendar year
beginning on such May 1 and ending on the following April 30. A copy of
such list shall be maintained in the City Manager's office and in the office
of the City Clerk. In the event that the City Manager fails to update the
"Adopt-A-Spot" list on or about May 1 of a given year, the "Adopt-A-Spot"
list then on file in the office of the City Manager shall be controlling for
the purposes of this section. No person shall, within any "Adopt-A-Spot"
area, erect or maintain any sign or other advertising material whether for
political purposes or otherwise, except for such advertising material and/
or device as has been previously authorized in writing by the City Manager
or his/her designee. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a violation.
§ 223-17. Bonds.
The Commissioner may require any person seeking to perform any work
affecting any highway, bridge, sidewalk or other public property to furnish
a bond of indemnity to the City of Rochester in such sum and with such
sureties as the Commissioner may deem proper.
§ 223-18. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided herein, whoever is in violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 223-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-18
1:251

ARTICLE II
Newsracks and Public Way Obstructions
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 35 of the 1995 Code]
§ 223-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health and safety
through the regulation of the placement of newsracks and public way
obstructions.
§ 223-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
CITY — The City of Rochester.
NEWSPAPER or NEWS PERIODICAL — A daily or weekly publication
containing all of the following: current news, editorials, feature articles and
advertising.[Amended 3-5-2019]
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or news periodicals.
PARKWAY — That area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and
the property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" shall also include any area
within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.
PUBLIC WAY OBSTRUCTION — Any object other than a newsrack which
obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on the streets,
sidewalks, parkways or roadways. The term "public way obstruction" shall
include, but not be limited to, signs and planters.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians on
any public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the City.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use or public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys,
sidewalks, garages, parking lots, parks and playgrounds.[Amended
3-5-2019]
§ 223-21. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall install, use, attach or maintain any newsrack or public
way obstruction which projects onto, into or over any part of the
roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part, upon,
along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.
§ 223-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-21
1:253
§ 223-22. Permit required; application for permit.
§ 223-23. Standards for installation, maintenance and operation.
Any newsrack or public way obstruction which in whole or in part rests
upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the
following standards:
B. No person shall install, use, attach or maintain any newsrack or public
way obstruction which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any
public sidewalk or parkway when such installation, use or maintenance
endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or
location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation
purposes or other uses, or when such newsrack or public way
obstruction unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped
vehicle, the ingress or egress for any residence or place of business, or
the use of poles, posts, travel signs or insignias, hydrants, mailboxes or
other objects permitted at or near said location.
C. Within 60 days of the passage of this article every person or other entity
shall comply with the provisions of this article with respect to each
newsrack and/or public way obstruction owned by it within the City.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
A. No person shall install or maintain any newsrack or public way
obstruction which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway without further applying for and being granted a
permit from the Licensing Board. The permit application shall include
the following:
(1) The physical dimensions of each newsrack or public way
obstruction to be installed or maintained in the City by the person;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity
to whom or to which the permit is to be issued; and
(3) A diagram showing the location of the newsrack or public way
obstruction and the dimensions of the sidewalk, if any, upon which
it is to be located.
B. Newsracks shall require the submission of a permit application, but the
permit shall be granted by the Licensing Board on a ministerial basis
provided that the proposed newsrack as installed will not violate the
provisions of § 223-21 above.
A. All newsracks and public way obstructions must be individually
permitted by location.
B. No newsrack or public way obstruction shall be chained, bolted or
otherwise attached to any public property, or to any private property,
§ 223-21 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-23
1:254
§ 223-24. Identification required.
Within 30 days after this article becomes effective, every person or other
entity which places or maintains a newsrack or public way obstruction on
the streets of the City shall have his/her/its name, address and telephone
number affixed thereto in a place where such information can be easily
seen.
§ 223-25. Hold harmless agreement; insurance. [Amended
3-5-2019]
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack or public
way obstruction on a public sidewalk, parkway, roadway or street in the
City shall file a written statement with the Licensing Board, satisfactory to
the City Attorney, whereby he/she/it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless
the City, its officers, City Council members and employees from any loss or
liability or damage, including expense and costs for bodily injury or damage
to private or public property sustained by any person as a result of the
installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack or public obstruction within
the City. A certificate of insurance in a form approved by the City Attorney
indicating no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.) in general liability
insurance coverage and naming the City as an additional insured shall be
maintained on file with the Licensing Board by each such person or entity.
without the written permission of the City, the owner, or the person in
possession of the property to which the attachment is to be made.
C. Newsracks and public way obstructions shall not be chained or
otherwise attached to one another.
D. The City shall issue a proof of permit in the form of a sticker or decal
which shall be attached to the newsrack or public way obstruction at all
times.
E. All permits must be renewed annually prior to July 1.
F. Unlicensed newsracks or public way obstructions will be considered
abandoned and subject to removal without notice.
G. All permits are nontransferable.
H. The annual fee for each permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.), regardless of
when during a year such permit is issued.
I. Any permit may be revoked at any time, by action of the Licensing
Board; provided, however, that any revocation initiated by the
Licensing Board shall entitle the owner of the newsrack and/or public
way obstruction to a pro rata refund of the annual permit fee paid
pursuant to the preceding Subsection H of this section.
§ 223-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-26
1:255
§ 223-26. Removal of newsrack or public way obstruction.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall remove any newsrack or public
way obstruction placed on any street, sidewalk, parkway or roadway in
violation of this article.
§ 223-27. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision of this article or
its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article without the
invalid provisions or applications.
§ 223-28. Injunction.
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition
to any other relief provided by this article, the City Attorney may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include the
seeking of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and/or
permanent injunction.
§ 223-29. Damage to newsracks and public way obstructions.
Any damage to newsracks or public way obstructions, whether or not
properly licensed, by any cause whatsoever, including snowplowing and
removal, shall be at the sole expense of the owner.
§ 223-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined one hundred dollars ($100.) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues to occur.
§ 223-26 ROCHESTER CODE § 223-30
1:256
Chapter 254
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 223-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-30
1:257

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 254-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — For the purposes of this chapter only, an
abandoned vehicle is one that is parked in violation of any provisions of this
chapter for a period of time greater than 24 hours.
CROSSWALK —
DISTRICTS —
FIRE LANE — The portion of a traveled way established on private property
devoted to public use, where the parking of motor vehicles or other
obstructions may interfere with the ingress and egress of Fire Department
or other emergency vehicles for the protection of persons and property,
such as at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches
and similar locations.
INTERSECTION — The area bounded by the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or the lateral boundary lines of two highways.
OFFICIAL TIME — Time designated herein shall be standard or daylight,
whichever shall be in force.
PERSON, DRIVER and PEDESTRIAN —
That portion of the roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation
or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
A.
Any portion of the roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing
by lines or other markings on the surface.
B.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to a highway when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more
is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
A.
URBAN RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to a
highway not comprising a business district when the frontage on such
highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by
dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
B.
RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to a
highway not comprising a business or urban residence district when the
frontage on such highway for a distance of 1/2 mile or more is mainly
occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business
on any one side.
C.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
A.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-1
1:259
POLICE OFFICER — An officer of the Municipal Police Department or
any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
RAILROADS —
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the road.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, draft animals, cattle, sheep, goats, vehicles and
other conveyances while using the street for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES —
TRAFFIC MOVEMENTS —
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in physical control of a
vehicle.
B.
C. PEDESTRIAN — A person on foot.
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.
A.
RAILROAD TRAIN — A steam engine, electric, diesel or other motor,
with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
B.
All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with these
regulations erected pursuant to competent authority for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
A.
Traffic signals, mechanically or electrically operated, by which traffic
is alternatively directed to stop and proceed, erected pursuant to
competent authority.
B.
A. STOP — When required, means complete cessation of movement.
STOP or STOPPING — When prohibited, means any stopping of a
vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign
or signal.
B.
C. STANDING — Any stopped vehicle, whether occupied or not.
PARK — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
D.
TURN — — The turning of a vehicle from its original direction to the
opposite direction; the turning from one side of the street to the other
for the purpose of parking.
E.
§ 254-1 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-1
1:260
TRAVELED WAYS —
VEHICLES —
WEEKDAY — For the purposes of Article III only, weekday shall mean
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY — When required, means slowing down,
stopping if necessary, to allow vehicles using the street being
approached to have the right-of-way.
F.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of
every way or place of whatever nature used by the members of the
public for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
A.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular traffic by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner.
B.
ROADWAY — That portion of the street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
C.
CURB — The lateral boundaries of that portion of the street improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel whether defined by a
curbstone or not.
D.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the street between the curblines and
adjacent property lines intended for pedestrian use.
E.
ALLEY — A public, narrow passage or way between buildings within the
compact area of the City.
F.
PARKING LOT — Every parking area in public or private ownership
used for parking of motor vehicles by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner.
G.
VEHICLES — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
A.
B. MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle that is self-propelled.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Fire and Police Department
vehicles and such other vehicles as are designated as such by the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles or the City Council of
Rochester, New Hampshire.
C.
§ 254-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-1
1:261

ARTICLE II
Operation of Motor Vehicles
§ 254-2. One-way streets.
Vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
§ 254-3. Driving through and passing processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other procession in motion or pass any such procession unless so
directed by a person in charge of said procession or a police officer.
§ 254-4. Funeral or other processions.
§ 254-5. U-turn prohibited on designated streets.
The driver of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn upon any street when a sign
is posted indicating no U-turn is allowed and shall not make a U-turn on
any other street unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
§ 254-6. Limitations on backing and movement from parked
position.
§ 254-7. Use of bicycles, roller blades, roller skates and
skateboards.
A. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a
type approved by the Chief of Police.
B. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand side of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
C. No person shall willfully interrupt, interfere, or in any way disturb a
funeral assembly or procession.
A. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection.
B. The driver of a vehicle shall not back over a crosswalk except where
such crosswalk is immediately adjacent to authorized parking areas and
then only when such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with pedestrian traffic.
A. All bicycles shall be ridden in accordance with the New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated.
§ 254-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-7
1:263
§ 254-8. Unnecessary noise.
No person shall operate any vehicle on any traveled way so as to make any
loud, unusual or other unnecessary noise as hereinafter defined.
§ 254-9. Misuse of power.
No person shall operate any vehicle on any traveled way so as to misuse the
power of that vehicle as hereinafter defined.
§ 254-10. Definitions.
The words "loud, unusual, or other unnecessary noise" or "misuse of power"
whenever used in this article shall include any noise or misuse of power
occasioned by any one or more of the following actions of the operator of
any vehicle:
B. Roller blades, roller skates, and skateboards are prohibited on
sidewalks, parks, and parking lots of the main downtown area and the
central business districts of Gonic and East Rochester. The Chief of
Police shall establish and publish the boundaries of each such central
business district.
A. Misuse of power: exceeding tire traction limits in acceleration,
sometimes known as "laying down rubber," "peeling rubber" or
"fishtailing";
B. Misuse of braking power exceeding tire traction limits in deceleration
where there is no emergency;
C. Rapid acceleration by means of quick shifting of transmission gears
with either a clutch and manual transmission or automatic
transmission;
D. Rapid deceleration by means of quick downshifting of transmission
gears with either a clutch and manual transmission or automatic
transmission;
E. Racing of engines by manipulation of the accelerator, gas pedal,
carburetor, or gear selector, whether the vehicle is either in motion or
standing still; or
F. The blowing of any horn except as a warning signal or the use of any
siren or any other noise-making device, whether the vehicle is either in
motion or standing still; provided, however, that the use of a siren or
other device on an emergency vehicle shall not be construed as a
violation of this chapter.
§ 254-7 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-11
1:264
§ 254-11. Motor vehicles on park, recreation area and school
property.
The use of all motor vehicles, including but not limited to motorcycles
and off-road vehicles, is prohibited on City parks, recreation areas, and
all school property except for designated parking lots unless special
permission has been granted by the City Manager for organized activities.
§ 254-12. Commercial vehicle and truck travel restricted. [Amended
4-7-1998]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, including any applicable
vehicle weight limitations and/or restrictions upon any classification of
vehicles recognized by the State and/or Federal Department of
Transportation or Interstate Commerce Commission, streets or parts of
streets shall be restricted to vehicles complying with such vehicular weight
limitations and/or restrictions; provided, however, that if signs are erected
restricting a street, or part thereof, with a sign stating merely "No Through
Truck Traffic," or similar designation, without further elaboration, then
such street, or part of such street, shall be restricted to pleasure vehicles
only with a gross vehicle weight under 6,000 pounds. All commercial
vehicles, including but not limited to trucks, failing to comply with such
vehicular weight limitations or restrictions are expressly prohibited from
using such streets. These restrictions shall not apply to vehicles making
deliveries to residences or businesses on said streets, to City-owned
vehicles, or to drivers traveling to their own residences on said street.
Drivers traveling to their own residences shall not park said vehicles on any
portion of the City street or right-of-way.
§ 254-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-12
1:265

ARTICLE III
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 254-13. Parking prohibited in certain places.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of
the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 254-14. Winter all-night parking prohibited. [Amended
12-6-2005]
§ 254-15. City-owned parking lots. [Amended 12-6-2005]
There shall be free parking in marked areas in all City-owned parking lots.
Any vehicle left for a period of 24 hours or more shall be towed to a public
garage for storage at the owner's risk and expense. It shall be unlawful
to park or leave standing any motor vehicle in an unmarked area of any
municipal parking lot for any purpose except loading or unloading.
§ 254-16. Parking prohibited during certain hours in designated
places.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours designated thereon, on any day, upon any street so
marked by signs.
§ 254-17. Parking time limited in designated places.
A. Between November 1 and May 1 no person shall park any vehicle in any
municipal parking lot or on any public street when a snow emergency
has been declared by the City of Rochester Commissioner of Public
Works or his/her designee. In declaring a snow emergency, the City
shall notify the local media and use other means that may be
appropriate to alert the public not less than six hours prior to such
emergency taking effect. When called, such emergency shall remain in
force until such time as declared by the Commissioner or his/her
designee.
B. The Police Chief, after consultation with the Commissioner of Public
Works, may grant specific exceptions to Subsection A above in
designated areas of any municipal parking lot or on any particular
public street when a snow emergency has been declared.
A. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time stated on such signs.
B. The application of time restrictions as described in the foregoing
subsection shall mean that no driver of a vehicle shall be permitted to
park within any one limited area for more than the time allowed in that
§ 254-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-17
1:267
§ 254-18. Bus and taxicab stands.
§ 254-19. Unlawful parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 254-20. Using vehicles for primary purpose of advertising.
No person shall park on any street a vehicle for the primary purpose of
advertising, except upon written permit from the Chief of Police.
§ 254-21. Emergency restrictions on parking.
The Chief of Police may restrict or prohibit parking or travel on any public
street whenever the ordinary uses of the same become hazardous because
of snow accumulation, existence of some emergency condition, or to
facilitate the removal of snow or other hazards. Said restriction or
prohibition shall be effective when suitable signs have been erected at
intervals of not more than 100 feet.
§ 254-22. Fire lanes.
When signs are erected and the road surface is clearly marked giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any way marked as
a fire lane.
area, on any one day, whether such time is used in a single period of
parking or accumulated in two or more periods.
C. Exception. The Chief of Police may permit plumbers, electricians or
other contractors to park or leave standing vehicles in front of buildings
for a longer period of time than is provided for in this chapter provided
it is essential for the work being carried on in said building.
A. The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street at any place
other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, for the purpose of
inviting or soliciting business or while in the act of inviting or soliciting
business.
B. No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand, or other
than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stand has been officially
designated.
A. Displaying it for sale.
B. Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairs of an
emergency nature.
§ 254-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-23
1:268
§ 254-23. Loading zones.
The Chief of Police may establish loading and unloading zones which shall
be marked by appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
vehicle or any person having custody of any vehicle to park said vehicle
or permit the same to be parked in any zone designated as a loading zone
unless actually engaged in loading or unloading.
§ 254-24. Parking within lines.
All parking of motor vehicles upon City streets or parking lots shall be
within the marks placed upon the streets which indicate the place and
manner for parking.
§ 254-25. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified
places.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device,
no person, except a person driving an emergency vehicle, shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
(2) On a sidewalk.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) On a crosswalk.
(5) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(6) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a way or within a
highway tunnel.
(7) On any railroad tracks.
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(9) In any parking place, whether on public or private property,
specially designated for a person with a walking disability by
means of a sign as required by RSA 265:73-a stating that the space
is reserved for a person with a walking disability or displaying the
international accessibility symbol, unless that person has special
number plates, decals, or a card issued pursuant to RSA 261:86,
261:87, or 261:88, or a similar license plate, decal, or card issued
by another state or country displaying the international
accessibility symbol and the person who qualifies for the plate,
decal, or card is being transported to or from the parking place.
(10) On any controlled access highway.
§ 254-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-25
1:269
§ 254-26. Stopping, standing or parking outside business or
residence districts.
§ 254-27. Unattended vehicle.
No person driving or in charge of a vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing
the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon
any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb of the way.
§ 254-28. Additional parking regulations.
(11) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
B. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway.
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(4) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted.
(5) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
C. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers:
(1) At any place where official signs prohibit parking. No person shall
move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
A. Upon any way outside of a business or residence district no person shall
stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the way when it is
practicable to stop, park or leave such vehicle off such part of said way,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the way opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and clear view
of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in
each direction upon such way.
B. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled
while on the paved or main traveled portion of a way in such manner
and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
§ 254-25 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-28
1:270
§ 254-29. Free parking for disabled persons and for official
purposes.
Any motor vehicle carrying special number plates issued to paraplegic,
amputee, or blind war veterans pursuant to RSA 261:86 and 261:87, and
any motor vehicle used for a purpose, or by a person, designated by a City
Council or town meeting, shall be allowed free parking time in the City of
Rochester so long as said motor vehicle is under the direct control of the
owner. The provisions of this section shall apply to a veteran who suffers
a disability incurred in or aggravated by such service, upon satisfactory
proof that the veteran has been evaluated by the United States Veterans
Administration to be permanently and totally disabled from such serviceconnected
disability.
§ 254-30. Yeagley Way student parking. [Amended 9-2-1997;
6-5-2001]
Thirty-five marked parking spaces shall be designated for student parking
only on Yeagley Way between Wakefield Street and the Technology Center.
During normal school hours when school is in session, the Rochester School
Department shall have full authority to control said 35 spaces which shall
be subject to the requirements of the School Department's permit and
enforcement system.
§ 254-31. Columbus Avenue parking lot permit parking. [Amended
4-2-2002]
The parking lot constructed along Columbus Avenue beginning near its
intersection with Winter Street and extending to, and abutting, Lot 319
on Rochester Tax Map 120 is intended, in part, to facilitate the effective
use of Lot 1 on Rochester Tax Map 125. This lot, in whole or in part,
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to
the right-hand curb, or, if upon a roadway where there are no curbs,
said vehicle shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of
such vehicle parallel to the right-hand side of the traveled portion of the
way.
B. Except when otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or
parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of
authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12
inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, or its left-hand
wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
C. The City Council may by ordinance permit angle parking on any
roadway, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any
federal aid or state way unless authorized by the Commissioner of
Transportation.
§ 254-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-31
1:271
as recommended by the Chief of Police and with the approval of the City
Manager, shall be designated "Permit Parking Only" during certain
designated hours and on certain designated days. When signs are erected
giving notice thereof, no person without an authorized permit shall park in
any parking space designated for "Permit Parking Only" during the hours
and/or on the days indicated on such signs. Except with respect to spaces
designated for "Permit Parking Only" the use of this parking lot shall be
governed by the provisions of § 254-15 hereof.
§ 254-31 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-31
1:272
ARTICLE IV
Rights and Duties of Pedestrians
§ 254-32. Pedestrians crossing street in urban area.
No person shall cross any street in the urban area of the City at any point
other than a marked crosswalk.17
17.Editor's Note: Original § 63.2, The passing of items to or from the occupant of a motor
vehicle on a roadway, added 9-1-2015 and amended 6-7-2016, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 3-6-2018.
§ 254-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-32
1:273

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 254-33. Duty of Police Department.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of this City to enforce the
provisions of these regulations. Officers of the Police Department are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible
or audible signals in conformance with these regulations, provided that in
the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic, as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations.
§ 254-34. Required obedience to traffic regulations.
It is a violation for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any
act required by these regulations.
§ 254-35. Obedience to police.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of a police officer.
§ 254-36. Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned or used by the United States Government, the State of New
Hampshire, or any political subdivision of said state and it shall be unlawful
for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of these regulations,
except as otherwise permitted by law or these regulations.
§ 254-37. Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles.
A. The provisions of these regulations governing the operation, parking
and standing of a vehicle shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles
as defined in these regulations except as follows: a driver when
operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations.
(2) Proceed past a red stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specific directions so long as persons and property are not
thereby endangered.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall not protect the driver of any such
vehicle from the consequence of disregard for the safety of others.
§ 254-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-38
1:275
§ 254-38. Persons subject to traffic regulations.
Every person propelling a push cart or riding a bicycle or any animal upon a
roadway and every person driving an animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject
to the provisions of these regulations whenever applicable.
§ 254-38 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-38
1:276
ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 254-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-2007; 3-5-2019]
Except as otherwise provided herein, a person violating any provision of
Articles I through VIII of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) for each offense, except that
the optional procedures set forth in § 254-42 may be used in lieu of court
proceedings for violations of Article III.
§ 254-40. Owner responsibility for illegal parking.
A person shall not allow, permit or suffer a vehicle registered in his/her
name to stand or park in violation of any of the ordinances of this City
controlling the standing or parking of vehicles, and the owner or person
in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held as prima facie
responsible for such violation.
§ 254-41. Notice of violation.
A police officer observing a violation of any of the provisions of Article III
shall attach to the vehicle a notice to the operator or owner that the vehicle
has been parked in violation of Article III and instructing the operator or
owner to report at police headquarters. The notice shall contain:
§ 254-42. Procedure in paying penalties. [Amended 5-1-2007]
A. Location. The location where the vehicle is parked.
B. Registration number of vehicle. The state registration number of such
vehicle.
C. Time of violation. The time at which such vehicle is parked in violation
of any of the provisions of these ordinances.
D. Any other facts. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
A. The operator or owner may, within 10 working days of the time when a
notice of violation of Article III was attached to the vehicle, pay to the
Police Department the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.) as a penalty and in
lieu of court proceedings. Failure by the operator or owner to make
such payment within 10 working days may result in the issuance of a
summons to the operator or owner to appear in court to answer to
charges of violating Article III. The Chief of Police may authorize, at any
time before a court summons has been issued, but after the expiration
of the ten-working-day period, the acceptance of a voluntary payment of
twenty-five dollars ($25.) as a penalty in full satisfaction of the violation.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, an
operator or owner of a vehicle to which a notice of violation of the
§ 254-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-42
1:277
§ 254-43. Towing vehicles.
The Police Department is authorized to remove and tow away or have
removed and towed away by commercial towing service any abandoned
vehicle, or other vehicle illegally parked in a place where it creates or
constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, or obstructs or
may obstruct snow removal operations or the movement of any emergency
vehicle. Vehicles towed for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place
and shall be restored to the owner or operator upon payment of all fees for
towing and storage.
provisions of § 254-29 was attached may, within five working days of
the time when the notice of violation of said § 254-29 was attached to
the vehicle, pay to the Police Department the sum of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.) as a penalty and in lieu of court proceedings. Failure by
the operator or owner to make such payment within five working days
may result in the issuance of a summons to the operator or owner to
appear in court to answer to the charges of violation of § 254-29. The
Chief of Police may authorize at any time before a court summons has
been issued, but after the expiration of the five-working-day period, the
acceptance of a voluntary payment of two hundred sixty dollars ($260.)
as a penalty in full satisfaction of the violation.
§ 254-42 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-43
1:278
ARTICLE VII
Taxicabs
§ 254-44. Declaration of policy.
Every person owning or operating a motor vehicle who secures or accepts
passengers for hire on the public streets, or in public places, shall be
deemed to be operating a taxicab and shall be subject to City regulations in
accordance with this article.
§ 254-45. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — The person in actual physical control of a taxicab.
OPERATOR — Any person owning, in charge of, or managing a taxicab
business or company in the City.
TAXICAB — Any rubber-tired motor vehicle having a manufacturer's rated
seating capacity of not more than seven persons, used in the call and
demand transportation of passengers for compensation to or from points
chosen or designated by the passengers and not operated on a fixed
schedule between fixed termini, or any such vehicle leased or rented, or
held for leasing or renting, with or without drivers or operators.
UNENGAGED TAXICAB — A taxicab in the charge of a driver and neither
occupied by nor standing at the direction of a passenger nor responding to
a call of a prospective passenger. A taxicab standing in a taxi stand shall be
presumed to be unengaged.
§ 254-46. Taxicab operator permit and fee.
Every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs, automobiles
or other vehicles for the transportation of persons for hire shall make an
application to the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department for an operator's permit on forms provided by the City for this
purpose.18 The fee for such permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.)
annually which shall be paid at the time the application is made, and on or
before January 1 of each calendar year thereafter. Only one operator permit
shall be required per business.
A. Issuance of business operator's permit. All permits must be approved
by the Licensing Board. Before any permit is issued, the Chief of Police
shall conduct an investigation of the applicant, including, but not
necessarily limited to, a criminal history records check to be conducted
by the New Hampshire State Police, with any fees for the same to be
paid by the applicant. Any conviction for violation of the laws of the
18.Editor's Note: Throughout this article, references to the Code Enforcement Department
were amended to the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department 10-15-2013.
§ 254-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-46
1:279
§ 254-47. Taxicab permit and fee.
Every person engaged in the business of operating taxicabs, automobiles, or
other vehicles for hire shall make application to the Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department for taxicab permits on forms
provided by the City of Rochester for this purpose. The fee for such permits
shall be thirty dollars ($30.) for each vehicle which shall be paid at the time
the application is made and on or before January 1 of each calendar year
thereafter.
State of New Hampshire, or any other state, may be cause for denial by
the Licensing Board. [Amended 8-1-2000]
B. Insurance. Before any permit is issued, the Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department shall ensure that the
applicant has provided a certificate of insurance for each permitted taxi
for the full time period of the permit. The personal injury coverage shall
not be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) for injury to
one person with a total coverage of not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.) for each accident. The property damage
coverage shall be not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.) per
occurrence. It shall further be the responsibility of any insurance
company or agent to notify the Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department 10 days prior to any cancellation of any
such policy. [Amended 9-4-2007]
C. Appeal of denial. When any such application is denied by the Licensing
Board, the applicant may request such denial be reviewed by the City
Council. Any such request for review shall be made to the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department. The City
Council may issue or deny the permit.
D. Transfer prohibited. No taxicab operator permit may be transferred
from one operator to another. Any operator who voluntarily
discontinues doing business shall surrender his/her permit to the City
of Rochester within 10 days of the time he/she discontinues operation.
E. Display of permit certificate. It shall be the duty of operators of taxicabs
to display their permit certificates in a conspicuous place within their
place of business headquarters or have them readily available for
inspection upon demand by authorized municipal officials at all times.
F. Taxicab records. All taxicab operators and drivers shall keep such
records of trips, fares, and destinations as may be required for
examination by the Chief of Police and/or the Licensing Board; such
records shall be kept for a period of six months.
A. Issuance of taxicab permits. Before any new taxicab permits are issued,
the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department shall refer all applications to the Chief of Police who shall
inspect the condition of the vehicles proposed for permit and approve
§ 254-46 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-47
1:280
§ 254-48. Taxicab driver's license and fee.
Every person engaged in the driving of taxicabs, automobiles, or other
vehicles for hire for the purpose of transporting persons shall have attained
the age of 18 years, hold a valid New Hampshire operator's license, and
shall make application to the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department for a taxicab driver's license on forms provided by the
City for this purpose. The fee for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.)
which shall be paid by the applicant at the time of making application and
on or before January 1 of each calendar year thereafter.
or disapprove the issuance of permits within 48 hours, Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays excluded. Vehicles not meeting the inspection
requirements of the State of New Hampshire may be denied permits.
(1) Issuance of temporary taxicab permit. Above requirements for a
replacement vehicle may be waived only at the discretion of the
Police Chief or his/her designee, with proper insurance binder, until
such time as a proper permit may be issued within the prescribed
48 hours.
B. Appeal of denial. When any such application is denied by the Chief of
Police or the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department, the applicant may request such denial be reviewed by the
Licensing Board. A request for review shall be made to the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department who shall
convene the Licensing Board within 48 hours, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, at which time the Licensing Board shall either
issue or deny the permit.
C. Transfer of permits. Taxicab permits may be transferred from one
vehicle to another by making an application for such transfer in the
same manner as is required for original permits and making payment of
five dollars ($5.) to the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department at the time of making an application for such
transfer, together with proper forms as provided by the Licensing
Board.
A. Issuance of taxicab driver's license. Before any taxicab driver's license
is issued, the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department shall refer all applications to the Chief of Police who shall
conduct an investigation of the applicant, including, but not necessarily
limited to, a criminal history records check to be conducted by the New
Hampshire State Police, with any fees for the same to be paid by the
applicant. The Chief of Police shall approve or disapprove the issuance
of such license within 72 hours, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
excluded, of the receipt of the results of such investigation. Any
conviction for violation of the laws of the State of New Hampshire, or
any other state, may be cause for denial. [Amended 8-1-2000]
§ 254-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-48
1:281
§ 254-49. General requirements.
B. Appeal of denial. When any such application is denied by the Chief of
Police or the Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
Department, the applicant may request such denial be reviewed by the
Licensing Board. All such requests for review shall be made to the
Director of the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department
who shall within 48 hours, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded,
convene the Licensing Board. The Licensing Board shall either issue or
deny the license.
C. Identification. It shall be the responsibility of all taxicab drivers to
display their taxicab driver's license in a conspicuous place within any
taxicab being operated by them. It shall further be their responsibility,
upon request of any passenger, to furnish their names.
A. Condition of taxicabs. It shall be the responsibility of all taxicab
operators to ensure that all taxicabs shall be kept in a safe and sanitary
operating condition at all times and shall at all times qualify with the
standards for inspection of motor vehicles by the laws of the State of
New Hampshire. Any officer observing a violation of this subsection
may obtain the taxicab permit of the vehicle involved which shall be
temporarily suspended and returned forthwith upon said violation
being properly corrected to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his/
her designee.
B. Periodic inspection. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall inspect
each taxicab operating in the City of Rochester at least every six
months. The purpose of periodic inspection shall be for the
maintenance of safety and sanitary conditions of the vehicles.
[Amended 9-4-2007]
C. Parking limited. No operator or driver shall park or allow to be parked
any taxicabs upon any street in any business district at other than an
authorized taxicab stand except when actually engaged in taking on or
leaving passengers.
D. Taxicab stands. The Licensing Board may establish taxicab stands on
such public streets and in such places and in such numbers as shall be
determined to be of greatest benefit and convenience to the public and
businesses, and every such taxicab stand shall be designated by
appropriate markings. [Amended 3-5-2019]
E. Limitation on use. No operator or driver of any taxicab shall:
(1) Accept any other passenger without the consent of the person or
persons who have engaged the cab.
(2) In any case pick up any adults when children under the age of 16
years are alone in the cab, unless said juvenile is seated adjacent to
the driver. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 254-48 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-49
1:282
§ 254-50. Suspension or revocation of permit or license.
F. Passengers limited. The operators or drivers of taxicabs shall not carry
more passengers in their taxicabs than the seating capacity as listed in
the manufacturer's vehicle specification.
G. Service to be given on demand. It shall be the duty of every taxicab
driver or operator of an unengaged taxicab, upon request, during his/
her regular business hours, to transport any orderly person between
two points within the City of Rochester.
H. Property left in taxicab. All property of reasonable value left in taxicabs
shall be returned to the owner forthwith or, after a diligent attempt has
been made to return said property to the owner, it shall be delivered
over to the Police Department by the driver of the taxicab.
I. Records. Records and other privileged information will be made
available only to the Police Department and the Licensing Board.
J. Complaints. Whenever there is a complaint over fare or otherwise that
cannot be agreeably resolved to all parties, the complainant may
register such a complaint in writing to the Director of the Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services Department who shall convene the
Licensing Board for the purpose of conducting a hearing. Upon
sustaining the complaint, the Licensing Board may suspend or revoke
such permits as may be required.
K. Rates. All taxicab operators will have on file with the Director of the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department rates being
charged and shall file new rates as they are changed before they are
allowed to be in effect. Such rates shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in each taxicab.
L. Identification. All taxicabs shall be required to display outside
identification.
A. Whenever any operator shall be convicted in the Rochester District
Court of a violation of any sections of these rules and regulations, he/
she shall forthwith return his/her operator's permit to the Director of
the Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department who shall
retain such permit until application is made in the same manner as for
an original permit, and a determination has been made by the Chief of
Police and/or the Licensing Board as to the issuance of such permit.
B. Any taxicab driver who shall be convicted of any violation of these rules
and regulations, or of any law of the State of New Hampshire, shall
forthwith return his/her taxicab driver's license to the Director of the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department who shall retain
said license until such time as an application has been filed in the same
manner as for an original taxicab driver's license and a determination
as to its issuance or denial shall have been made by the Chief of Police
and/or the Licensing Board. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 254-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-50
1:283
§ 254-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a violation and fined not in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.); a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day, or
part thereof, during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
C. The Licensing Board may suspend or revoke any operator's permit,
taxicab permit, or taxicab driver's license at any time for just cause.
Upon receipt of notice of such suspension or revocation, the operator or
driver may request a hearing before the Licensing Board. All such
requests shall be made to the Director of the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department who shall within 48 hours, Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays excluded, convene the Licensing Board. A
decision by the Licensing Board shall be made within 48 hours after the
hearing is completed.
D. A majority decision of the Licensing Board may be appealed through the
Strafford County Superior Court, and upon receiving such notice of
action from the Court, said suspension or revocation will be held in
abeyance pending results of said ruling.
§ 254-50 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-51
1:284
ARTICLE VIII
Towing Services
[Added 1-7-1997 (Ch. 67 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 254-52. Purpose and intent. [Amended 10-3-2006]
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure for providing towing
services to the City of Rochester. The intent is to have six individual towing
services available 24 hours a day on a rotating basis.
§ 254-53. Application procedure.
Any business or individual desiring to provide towing services to the City
of Rochester shall complete an application, which shall be available at
the Rochester Police Department. Each interested applicant shall provide
the information and/or documentation required to the Rochester Police
Department along with a nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.).
§ 254-54. Qualifications.
The business or individual shall meet the following minimum qualifications:
A. Be able to provide on-call service 24 hours per day, seven days per
week.
B. Be able to respond to any call within the City limits within 25 minutes of
receiving a call.
C. Be able to provide comprehensive general liability insurance with limits
not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.) per occurrence
for property damage, subject to an annual aggregate limit of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.), with automobile liability insurance with limits of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.) per person and one million
dollars ($1,000,000.) per occurrence for property damage, subject to an
aggregate limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.), with the City of
Rochester named as an additional insured.
D. Be able to provide workers' compensation insurance as required by
New Hampshire statutes.
E. Be able to provide all the necessary equipment to handle the normal
problems that arise in removing vehicles from an accident scene with at
least one of the vehicles being a slide back carrier.
F. Be able to provide secure exterior and/or interior storage space within
the City of Rochester for any towed vehicles.
G. Have at least one year of experience in the towing business.
§ 254-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-55
1:285
§ 254-55. Approval process. [Amended 10-3-2006]
All applications shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
All applications determined to meet the minimum qualifications shall be
placed in a pool of eligible applicants. Six applicants shall be selected by
random lottery conducted by the City Licensing Board to provide towing
services to the City.
§ 254-56. Contract between City and towing service. [Amended
10-3-2006]
The six applicants selected shall each enter into a two-year contract
between the City, through its Licensing Board, and the individual towing
service. The form and content of said contract shall be determined by
the Licensing Board. Each towing service shall pay the City a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.) for the contract rights covering the two-year
period; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) shall be paid upon execution of
the contract. Any vacancy occurring during the two-year contract period
shall be left unfilled with the remaining towing services equally dividing the
rotation schedule.
§ 254-57. Services to be performed. [Amended 10-3-2006; 5-1-2007]
During the contract term, the six vendors shall be on a rotating schedule
and shall be referred all calls for towing which are due to accident and/
or arrest which are police related. The City reserves the right to call any
towing service designated by the owner/operator of a vehicle involved in an
accident who requests the officer on the scene to call such towing service.
A. The towing service shall also clean the road area and remove all glass
and debris from an accident scene.
B. The towing service shall provide free storage to all vehicles impounded
by the police. Towing charges will be the responsibility of the owner of
the impounded vehicle.
C. The towing service shall, upon request of the City, tow any vehicles
which have been abandoned as defined in RSA 262:32, which are
obstructing access as defined in RSA 31:102 or which are in violation of
private property restrictions as outlined in RSA 262:40-a. Towing and
storage charges shall be as provided by law. [Amended 3-5-2019]
D. Emergency repairs and towing shall be provided without charge by the
towing service to all Police Department vehicles. Any parts required
shall be charged to the City at dealer cost.
E. The towing service shall notify the City of Rochester of any change in its
legal or storage site address at least 14 days prior to the effective date
of such change.
§ 254-55 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-58
1:286
§ 254-58. Rate structure.
All rates charged by the towing service may not exceed reasonable rates
commonly charged in this area.
§ 254-59. Administration.
All issues relating to contractual matters relating to the towing service and
the City shall be determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Any
dispute or interpretation unable to be resolved between the Chief of Police
and the towing service shall be referred to the City Licensing Board which
shall make the final determination in any such matter.
§ 254-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-59
1:287
Chapter 260
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 94.
Sewers — See Ch. 200.
§ 254-59 ROCHESTER CODE § 254-59
1:288
ARTICLE I
Use Regulations and Rates
[Adopted 6-6-1995 as Ch. 17 of the 1995 Code]
§ 260-1. Agreement. [Amended 5-5-1998]
The following rules and regulations, and such regulations as may be
hereafter established by the Rochester Department of Public Works, shall
be considered a part of the contract with every customer who uses water
supplied by the Rochester Department of Public Works and such customer
by taking water shall be considered as expressing his/her assent to be
bound thereby.
§ 260-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning set forth below:
APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE — The form signed by the owner
or his/her designated representative to obtain water from the distribution
water mains which will become the contract between the Department of
Public Works and the applicant.
BUSINESS OFFICE — The Business Office of the City of Rochester, New
Hampshire, as represented by its Finance Director, or duly authorized
employee.
CITY — The City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Public Works or his/her designee.
See § 7-18A of the City Code.[Amended 3-5-2019]
CURB STOP — The shutoff valve located on the water service line from the
water main to the structure.
CUSTOMER — The party who has made an application for a water service
for the dwelling unit described in the application, or the subdivision
supplied with water service by the City of Rochester, or the owner or agent
thereof for the property being serviced. This includes any private person,
commercial business, corporation, industry or governmental division.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works of
the City of Rochester, New Hampshire, as represented by its Commissioner
of Public Works or duly authorized employee or agents.
DISTRIBUTION WATER MAIN — Water mains which are installed or
presently located on roadway layouts, rights-of-way, or easements which
provide the water for fire protection or water services, including the
individual shutoff.
DWELLING UNIT — A single-family home, cottage, mobile home on private
property, apartment, condominium or townhouse.
READER — A device installed by the Department of Public Works for remote
reading of the quantity of water measured by the water meter.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:289
REPLACEMENT COSTS — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
operational life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The
term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement costs.[Amended
5-5-1998]
SEWER DEDUCT METER — A device installed and owned by the
Department of Public Works for the measurement of water that will not be
disposed of in the City sewer system.
UTILITY ADVISORY BOARD — The Utility Advisory Board of the City of
Rochester, New Hampshire.
WATER METER — A device installed by the Department of Public Works for
the measurement of water quantities to be used as a basis for determining
charges for water services.19
WATER SERVICE — The pipe extending from the distribution water main to
the customer's building or structure.
§ 260-3. Policy statement.
A. To the largest extent possible, the City of Rochester is intended to have
a fully metered system with outside readers; all residential, commercial
and industrial customers shall be metered, unless it is determined by
the Commissioner not practical to do so.
B. All school buildings, non-City community facilities, hospitals, etc., shall
be considered separate services, metered and billed as commercial
customers.
C. Customers shall be billed in accordance with the provisions of § 260-18
of this article.
D. In agreement with any like provision in Chapter 200, Sewers, an elderly
exemption, based on existing property tax requirements for such
exemptions, shall be instituted.
E. For all commercial and industrial customers not presently metered, the
installation of a meter will be required. The customer shall pay any
costs associated with such installation.
F. In the event of a meter or reader failure or when in the opinion of the
Business Office or Commissioner a flat rate billing is necessary, each
unit of a multi-unit dwelling or mobile home park shall be considered a
residential customer. The property owner shall be billed for each
dwelling unit even if the property has only one service (i.e., the owner
of a ten-unit apartment building shall be billed the residential flat rate
times 10).20
19.Editor's Note: The definition of "water rates and charges" which immediately followed this
definition was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
See § 260-33, Water Rate and Fee Schedule.
§ 260-2 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-4
1:290
§ 260-4. Application for service.
§ 260-5. Size of service and meter required. [Amended 11-14-2006;
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The minimum size of service connections and meter installation permitted
shall conform to the recommendations of the American Water Works
Association.
A. All applications for water service or expansions or fire sprinklers must
be made at the Public Works Department office on an application form,
stating fully and truly the uses to which the water is to be applied. The
customer or his/her duly authorized representative must sign such
application.
B. An estimate of the cost of work to install the service will be prepared by
the applicant and verified by the Department of Public Works.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
C. A deposit equal to the estimated cost or a payment agreement shall be
made with the Business Office before the work is begun. This regulation
also applies to repairs on service piping, the setting of new meters,
including outside reader, radio read equipment and appurtenances, or
the repair of meters already installed if damaged due to the negligence
of the owner. All financial obligations involved in such transactions shall
be adjusted immediately upon the completion of the work in the
interests of all parties involved. [Amended 3-6-2007]
D. Installation charges and other fees on all new services must be paid or a
payment agreement made with the Business Office before the water is
turned on. This regulation also applies to repairs on service piping, the
setting of new meters, including outside reader, radio read equipment
and appurtenances, or the repair of meters already installed if damaged
due to the negligence of the owner. All financial obligations involved in
such transactions shall be adjusted immediately upon the completion of
the work in the interests of all parties involved. [Amended 3-6-2007]
E. The Commissioner may waive the deposit for emergency repair
purposes.
F. The City of Rochester may allow applicants to enter into agreements
with the City to pay all costs in equal installments over a period of time.
Interest shall accrue on late payments at the same rate charged by the
City for overdue property tax bills. Such agreements shall be recorded
with the Strafford County Register of Deeds at the expense of the
applicant. In the event property is conveyed, all monies owed to the City
of Rochester shall be remitted in full. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
20.Editor's Note: Original § 17.4, Water Service Connection Required, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 10-7-2014.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:291
§ 260-6. Service installation and repair.
A. The Department of Public Works or its agent shall or developer's or
property owner's contractor shall install all new water services.
B. The Department of Public Works or its agent shall make necessary
repairs to existing services up to the customer's side of the curb stop.
The cost incurred for the repair and maintenance of all existing water
services from the distribution main up to the customer's side of the curb
stop, or to the customer's property line, whichever is further from the
distribution main, shall be the responsibility of the Department of
Public Works. The cost incurred for the repair and maintenance of
existing water services from the customer's side of the curb stop, or
from the customer's property line, whichever is closer to the customer's
building, shall be the responsibility of the customer, except that the
customer shall not be responsible for the cost of the sidewalk or
roadway excavation and repair.
C. If new services are installed by a developer or property owner, the
Department of Public Works must approve all materials, inspect the
installation, provide and install the meter, perform the installation of
the remote reader, install all wiring and perform testing and sealing of
meters. All charges incurred during the work are the responsibility of
the developer or property owner.
D. If a developer's or property owner's contractor's installation is found to
be incorrect it shall be the developer's or property owner's
responsibility to have it corrected.
E. Annually, before any contractor or company shall install or repair any
portion of a water system within the City of Rochester, such contractor
or company shall obtain a license from the Department of Public Works
authorizing such contractor or company to perform installations of or
repairs to such water system. Licenses shall be valid from January 1
through December 31 for any given year, except that in the first year
after adoption, said existing licenses shall be prorated. The
Commissioner of Public Works shall issue such license only to
contractors or companies which demonstrate the ability to perform
water installations and repairs in a workmanlike manner, consistent
with the standards maintained by the Department of Public Works. All
applicants shall be required to submit evidence of general liability
insurance. The City Manager shall establish an annual fee for such
water installation and repair license that shall be listed in § 260-33,
Water Rate and Fee Schedule.
F. Any contractor or company installing or repairing any portion of the
public water system must receive written authorization from the
Department of Public Works and provide a performance bond or escrow
account in the name of the City for the total (100%) of the estimated
cost of the work.
§ 260-6 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-6
1:292
§ 260-7. Pipes and fixtures.
§ 260-8. Meters.
G. The Department of Public Works and its agents shall have an easement
10 feet on each side of the water service for its entire length for the
installation or repair of the service.
H. The customer shall be charged for all materials and labor associated
with the initial installation or subsequent repairs due to negligence of
the customer. The Department of Public Works shall do its best to
return the easement to its prior condition as a result of installation or
repair; however, it will be the customer's responsibility to repair and
replace any damaged property within the aforementioned easement.
I. When it becomes necessary to thaw a frozen service pipe and it cannot
be determined where it is frozen, 1/2 of the cost thereof shall be paid by
the customer. The entire cost of thawing a frozen service pipe between
the curb stop and the dwelling unit or other structure being served
shall be the responsibility of the customer.
J. Ordinarily, no new service pipes or extensions of mains will be installed
between December 1 and March 31 unless the customer shall defray all
extra expenses incurred. An additional minimum charge as listed in
§ 260-33, Water Rate and Fee Schedule, shall be applied to the
customer for road maintenance during these winter conditions if
service or extension is allowed. [Amended 11-14-2006]
A. No persons except those duly authorized by the Department of Public
Works will tap any water main or connect any service pipes thereto. No
unauthorized person shall shut off or turn on the water from any main
within the street lines. No person except firefighters shall open any
hydrants without the consent of the Department of Public Works. Water
taken out of the system without permission will be calculated by the
Division of Water Supply Works and the violator will be required to pay
the same and, in addition, be subject to a fine for the violation of above
provision. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Notice of shutoff for repairs to mains or service pipes will be given
when practicable.
C. No water service pipes shall be laid in the same trench with gas pipes,
sewer pipes, or any other facility of a public utility nor within three feet
of any open excavation or vault.
D. No cross-connection between the public water system and any nonpotable
supply will be allowed unless properly protected. The
Department of Public Works shall inspect any such connection. No
connection capable of causing backflow between public water supply
and any waste outlet will be permitted.
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:293
§ 260-9. Sewer deduct meter. [Amended 5-5-1998; 4-2-2008]
Upon application and approval by the Department of Public Works, a
customer may install a meter to measure water that will not be disposed
of in the City's sewer system. The purpose of this meter would be to meter
water uses, including but not limited to in-ground sprinkler systems and
commercial air-conditioning systems. The cost of this meter inspection of
the installation by the City is entirely the responsibility of the customer. The
meter will fully meet the requirements of § 260-8 of this chapter except that
the sewer deduct meter shall not be required to have a separate exterior
shutoff valve.
§ 260-10. Meter repairs.
A. All services are to be metered except in unusual cases where the
Commissioner determines that it is not practicable. Every owned
property shall be metered and equipped with a separate exterior
shutoff valve for each meter. Existing City water customers prior to
March 1, 2008, will not be required to retrofit existing services to
comply with this shutoff valve for each meter requirement. However,
new services or any meters not currently being read by the City shall be
required to comply with this provision prior to the City taking over
responsibility for reading or billing of said meter or customer. A
common meter will be provided for rented units or lots. All meters will
be maintained by the Department of Public Works, but the customer will
be charged for any damage to meters caused by abnormal conditions,
i.e., freezing, fire, tampering, etc. The Department of Public Works will
set only one meter on any one service, and the owner of the premises
shall be liable for the entire amount of water used on the premises
irrespective of leases of individual consumers. [Amended 4-2-2008]
B. Meters are installed for measurement of all water supplied to
consumer. Customers shall provide a clean, dry, warm, safe and
accessible place (always free from debris) for installation of a meter.
The location shall be easily accessible by a person in the upright
position for reading, maintaining and changing.
C. All persons shall avoid unnecessary waste of water. Water shall not be
left running to prevent freezing unless required by the Department of
Public Works. All customers taking water must keep their own fixtures,
and service pipes within their property lines, in good repair, and fully
protected from injury by frost, and all such pipes and connections shall
conform to the Rochester Plumbing Code.
A. All meters shall be kept in repair by the Department of Public Works
except when damaged by the customer or by his/her negligence,
including freezing. In case of any such damage, the cost of repairs shall
be charged to the owner of the premises.
B. If the reader is out of repair or fails to register, the customer will be
charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the reader when
§ 260-8 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-10
1:294
§ 260-11. Meter testing.
§ 260-12. Sealing of meter. [Amended 5-5-1998]
Upon completion of adjustment and test of any meter under the provisions
of these rules, the Department of Public Works shall affix thereto a suitable
seal in such a manner that the adjustment of registration of the meter
cannot be tampered with without breaking the seal. Disruption of the seal
will be cause for discontinuance of service.
§ 260-13. Tampering with meter.
in order or the flat rate structure, whichever is less. Subsequently, if
the actual amount of water used is determined to be different than
the amount previously estimated, the charge will be on the subsequent
billing by the difference between the two.
C. If a customer, after being so notified, does not allow access to the
Department of Public Works in order to test and/or correct a faulty
meter or reader, the customer's subsequent bill will be 1.5 times the
average daily consumption as historically shown on the meter.
D. No person, except the duly authorized agent of the Department of
Public Works, shall be allowed to reset, take off, or repair a meter.
[Amended 5-5-1998]
A. Only the Department of Public Works shall replace or remove and test
all meters. No meter shall be placed in service or permitted to remain in
service if the error of registration exceeds 2% or as established by the
latest American Water Works Association (AWWA) meter standards,
whichever is less.
B. The Department of Public Works may test a meter for accuracy in
registration upon complaint of the water consumer. There shall be a
minimum service charge for any complaint-driven service call. The
minimum service charge shall be as listed in § 260-33, Water Rate and
Fee Schedule. Any meter found to be accurate in accordance with this
article will not be replaced by the Public Works Department due to a
complaint.
C. Should the meter in question be found to be within the accuracy limits
established by the latest AWWA meter standards, all applicable fees
associated with testing shall be paid by the customer. If the meter in
question is found to be inaccurate, all fees will be waived.
D. The percent of error of registration shall be taken as the average of the
error at the intermediate and maximum rates of test flow. Any
determination of charges shall be based on this average error.
[Amended 5-5-1998; 4-2-2008]
A. No customer or his/her agent shall perform a tampering event with
regard to a meter without having first received the written consent and
§ 260-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-13
1:295
§ 260-14. Outside reader. [Amended 3-6-2007]
All customers shall be required to have an outside reader with radio read
capability for their meter. Existing City-maintained meters that were
authorization of the Commissioner of Public Works and/or his/her
designee to take such action. In the event that the Commissioner of
Public Works and/or his/her designee shall determine that a customer
and/or his/her agent has performed a tampering event with respect
to a meter, such customer shall be subject to the following charges:
[Amended 5-5-1998]
(1) A charge in an amount based upon the actual water usage metered
to such meter prior to the tampering event, if determinable.
(2) A charge in an amount based upon twice the estimated water usage
for the premises serviced by the meter in question during the
preceding billing period(s) or the corresponding billing period(s)
during the year immediately preceding such tampering event,
whichever is greater.
(3) A charge for all costs associated with the repair and/or
replacement of such meter.
(4) A reconnection fee as listed in § 260-33, Water Rate and Fee
Schedule.
B. Anything in Subsection A above to the contrary notwithstanding, should
a customer or his/her agent, as a result of an emergency or other
circumstances beyond his/her control, perform a tampering event with
respect to a meter, without having received the prior written consent
and authorization of the Commissioner of Public Works, such customer
may, upon appeal to the Utility Advisory Board in accordance with the
provisions of § 260-19 and within its discretion, be relieved of any or all
of the charges listed in Subsection A(1) through (4) above, provided
that such customer shall have notified the Department of Public Works,
in writing, of the tampering event in question within three business
days of the occurrence of such event.
C. Any provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the
occurrence of a tampering event without a customer and/or his/her
agent having first obtained the written consent and authorization of the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Works shall be cause for
discontinuance of service to the customer.
D. For the purposes of this section, the term "tampering event" shall mean
any action which disables, disconnects, bypasses or otherwise tampers
with a water meter so as to affect, in any way, the ability of such meter
to accurately measure the water being supplied to a customer. Such
event shall include, but shall not be limited to, any breaking or other
disruption of the seal affixed to a meter pursuant to the provisions of
§ 260-12 of this chapter.
§ 260-13 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-14
1:296
installed prior to November 1, 2004, shall be exempt from the requirement
for radio read capability until such time as the radio read program is
implemented. The outside reader shall be installed at a place on the
premises acceptable to the City and according to the specifications
available at the Department of Public Works. The customer shall be
responsible for repairs or replacement of damaged outside readers and
associated wiring when damage is due to abuse, neglect and/or negligence
of the customer. The City shall render a bill for labor, equipment and
materials for all such repairs or replacement. The outside reader and
appurtenances shall be the property of the City. The customer shall be
responsible for providing safe access to City personnel for reading. The
customer shall remove potential hazards and nuisances such as snow, ice,
vegetation and dogs from the outside reader's access. Exceptions may be
granted by the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, in which
case reasonable access shall be granted to Department of Public Works
personnel for the purposes of reading and maintenance. If satisfactory
access is not provided the City reserves the right to produce an estimated
bill.
§ 260-15. Inspections. [Amended 5-5-1998; 3-6-2007]
The Department of Public Works employees or its agents shall be allowed
access to the customer's premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. for examination of pipes, fixtures, connections, the quality of water
used, and the manner of use. In the case of an emergency, no prior notice
needs to be given, and, in the event of refusal of entry, water may be shut
off with a fee assessed and application can be made to the courts for an
appropriate order with all legal costs being charged to the customer.
§ 260-16. (Reserved)21
§ 260-17. Establishment of water rates. [Amended 5-5-1998; at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Water rates shall be established periodically by the City Council. Such
water rates shall be computed based on the total amount budgeted for the
Department of Public Works, Division of Water Supply Works, operations
and maintenance, plus any debt service and capital outlays determined by
the City Council, and projections of estimated water consumption, number
of accounts, and/or other such factors. Water rates shall be recommended
to the City Council by the Utility Advisory Board and/or the City Manager
and shall be established to provide sufficient revenue to at least pay the
expenses of operating and maintaining the water treatment works,
transmission and distribution system, and appurtenant facilities.
A. Exemption. The City Council may authorize elderly exemptions for
users qualifying for property tax exemptions in the City, but such
21.Editor's Note: Original § 17.17, Rates, charges and fees, as amended 5-5-1998, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See § 260-33,
Water Rate and Fee Schedule.
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-17
1:297
§ 260-18. Billing and payment.
§ 260-19. Appeals. [Amended 5-5-1998]
Users aggrieved of bills rendered under this article have the following
rights of appeal:
exemptions shall not result in charges lower than those necessary to
recover operation and maintenance costs. Only the portion of the water
rates that recovers the debt service or capital outlays may be exempted.
B. Implementation of new rates. Before new rates and/or fees are
effective, there shall be two readings before the City Council. In
addition, a public hearing shall be held between the first and the second
readings. The public hearing shall be held at least 10 calendar days
before the rates are effective.
A. Water bills shall be rendered to all customers at least quarterly and may
be rendered more frequently at the discretion of the Business Office
with the approval of the City Manager. [Amended 5-5-1998]
B. Water bills shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall
become delinquent after 30 days after the date of issuance. Interest
shall accrue on bills not paid when due at the same rate charged by the
City for overdue property tax bills. Seasonal customers will not be
eligible for service unless the previous year's bill has been paid in full.
C. Checks shall be made payable to the City of Rochester and mailed to the
Tax Collector's office in City Hall. When bills are overdue, the customer
will be sent a notice. Bills not paid when due become a lien on the
property by New Hampshire statute.
D. The failure of a customer to receive water bills does not relieve the
customer of the responsibility of making prompt payment.
E. The Department of Public Works in supplying water, doing work, or
furnishing material shall deal with only the customer and the premises,
and such customer shall keep the Business Office advised of the
address to which bills, notices, and communications may be forwarded.
Although the payment for service rate may be assumed by an agent or
tenant, the customer of the premises will be held personally responsible
for the same. A change in ownership will not relieve the premises from
payment of back bills. In case of forfeiture, the water may be shut off
and will not be turned on again until all unpaid charges have been
settled in full. A water shutoff notice will be delivered to the customer
prior to shutoff. (See § 260-20.)
A. Notification. The aggrieved user shall notify the Business Office in
writing that said bill is contested before the next payment is due for
water service. The notification shall explain why the bill is contested
and provide the information necessary to determine the validity of the
§ 260-17 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-19
1:298
§ 260-20. Agreements and shutoffs.
§ 260-21. Miscellaneous bills. [Amended 5-5-1998; 3-5-2019]
Charges for labor and material, including installation costs, shall be billed
upon completion of the work which the bill covers. If such bills are not paid
within 30 days or a payment agreement made with the Business Office, the
water will be shut off or the charges will become a lien on the property, or
both. All late payments shall include interest charges. Collection procedures
will be taken and any costs will be charged to the customer.
§ 260-22. Turning on and off. [Amended 5-5-1998; 3-5-2019]
Forty-eight hours' advance notice is normally required for turning on and
shutting off water. The requested service will be provided as soon as
possible thereafter. All expenses involved will be the responsibility of the
customer. Overtime charges at the rate of time and 1/2 will be charged
before or after duty hours, with a minimum of a three-hour charge.
claim. The Finance Director may require the use of forms to expedite
the appeals process.
B. Resolution. Upon receipt of a notification under Subsection A, the
Finance Director shall submit the claim to the Utility Advisory Board
with a recommendation on the validity of the claim. The decision of the
Utility Advisory Board shall be final, except that the City Manager shall
have the authority to veto or modify any action of the Utility Advisory
Board. Aggrieved parties shall be allowed only one appeal per claim.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
C. Disposition of appeals. For appeals found to be valid, the date of the
billing shall be revised to the date of the Utility Advisory Board's
decision. Revised charges shall become due and payable as specified in
§ 260-18. For appeals not found to be valid, the date of the billing shall
be as originally issued, and charges and interest shall be as computed
as specified in § 260-18.
A. An agreement between the City Finance Director and the customer may
be signed, on a form provided in the Business Office, if the customer is
unable to satisfy his/her water bill in full at the due date. A water
shutoff notice and agreement procedure shall be established by the
Finance Director and approved by the City Manager. [Amended
5-5-1998]
B. Unpaid bills of over 30 days shall constitute cause for water shutoff. If
on the day of the shutoff the customer pays the outstanding water bill
after City personnel arrive at the customer's service to execute the
shutoff, the customer will be assessed a minimum service charge. This
charge is as listed in § 260-33, Water Rate and Fee Schedule.
§ 260-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-23
1:299
§ 260-23. Swimming pools. [Amended 5-5-1998]
The Department of Public Works does not use its equipment to fill private
swimming pools. Private companies must obtain written authority from the
Department of Public Works to use water from the water system. Customers
desiring an abatement of sewer charges while filling their pools must call
the Business Office for instructions prior to filling the pool. There will be no
abatement if the Business Office has not been contacted.
§ 260-24. Transfers.
On sale or transfer of property, the customer must give notification to the
Business Office of such sale or transfer in order that a final meter reading
can be taken and proper charges made to the proper owner. A minimum of
24 hours' notice is required. If an apartment building, or other structure,
or dwelling unit becomes a condominium, notification must be given to the
Business Office in writing. The new owner shall complete a water service
application and be responsible for any fees or charges from the Department
of Public Works and any private plumber necessary to provide a separate
service and meter.
§ 260-25. Violations.
§ 260-26. Interruption of service. [Amended 5-5-1998]
The Department of Public Works reserves the right to shut off the service
temporarily whenever it becomes necessary to make extensions,
alterations, or repairs, or to curtail the use of water whenever conditions so
require.
§ 260-27. Claims for damages and liability. [Amended 5-5-1998]
A. Should any customer violate any regulations established by the Division
of Water Supply Works, or fail to pay rates or other charges when due,
his/her supply shall be shut off, or terminated, and it shall not be
resumed until causes of complaint are removed and/or all charges paid.
[Amended 5-5-1998; 3-5-2019]
B. Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby established or failure
on the part of any customer taking water to promptly pay any and all
claims of the Department shall be considered sufficient cause for
cutting off the water supply of such customer and such supply shall not
be turned on again until all such cause of complaint shall have been
removed, including any additional work or costs incurred for the
turning on of the water.
C. Where two or more customers take water through one service pipe, the
provision in regard to cutting off the supply shall be applicable to all
such customers although one or more of them may be innocent of any
cause of offense.
§ 260-23 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-27
1:300
§ 260-28. Utility Advisory Board.
§ 260-29. Construction/extension of water mains for new
development.
A. The Department of Public Works will not be responsible for any damage
caused by shutoffs in the mains or service pipes, because of shortage of
supply, setting or removing meters, repairs, construction, or for other
reasons beyond the control of the Department. Notice of shutoff will be
given when practicable; however, nothing in this rule shall be construed
as requiring the giving of such notice. The Department of Public Works
will not be liable for any damages resulting from leakage escaping from
any part of the owner's system.
B. All customers having direct pressure hot water tanks or appliances
must place proper automatic vacuum and relief valves in the pipe
system to prevent any damage to such tanks or appliances should it
become necessary to shut off water on the street mains or service pipe.
Service will be provided to such direct pressure installations only at the
customer's risk and in no case will the Department of Public Works be
liable for any damage occasioned thereby.
A. Function of the Board. The Utility Advisory Board shall periodically
make recommendations to the City Council on the level of water rates
to be established under this article, but such recommendations are not
binding on the City Council. The Utility Advisory Board shall rule on
appeals of user and other charges and fees and perform such other
duties that may be assigned by City Council. [Amended 5-5-1998; at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Membership. The Utility Advisory Board shall consist of five members.
Such members shall be nominated by the Mayor and appointed by the
City Council.
C. Term. Members appointed on, or after, June 1, 2013, shall serve a term
of three years from the date of appointment. [Amended 6-4-2013]
D. Vacancies. Vacancies on the Utility Advisory Board shall be filled in the
same manner that members are appointed under Subsection B. The
term of a member appointed to fill a vacancy shall be equal to the
remaining term of the member being replaced.
E. Administrative actions. The City Manager shall have the authority to
veto or modify any action of the Utility Advisory Board.
A. Applications for the construction/extension of water mains shall be in
the form of a petition addressed to the Commissioner of Public Works in
compliance with the rules established by the Department of Public
Works. [Amended 5-5-1998; 5-1-2007]
B. The Commissioner may require that an applicant file with the Planning
and Development Department such rights-of-way, releases,
§ 260-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-29
1:301
§ 260-30. Regulation of water usage during emergency. [Amended
9-14-1999; 7-10-2018]
performance surety, or any other instruments reasonably consistent
for any such construction, and the City of Rochester shall be grantee,
guaranteed insured, or payee of any such instrument. [Amended
5-1-2007]
C. The applicant shall pay full costs for any such construction of water
main and installation and full title to the same shall, upon acceptance
by the City Council, be the property of the City of Rochester. All
construction of water mains shall be under the direct supervision of the
Department of Public Works.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to ensure the use of water is
properly regulated whenever an emergency exists by reason of a
shortage of water due to inadequate supply, limited treatment or
distribution capacity, or failure of equipment or material. The City of
Rochester may use reasonable means to protect, preserve, and
maintain the public health, safety, and welfare when a water supply
shortage exists.
B. Authority. The City of Rochester adopts these regulations under its
authority to regulate public water systems under RSA 38:26. In
accordance with the provisions of RSA 47:17, XV, whenever an
emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to inadequate
supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of
equipment or material, the City Manager is authorized to restrict or
prohibit the use of water from the City water system.
C. Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all water
users with connections receiving water from the City water system,
which includes all public water systems owned and operated by the
City.
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, joint-stock
company, association, state, municipality, commission, United States
government or any agency thereof, political subdivision of the state or
any interstate body, or other entity.
WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE — A situation when the City's water supply
is in jeopardy as evidenced by a state or federal government agency
declaring a drought in the area or the water system being unable to,
or within 60 days of such written determination becomes unable to,
supply the full commercial, domestic and residential needs of the users
of the City's water system, including needs for adequate fire protection.
A water supply shortage usually occurs due to drought or a major
infrastructure failure.
§ 260-29 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-30
1:302
E. Water emergency declaration. A water emergency declaration may be
issued by the City Manager whenever a supply shortage or other water
emergency occurs.
F. Water use restrictions. Upon declaration of a water emergency, the City
Manager shall implement certain water use restrictions necessary to
conserve and maintain adequate reserves of the public water supply.
Provided there is a declaration as noted above, the following levels of
restriction will apply immediately after the public notification period
specified in Subsection H:
(1) If a Level 1 water use restriction is issued, then customers are
encouraged to refrain from outside water use such as landscape
watering and to limit the amount of water used outdoors for other
purposes.
(2) If a Level 2 water use restriction is issued, then:
(a) Any outside water use by odd-numbered addresses is allowed
only on odd-numbered days.
(b) Any outside water use by even-numbered addresses is allowed
only on even-numbered days.
(c) Any outside water use shall not occur between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(3) If a Level 3 water use restriction is issued, then:
(a) No outside water use for lawn watering or irrigation. This
applies to automatic sprinklers, automatic irrigation systems,
and any unattended lawn watering.
(b) Filling of any swimming pools greater than 100 gallons'
capacity is prohibited.
(c) Washing of vehicles, including automobiles, trailers, trucks,
etc., by hose is prohibited.
(d) Any outside water use shall not occur between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(4) If a Level 4 water use restriction is issued, then all outside water
use is prohibited.
G. Exemptions to water use restrictions.
(1) Hand irrigation of crops used for food by residents at a residential
property, provided a competent person is present using watering
equipment with an automatic shut-off device, shall not be
restricted.
(2) Water to sustain animal life shall not be restricted.
§ 260-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30
1:303
(3) Despite the authority granted by Subsection B of this regulation,
orders imposing water use restrictions shall not apply to uses that
obtain water from sources other than the City water system, unless
it can be clearly demonstrated that the use of such water directly
affects the City water system.
(4) The City Council may issue temporary water use restriction
exemption permits for identified properties and locations that have
made recent landscaping investments. The exemption period for
limited irrigation for new seed, sod, or plugs is up to 45 days from
the date of installation, and will be permitted between the hours of
5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Property owners must demonstrate that
area soils have been appropriately prepared and use efficient
irrigation best management practices. A watering exemption
permit only pertains to newly seeded lawns and will not be issued
for over seeding. This exemption does not apply during a Level 4
water use restriction.
H. Public notification. Upon declaration of a water emergency by the City
Manager, the City shall issue a written emergency notice declaring the
emergency and setting forth with particularity a water use restriction
that regulates the use of water from the City's water system. The
notification, as issued, shall be reissued whenever there are
modifications to the water use level restrictions.
(1) Publication and/or posting of notice. The written emergency notice
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
of Rochester within 72 hours after the issuance of such notice. In
addition, the written emergency notice shall be posted in five
prominent places within the City.
(2) Immediate threat to public health or safety. Whenever a sudden or
unexpected event reduces the availability of water or water
pressure as to create an immediate threat to public health or safety,
the emergency notice may be issued by any reasonable means,
including electronic means.
I. Termination notice of a water emergency. Upon a determination by the
City that the water emergency no longer exists, the City Manager may
terminate the water use restrictions. Public notification of such
termination shall be given in accordance with Subsection H(1).
J. Appeals of water emergency declaration. Any person aggrieved by a
water emergency declaration by the City Manager shall have the right
to present the matter to the next regular or special meeting of the City
Council or any emergency session of the Council called to discuss the
water emergency. The City Council may exempt such aggrieved person,
in whole or in part, from the compliance with such water use
restrictions upon a showing that compliance with such water use
restrictions creates an immediate threat to such person's, or such
person's immediate household's, health or safety. A ruling by a majority
§ 260-30 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-30
1:304
§ 260-31. Extension of existing water mains in accepted roadways.
vote of the City Council with regard to such appeal shall be final and
binding. Until and unless the action of the City Manager is modified or
revoked by action of the City Council, all water usage shall be bound by
the terms of the water use declaration issued by the City Manager.
K. Penalties. Any person who, in any manner, directly or indirectly, violates
or permits others under his/her custody or control to violate any terms
of a duly issued water use restriction shall be guilty of a violation. Each
separate day of water use in violation of such emergency notice shall
constitute a separate offense and each separate prohibited water use in
excess of one on the same day shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition to the foregoing penalties, the City of Rochester is authorized
to discontinue the furnishing of water where orders and restrictions
have been violated on multiple accounts. Such discontinuance shall be
made pursuant to RSA 38:31 and may be continued so long as there is
evidence that the violations continue. Penalties are determined by each
water level restriction as follows:
(1) Level 1 water restriction. There are no penalties as this is
voluntary.
(2) Level 2 and 3 water restrictions.
(a) First violation will be issued a warning.
(b) Second violation shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.).
(c) Third violation shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100.).
(d) Additional violations shall be punishable by a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500.) to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.) and
discontinuance of water service. A service reactivation fee, as
defined by § 260-33B, will be charged before water service is
restored.
(3) Level 4 water restriction. Each violation shall be punishable by a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.) to ten thousand dollars
($10,000.) and discontinuance of water service. A service
reactivation fee, as defined by § 260-33B, will be charged before
water service is restored.
A. Upon petition by citizens of the City or when deemed necessary or
desirable for the protection and well-being of the City, the extension of
water mains in accepted roadways may be approved by a vote of the
City Council. [Amended 5-5-1998]
B. Where the construction and installation of water mains is to be made in
and upon existing streets and roads, and the public good requires it
§ 260-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-31
1:305
§ 260-32. Private fire protection.
§ 260-33. Water Rate and Fee Schedule. [Amended 6-26-2007;
6-10-2008; 6-16-2009; 7-5-2011; 11-20-2012; 2-4-2014; 9-15-2015]
and/or undue hardships would result if cash payment were made, then
and in such case the City of Rochester may finance the construction
through the issuance of bonds or other financing method and pay the
full costs. The proportionate share of each abutter along the line of
construction and installation based on the actual cost of construction
per running foot or other equitable distribution of cost when petition,
application, or late petition is made and granted shall become a lien
on such abutting property as real estate taxes until payment of said
proportionate share of full costs, including financing, is made.
C. Payment may be as follows:
(1) The affected party may pay his/her proportionate share in cash for
the full amount, at the time the obligation is incurred; or
(2) The affected party may enter into an agreement with the City of
Rochester that said proportionate share of all costs may be paid in
equal installments over a period of time equal to the term of the
bond or a lesser period. Such agreement is to be recorded with the
Strafford County Register of Deeds at the expense of the affected
party. In the event property is conveyed, the new owner(s) will be
responsible for all unpaid bills and liens.
A. Private fire services may be permitted at the discretion of the
Commissioner of Public Works and Fire Chief. All applications for
private fire protection services must follow the provisions of § 260-4,
Application for service. [Amended 5-5-1998]
B. Fees for private fire hydrants shall be as listed in § 260-33, Water Rate
and Fee Schedule.
A. Quarterly water rates. [Amended 11-1-2016; 2-6-2018]
(1) Residential customers without exemption: five dollars and fifty-five
cents ($5.55) per 100 cubic feet of water use.
(2) Residential customers with exemption: two dollars and forty cents
($2.40).
(3) Commercial and industrial customers: five dollars and fifty-five
cents ($5.55).
(4) Unmetered residential customers:
(a) Per quarter per unit without exemption: one hundred fortyeight
dollars and fifty-three cents ($148.53).
§ 260-31 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-33
1:306
(b) Per quarter per unit with exemption: seventy-four dollars and
twenty-five cents ($74.25).
(5) Minimum fee:
(a) Per quarter per unit without exemption: twenty-one dollars and
nine cents ($21.09).
(b) Per quarter per unit with exemption: sixteen dollars and
ninety-one cents ($16.91).
B. Fees.
(1) Installation: a minimum of three hundred dollars ($300.) or
estimated cost of installation, in advance one hundred dollars
($100.).
(2) Installation and repair license: one hundred dollars ($100.) per
year.
(3) Bad check: twenty-five dollars ($25.) plus all associated fees.
(4) Service reactivated following payment when shut off due to
nonpayment: sixty dollars ($60.).
(5) Service shutoff or turn on by request: thirty dollars ($30.).
(6) Temporary service: see installation fees; water charges will be
billed accordingly.
(7) Private fire protection service: see installation fees.
(8) Private fire hydrant service connection: one hundred fifty dollars
($150.) per hydrant per fiscal year. For purposes of this subsection,
a private fire hydrant shall mean any fire hydrant located outside
the public right-of-way and/or located on property other than that
owned by the City of Rochester but which is connected to the public
water system. Any private hydrant located behind a water meter on
that property shall be exempt from this charge.
(9) Swimming pools: fees based on volume used times unit rate.
(10) Meter repair or testing: thirty dollars ($30.) per visit plus cost of
transportation of meter to testing facility and cost of testing.
(11) Meter damage: fifty dollars ($50.).
(12) Backflow prevention devices: all costs associated with installation,
repair, or inspection paid by owner. Inspection costs shall be not
less than minimum service charge.
(13) Violations: all costs to correct violation paid by owner.
(14) Minimum service charge: thirty dollars ($30.) per visit.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-33
1:307
(15) Meter tampering charge: a reconnection fee of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
(16) Minimum charge for road maintenance between December 1 and
March 31: two hundred dollars ($200.).
§ 260-33 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-33
1:308
ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 4-2-2013 (Ch. 18 of the 1995 Code); amended in its
entirety 12-3-2013]
§ 260-34. Purpose.
§ 260-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP (approved for both high- and low-hazard protection) — An
unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the
lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing
fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. Physically
defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe but
never less than one inch.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — A backflow prevention
device that has been:
A. New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Part Env-Dw 505
requires that the City of Rochester take appropriate actions to prevent
the reverse flow of water previously delivered to customers or the
backflow of harmful substances into the public water system. Each
public water system serving 1,000 or more persons must have a written
cross-connection control program ordinance. [Amended 3-5-2019]
B. Cross-connections between water supplies and non-potable sources of
contamination represent one of the most significant threats to health in
the water supply industry. This program is designed to accomplish the
following:
(1) To protect the City of Rochester, New Hampshire, public potable
water supply from contamination by isolating, within its customers'
internal distribution systems, contaminants that could backflow or
backsiphon into the public water system.
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable and
non-potable water systems by isolating those contaminants that
could backflow or backsiphon into the customer's internal
distribution system.
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control that will systematically and effectively prevent
the contamination of potable water systems via cross-connections.
(4) To supplement the regulations promulgated and revised by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services as listed in
§ 260-36 below.
§ 260-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:309
APPROVED SOURCE — A source of water utilized by a public water system
for distribution to the public for consumption purposes and which is
approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services,
Water Division, for said use following a required and/or approved treatment
process.[Amended 3-5-2019]
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — A device which prevents
backsiphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a
negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on, or available to, a
premises other than the City's approved public potable water
supply.[Amended 3-5-2019]
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source or
sources other than the intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT —
A device having two independently operating check valves separated by
an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it to the
atmosphere. The check valves are force loaded to a normally closed position
and the venting means is force loaded to abnormally open position.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — A device or means designed to
prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap,
reduced pressure principle device, double check valve assembly, pressure
vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bib vacuum breaker,
residential dual check, double check with intermediate atmospheric vent,
and barometric loop.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE INSPECTOR, CERTIFIED — A person
who has proven his/her competency to inspect and test backflow prevention
devices by the possession of a valid backflow prevention device certification
issued by the New England Water Works Association or other equivalent
certification approved by New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services.
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other means
causing water, liquids, or other substances to flow or move in a direction
opposite of what is intended.
BACKSIPHONAGE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any
source other than its intended source, that is caused by negative or reduced
pressure in the potable water system.
Manufactured to allow for accurate testing and inspection so as to allow
verification of performance; and
A.
Tested and certified by the University of Southern California,
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
B.
§ 260-35 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-35
1:310
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A section of pipe rising at least 35 feet at its
topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized in water
supply systems to protect against backsiphonage (only).
CHECK VALVE — A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow
of fluids in one direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow.
CONTAINMENT PHILOSOPHY — The method and philosophy of backflow
prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the service entrance
which isolates the customer's facility from the public water supply.
CONTAMINANT — As defined in RSA 485:1-a, II, any physical, chemical,
biological or radiological substance or matter in water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential physical connection or
arrangement between two otherwise separate systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other of which contains water of unknown or
questionable safety and/or steam, chemicals, gases, or other contaminants
whereby there may be a flow of an unapproved water or other substance to
a potable water system.
CUSTOMER (OWNER) — Any person who has legal title to or license to
operate or habitat in a property at which a cross-connection inspection is to
be made or at which a cross-connection is present.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Rochester Department of Public Works.
DEVICE UPGRADE — The replacement of an existing backflow prevention
device with another appropriate device designed for a higher-hazard duty
when the degree of hazard is increased.
DIVISION — Division of Water, New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY or DCA (approved for low-hazard
protection only) — An assembly of two independently operating springloaded
check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the
check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check
valve.
FIXTURE ISOLATION PHILOSOPHY — A more complex isolation approach
whereby protective devices are placed at individual fixtures within a facility
as well as where cross-connections exist at the last free-flowing outlet to
ensure occupants of a facility are protected within.
HIGH DEGREE OF HAZARD — A condition where, if a backflow were to
occur, the resulting effect on the water supply could cause injury, illness
or death if consumed by humans. The foreign substance may be hazardous
to humans from a chemical, biological, physical, or radiological standpoint.
The effects of the contaminant may result from short- or long-term
exposure.
HOSE BIBB VACUUM BREAKER — A device which is attached to a hose
bibb and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker.[Amended
3-5-2019]
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-35
1:311
LOW DEGREE OF HAZARD — A condition where, if a backflow were to
occur, the resulting effect on the water supply would be a change in
aesthetic qualities. The foreign substance must be non-toxic and nonhazardous
to humans.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department that allows the use of a
backflow preventer.
PERSON — As defined in RSA 485:I-a, XIII, any individual, partnership,
company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of
the state, department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or
any other legal entity.
POTABLE WATER — Water from a source that has been approved by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.[Amended
3-5-2019]
PREMISES — The industrial, commercial or residential facility or dwelling
connected to the public water supply.[Amended 3-5-2019]
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER or PVB (approved for low-hazard
protection only) — A device containing one or two independently operating
spring-loaded check valves and an independently operating spring-loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. The
device includes tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check
valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each of the check
valve(s).
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — As defined by RSA 485:1-a, XV, a system for
the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such
system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves an average
of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year. Such term
includes any collection, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities under
control of the operator of such system and used primarily in connection with
such system, and any collection or pretreatment storage facilities not under
such control which are used primarily in connection with such system. Any
water system which meets all of the following conditions is not a public
water system:
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE or RPZ (approved for both high- and low-hazard protection) — An
assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves
together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure
differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below
the first check valve. These units are located between two tightly closing,
resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly
Consists only of distribution and storage facilities (and does not have
any collection and treatment facilities);
A.
Obtains all of its water from, but is not owned or operated by, a public
water system; and
B.
C. Does not sell water to any person.
§ 260-35 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-35
1:312
located resilient-seated test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the
relief valve.
RESIDENTIAL NO. 7 DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two independently
operating, spring-loaded check valves without tightly closing shutoff valves
and test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water
meter to act as a containment device. This is a non-testable device.
SITE SURVEYS — Initial site surveys of existing commercial and industrial
properties are required to determine degree of compliance with the
regulations herein. Such activities shall be executed by the Department
either using its own resources or contracted resources. Activities shall
include on-site surveys of commercial and industrial users of the public
water supply which in the judgment of the Department may present risk of
cross contamination.
SUPPLIER — Any person who controls, owns, or generally manages a public
water supply system.
WATER SERVICE ENTRANCE — The point in the customer's water system
beyond the sanitary control of the Department; generally considered to
be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected
branch.[Amended 3-5-2019]
WATER TREATMENT CHIEF OPERATOR — The Water Treatment Chief
Operator of the City of Rochester, New Hampshire, Water Treatment
Facility, Department of Public Works, or his/her designated representative,
who is vested with the authority and responsibility for implementation of a
cross-connection control program and for enforcement of the provisions of
Article I of this chapter and these regulations.
WATER UTILITY — The suppliers of water.
§ 260-36. Authority. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The authority for this article is derived from the New Hampshire
Administrative Rules Part Env-Dw 505, Backflow Prevention, and the City of
Rochester public water system rules and regulations, as adopted.
§ 260-37. Responsibilities of Department.
The Department is responsible for protecting the public potable water
distribution system from contamination due to the backflow or backsiphon
of contaminants through the water service connection.
§ 260-38. Duties of Department of Public Works.
A. The Department will determine if an approved backflow prevention
device is required at the City's water service connection to any
customer's premises.
B. The Department may, directly or through a designated representative,
give notice in writing to any such customer to install an approved
§ 260-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-38
1:313
backflow prevention device at each water service connection to his/her
premises.
C. The Department will issue permits for all new backflow prevention
devices and amended permits for any upgrades to such devices for
higher-hazard duty. No permit will be issued by the Department without
an application from the owner.
D. Permits shall have a duration based upon degree of hazard for the
protective device. High-hazard device permits shall have a duration of
six months to coincide with semiannual inspection and testing
requirements. Low-hazard device permits shall have a duration of 12
months to coincide with annual inspection and testing requirements. All
permits shall automatically renew following certification from owner
that periodic inspection and testing has been completed on schedule.
E. There will be no fees for permits issued.
F. Existing commercial and industrial properties at the time of the
issuance of this article shall be the subject of site surveys conducted by
the Department to determine the need for backflow prevention devices.
G. The Department will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it
is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has
been issued and which will be regularly tested per required schedule to
ensure satisfactory operation.
H. If the Department determines at any time that a serious threat to the
public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately.
I. The Department will maintain records to include all applications for
backflow prevention devices, installation, inspection and testing
certification forms, notices of inspection/test requirement and permits.
J. The Department will monitor for permit compliance. Permits shall lapse
and become void if inspection and testing are not certified on schedule.
A void permit shall constitute grounds for discontinuation of water.
K. The Department will inform the owner by letter of any failure to comply
with scheduled inspection and testing and resulting permit violation.
The Department will allow an additional 14 days past the original due
date for completion of inspection and testing and owner certification. In
the event that the owner fails to provide the certification within the
additional 14 days, the Department will inform the owner, by letter, that
the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated. In the
event that the owner informs the Department of extenuating
circumstances as to why the certification has not been made on
schedule, a time extension may be granted by the Department, but in no
case will exceed an additional 30 days.
§ 260-38 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-38
1:314
§ 260-39. Requirements of owner. [Amended 3-5-2019]
L. All new single-family residential water services will be required to
install a residential No. 7 dual check device immediately downstream of
the water meter. [Amended 3-5-2019]
M. Installation of a residential dual check valve results in a potential closed
plumbing system within the residence. As such, provisions shall be
made by the owner to provide for thermal expansion within the closed
loop system, i.e., the installation of thermal expansion devices and/or
pressure relief valves.
N. New and retrofit installations of reduced pressure zone principle
devices and double check valve backflow preventer include the
installation of strainers located immediately upstream of the backflow
device. The installation of strainers will preclude fouling of backflow
devices due to both foreseen and unforeseen circumstances occurring
to the water supply system such as water main repairs, water main
breaks, fires, periodic flushing and cleaning of mains, etc. These
occurrences may stir up debris within the water main that will cause
fouling of backflow devices installed without the benefit of strainers.
A. The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all
cross-connections on his/her premises.
B. The owner shall ensure the protection of the water supply within his/
her premises by the installation of approved backflow prevention
devices, where necessary, or by fixture isolation techniques. All testing,
inspection and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Those devices internal to the facility will not be regulated by the
Department.
C. The owner, after having been informed by letter from the Department,
shall at his/her expense install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any
and all backflow preventers on his/her premises.
D. On new commercial and industrial installations, the owner or his/her
qualified agent supplying the device(s) shall propose the type of
backflow preventer, if any, that will be required. The owner shall supply
a complete application for the installation of a backflow prevention
device and provide it to the Department for permit issuance. The
Department shall approve proposed devices.
E. The owner shall inform the Department of any proposed or modified
cross-connections and also of existing cross-connections of which the
owner is aware but may not be known by the Department.
F. The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass.
Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s)
must supply additional devices necessary for testing to take place.
§ 260-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:315
G. The owner shall install backflow devices with the minimum
requirements as provided herein in a manner approved by the
Department or its designee and in accordance with approved plumbing
regulations. All new devices shall be tested satisfactorily upon
installation.
H. The owner shall install only a backflow preventer approved by the
Department and the Division.
I. Any owner having a private well or other private water source shall not
connect ("hard pipe") to the Department's system. The owner may be
required to install a backflow preventer at the service entrance if a
private water source is maintained, even if it is not cross-connected to
the Department's system.
J. In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water for
domestic purposes which is on the Department's side of the backflow
preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer
installed.
K. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for device
installation or replacement, annual or semiannual device inspection
and testing, re-testing in the case that the device fails to operate
correctly, and second reinsertions for noncompliance with Department
rules and regulations.
L. Should a backflow prevention device be required or an upgraded
device, whether determined by the Department or otherwise the owner,
the owner shall be responsible for submitting an application for such
device to the Department.
M. There will be no fee for applications submitted.
N. Owners shall certify the installation of new or upgraded backflow
prevention devices in writing to the Department within 90 days of
issuance by the Department of the permit.
O. Failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the owner to install the
required initial or upgrade device(s) and provide certification to the
Department within 90 days shall constitute grounds for discontinuing
water service to the premises until such time as the required
certification of compliance is received by the Department.
P. Owner shall be responsible for providing certification of inspection and
testing to the Department within 14 days of regularly scheduled
periodic inspection and testing, and retesting following initial test
failure if applicable. Failure to submit the certification within 14 days
shall void the permit and constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises.
Q. The owner shall correct at his/her cost any malfunction of the backflow
preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. Corrections that impact
§ 260-39 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-39
1:316
§ 260-40. Administration. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 260-41. Degree of hazard.
The Department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising
from cross-connections. These threats are classified as follows in this
section:
§ 260-42. Auxiliary water sources. [Amended 3-5-2019]
the required certification schedule above shall be communicated to the
Department at the earliest possible time.
A. Philosophy. The City will administer the program on the theory of
containment, the approach of which utilizes a minimum of backflow
devices and isolates the customer from the public water supply so that
contamination of the public water system does not occur. If he/she so
desires, the owner may utilize public health officials or private
consultants to assist in the survey of his/her facilities and to assist in the
selection of proper fixture isolation devices and the proper installation
of these devices.
B. The owner shall allow his/her property to be inspected for possible
cross-connections and shall follow the provisions of the Department's
program and the Division's regulations if a cross-connection is
required.
A. Low hazard. If a backflow were to occur, the resulting effect on the
water supply would, at the most, be a change in its aesthetic qualities.
The foreign substance(s) must be non-toxic to humans. All threats
classified as "low hazard" will require, at a minimum, the installation of
an approved double check valve assembly.
B. High hazard. If a backflow were to occur, the resulting effect on the
water supply could cause illness, injury or death if consumed by
humans. The foreign substances may be hazardous to humans from a
physical, chemical, biological, and/or radiological standpoint. The
effects of the contaminants may result from short- or long-term
exposure. All threats classified as "high hazard" will require the
installation of approved reduced pressure zone principle backflow
prevention devices or air gaps.
A. Where a single- or dual-family residential customer served by the public
water supply system has or proposes to install an auxiliary water supply
(i.e., well, cistern, spring, etc.), the supplier of the water shall protect
the public water supply against backflow by requiring the customer to
perform one of the following:
(1) Permanently disconnect the auxiliary water supply from any direct
connection to the public water supply system. An inspection to
determine compliance with this requirement shall be made by the
§ 260-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-42
1:317
§ 260-43. Permits. [Amended 3-5-2019]
supplier of the water, local Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services, or his/her designee. The frequency of the
inspections shall be at the time of the disconnection and at periodic
intervals thereafter (i.e., every three to five years).
(2) Abandon the auxiliary water supply in a manner acceptable to the
water supplier.
B. The Department shall not permit a cross-connection within the public
water supply system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot
be eliminated.
(1) The customer shall install an approved reduced pressure zone
(RPZ) device at the public water supply service connection.
(2) The customer shall provide the water supplier with backflow
prevention device test results per required schedule or the
customer's water service from the water provider will be shut off
until the data is supplied to the water supplier.
A. Cross-connection permits that are required for backflow prevention
devices are obtained from the Department. A permit will be issued for
each individual device. There will be no fees for initial permits and
subsequent renewals. Permits shall be issued with a duration which
coincides with the inspection and testing schedule of the device. Highhazard
devices shall have permits with durations of six months; lowhazard
devices shall have durations of 12 months. Failure of the owner
to provide certification of inspections and testing on the required
schedule shall void the permit and constitute grounds for
discontinuation of water.
B. Amended permits shall be issued for any premises whereby there are
any increases in degree of hazard such as to supersede the
effectiveness of the present backflow preventer. Owners are
responsible for submitting applications for the amended permits.
C. The permit shall contain the information required in New Hampshire
Administrative Rules Part Env-Dw 505, Backflow Prevention.
D. Permits are subject to revocation for cause by the Department and
become immediately revoked if the owner should so change the type of
cross-connection or degree of hazard associated with the service
without proper notification to the Department.
E. Fixture isolation devices internal to a facility will not be regulated by
the Department and permits are not required.
§ 260-42 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-44
1:318
§ 260-44. Existing backflow prevention devices. [Amended
3-5-2019]
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Department to
continue in service if in good working order unless the degree of hazard is
such as to supersede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer
or result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. Permits for existing
devices shall be issued with durations to coincide with the required
schedule of inspection and testing. Where the degree of hazard has
increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting to a
business establishment, an existing backflow preventer must be upgraded
to an approved device, or an approved device must be installed in the event
that no backflow device is present.
§ 260-45. Installation. [Amended 3-5-2019]
A. Installation requirements. Initial installations, replacements and
upgrades shall be performed by an individual with a current backflow
prevention device inspector/tester certification from the New England
Water Works Association (NEWWA).
B. Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention devices.
(1) The reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device shall be
installed on the owner's side of the water meter on the potable
water supply line.
(2) For "in-plant" protection, lines for safety showers and lines for eye
wash units must be taken off the upstream side of the reduced
pressure zone backflow prevention device.
(3) The reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device shall be
located so as to permit easy access and provide adequate and
convenient space for maintenance, inspection, and testing. The
device must be protected from freezing, flooding, and mechanical
damage.
(4) The reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device and shutoff
valves must be installed in a horizontal alignment between three
and four feet from the floor to the bottom of the device and a
minimum of 12 inches from any wall, unless the device is approved
by the Department of Public Works or its designee for vertical
installations.
(5) Tightly closing valves must be installed at each end of the device
and must be immediately accessible unless otherwise approved by
the Department of Public Works or its designee.
(6) A drain is to be provided for a relief valve port. There must be an
approved air gap separation between the port and the drain line. To
be approved, the air gap must be at least twice the internal
diameter of the discharge line, or two inches minimum.
§ 260-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:319
§ 260-46. Periodic testing. [Amended 3-5-2019]
(7) Backflow prevention devices are not allowed to be installed below
grade or other location that may be prone to unit inundation and/or
submergence.
C. Double check valve assemblies.
(1) The double check valve assembly shall be installed on the owner's
side of the water meter on the potable water supply line.
(2) For "in-plant" protection, lines for safety showers and lines for eye
wash units must be taken off the upstream side of the double check
valve assembly.
(3) The double check valve assembly shall be located so as to permit
easy access and provide adequate and convenient space for
maintenance, inspection, and testing. The device must be protected
from freezing, flooding, and mechanical damage.
(4) The double check valve assembly and shutoff valves must be
installed in a horizontal alignment and the top of the double check
valve assembly must be between 30 inches and 53 inches from the
floor to the bottom of the device and a minimum of 12 inches from
any wall, unless the device is approved by the Department of Public
Works or its designee.
(5) Tightly closing valves must be installed at each end of the device
and be immediately accessible unless otherwise approved by the
Department of Public Works or its designee.
(6) Double check valve assemblies must be provided with suitable
connections and appurtenances for testing.
A. Backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and tested at least
semiannually for high-hazard applications and at least annually for lowhazard
applications. All new devices in new facilities shall be tested for
positive operation upon installation. Responsibility for ensuring
inspections and testing and providing certification to the Department
shall be the owner's. Failure to certify inspections and testing on the
required schedule shall void the permit and be grounds for
discontinuation of water service.
B. Testing and inspection of all devices, to include reduced pressure
principle backflow devices, testable double check valve assemblies, and
testable pressure vacuum breakers, shall be performed by an individual
with a current backflow prevention device inspector/tester certification
from the New England Water Works Association (NEWWA).
C. Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test shall be
repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of
the repair, the device shall be re-tested at the owner's expense to
§ 260-45 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-46
1:320
§ 260-47. Conflicting provisions; severability.
§ 260-48. Interpretation.
The provisions of this article with respect to the meaning of technical terms
and phrases, the classification of different plumbing devices, the regulations
with respect to installing, inspecting, or testing backflow prevention
equipment, and other technical matters shall be interpreted and
administered by the Department acting in and for the City of Rochester,
New Hampshire.
§ 260-49. Appeals.
Any party aggrieved by any decision, regulation or provision under this
article, as amended, from time to time, shall have the right to appeal said
decision to the Department which shall issue a decision within 30 calendar
days of the appeal. If said appeal is denied by the Department, then the
aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal to the Utility Advisory Board
and then to the City Manager.
ensure correct operation. High-hazard situations shall not be allowed
to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and
cannot be repaired immediately. The owner is responsible for spare
parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two
devices is an effective means of ensuring that uninterrupted water
service during testing and repair of devices is maintained and is
strongly recommended when the owner desires such continuity.
D. Backflow devices will be tested more frequently than specified in
Subsection A above in cases where there is a history of test failures and
the Department feels that, due to the degree of hazard involved,
additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional testing will be
borne by the owner.
E. Failure to test a backflow prevention device as required, or failure to
repair a device when needed, shall result in immediate termination of
the water service.22
A. If a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision
of a zoning, building, safety or health or other ordinance or code of the
City of Rochester, or the State of New Hampshire, or the federal
government, existing on or subsequent to the effective date of this
article, that provision which in the judgment of the City of Rochester
establishes the higher standard of safety and protection shall prevail.
B. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article that
can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
22.Editor's Note: Original § 18.16, Records, and § 18.17, Reports, which immediately followed
this section, were repealed 3-5-2019.
§ 260-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-50
1:321
§ 260-50. Additional rules and regulations; amendments.
The City reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to control and
management of cross-connections, which additional rules and regulations,
to the extent appropriate, shall be a part of these regulations. Future
changes to this article will be submitted to New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services for approval prior to City adoption.
§ 260-51. When effective; repealer.
This article shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, as provided by law. The adoption of this article specifically repeals
any previously adopted cross-connection ordinance or rules of the City
of Rochester, New Hampshire, with regard to cross-connections between
water supplies of potable and non-potable systems and/or sources.
§ 260-50 ROCHESTER CODE § 260-51
1:322
Chapter 275
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult-oriented establishments — See Ch. 11.
Building construction and property
maintenance — See Ch. 40.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 135.
Planning Board — See Ch. 176.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 218.
§ 260-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-51
1:323

ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
§ 275-1.1. Title.
This chapter, Chapter 275 of the City of Rochester General Ordinances,
shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Rochester, New Hampshire," hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
§ 275-1.2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 674:16 and in accordance with
Chapters 672, 673, 674, 675, 676, and 677, et al., of the New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated and subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 275-1.3. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To implement the goals and provisions of the City's Master Plan;
B. To promote an orderly pattern of development and encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City;
C. To preserve and enhance the value of land and buildings;
D. To encourage the provision of high-quality housing for people of all
income levels;
E. To revitalize the downtown and other village and neighborhood
commercial areas;
F. To foster economic development and provide opportunities for business
growth;
G. To enhance the walkability, diversity, interest, beauty, and vibrancy of
the City's neighborhoods;
H. To conserve natural, historic, and cultural resources;
I. To preserve the City's rural character and scenic beauty and promote
agriculture;
J. To foster the creation of parks, recreation facilities, and open spaces;
K. To provide a range of transportation choices and mitigate traffic
congestion;
L. To promote excellence in architecture, landscaping, site layout,
signage, and civic design;
M. To encourage innovation, flexibility, and a collaborative review process
in the development of land;
§ 275-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-1.3
1:325
§ 275-1.4. Application of regulations.
No building or land shall be used, reused, occupied, constructed, altered,
removed, relocated, demolished, developed, redeveloped, or subdivided
except in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. See Article 30,
Nonconforming Property, for any exceptions.
§ 275-1.5. Other applicable law.
Wherever a provision of this chapter may differ from that prescribed by any
other pertinent statute, ordinance, regulation, rule, standard, or policy, the
provision which imposes the greatest restriction or the highest standard
shall govern.
§ 275-1.6. Severability. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If a court or any other body
with appropriate jurisdiction finds that any article, section, subsection, or
provision of this chapter is invalid, that finding shall not invalidate any other
provision of this chapter. Those other provisions shall remain in full force
without any other action required.
§ 275-1.7. Minimum requirements.
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be the minimum
requirements for the granting of any pertinent City approvals. Compliance
with these requirements, however, is not necessarily deemed sufficient for
the granting of these approvals. All applicants must comply with all other
applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, standards, and policies
of the City of Rochester and of other governmental authorities. In particular,
all applicants must comply with the City of Rochester Site Plan Regulations
and the City of Rochester Subdivision Regulations which include myriad
specific requirements and provide for the reasonable judgment of the
Planning Board and other City authorities in reviewing applications. An
N. To recognize and respect the rights of property and business owners;
O. To promote public health and secure safety from fire, flood, and other
hazards;
P. To prevent overcrowding of land while at the same time promoting
compact development patterns;
Q. To facilitate the adequate provision of infrastructure and utilities;
R. To preserve the best of the City's traditional character;
S. To enhance the sense of community; and
T. To make Rochester a more attractive, vibrant, and healthy community
for its residents, businesses, property owners, and visitors.
§ 275-1.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-1.7
1:326
application might meet all of the minimum requirements of this chapter but
be legitimately denied by the Planning Board in accordance with general or
specific provisions of those regulations or other applicable regulations.
§ 275-1.8. Establishment of districts. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A. The City of Rochester, New Hampshire, is hereby divided into zoning
districts as shown in Table 1-A - Zoning Districts, below. The uses,
dimensions, and other standards of development of land, buildings, and
structures shall conform to the provisions of the zone in which they are
located.
B. The residential, commercial, industrial, and special districts are known
as "base districts" or "underlying districts."
Table 1-A - Zoning Districts
Full Name Abbreviation Class
Residential-1 District R1 Residential District
Residential-2 District R2 Residential District
Agricultural District AG Residential District
Neighborhood Mixed-Use
District
NMU Residential District
Downtown Commercial
District
DC Commercial District
Office Commercial District OC Commercial District
Highway Commercial District HC Commercial District
General Industrial District GI Industrial District
Recycling Industrial District RI Industrial District
Granite Ridge District GR Granite Ridge
District
Airport Special District AS Special District
Hospital Special District HS Special District
Aquifer Protection Overlay
District
APOD Overlay District
Aviation Overlay District AOD Overlay District
Conservation Overlay District COD Overlay District
Flood Hazard Overlay District FHOD Overlay District
Historic Overlay District HOD Overlay District
Special Downtown Overlay
District
SDOD Overlay District
§ 275-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-1.9
1:327
§ 275-1.9. Overlay zoning districts.
The overlay districts listed above are established in recognition of special
conditions which exist in these areas. Each overlay district establishes
additional requirements above and beyond those of the base zoning district.
In case of any conflict between the requirements of the base and overlay
districts the more restrictive provision shall apply. Where practical, the
overlay districts are also shown on the Zoning Map. (See Article 5 through
Article 15 for specific provisions.)
§ 275-1.10. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established
as shown on a map titled "City of Rochester Zoning Map." The map, along
with all notations, references, and other explanatory material thereon, is
hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. Any change in the location of
boundaries of a zoning district hereafter made through any amendment to
this chapter shall be noted on the Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map of
the City of Rochester shall be located in the Department of Planning and
Development. The Official Zoning Map shall be kept current and shall be
determining except in case of any obvious errors or omissions.
§ 275-1.11. District boundaries.
Where there may be any uncertainty or ambiguity with respect to the
boundary of any district as shown on the Zoning Map the following rules
shall apply, unless a different approach is reasonably deemed appropriate
by the Zoning Administrator:
A. Center line. Where a boundary is indicated as a road, right-of-way,
driveway, railroad, utility line, watercourse or other body of water, it
shall be construed to be the center line thereof, unless otherwise
indicated or implied.
B. Parallel to feature. Where a boundary is indicated or implied to be
situated parallel to a road, right-of-way, driveway, railroad, utility line,
watercourse, or other body of water, it shall be construed to be parallel
thereto and at such distance therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map.
C. Shoreline. Where a boundary is indicated as following the edge of a
shoreline it shall be construed to follow the normal high-water line. In
the event of a natural change in the shoreline, it shall be construed as
moving with the actual shoreline.
D. Right angle. Where a boundary is indicated as intersecting the center
line of a road, right-of-way, driveway, railroad, utility line, watercourse
or other water body, unless otherwise indicated, it shall be construed to
intersect at right angles to that center line or, in the case of a curved
center line, at right angles to the tangent to the curve at the point of
intersection.
§ 275-1.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-1.11
1:328
§ 275-1.12. When effective.
This chapter is immediately effective, in entirety, upon formal adoption by
the City Council of the City of Rochester, New Hampshire. The Zoning
Ordinance which had been in effect prior to adoption of this chapter is
hereby rescinded in entirety.
§ 275-1.13. Suggestions.
There are various suggestions/recommendations made throughout this
chapter. These are labeled. These suggestions are merely recommended;
they are not required.
E. City boundary. Where a boundary is indicated as approximately
following a City boundary it shall be construed as following the City
boundary.
F. Feature on the ground. Where the location of a physical feature existing
on the ground such as a wetland, water body, road, or utility deviates
from that shown on the Zoning Map, and the physical feature is clearly
indicated or implied as marking the boundary, the actual location of the
feature on the ground shall be used to determine the location of the
boundary.
G. Lot lines. Where a boundary is clearly indicated as following a lot line,
including corners and vertices at the intersection of lot lines, it shall be
construed as following that lot line, even if the location of that line is
inaccurately represented on the Zoning Map, provided the discrepancy
is not greater than 20 feet. However, if the lot line is changed after
adoption of this chapter, then the zoning boundary shall not change
(unless subsequently amended as prescribed in Article 3,
Administration).
H. Metes and bounds. Where a boundary is clearly indicated as following a
lot line, any conflict between the Zoning Map and a description by
metes and bounds in a deed shall generally be resolved in favor of the
description by metes and bounds.
I. Scale/GIS. Where a boundary may not be clearly indicated by humanmade
features, natural features, lot lines, or other markers, distances
may be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
Where a question remains, the most precise distances and locations
shall ultimately be determined based upon information and
measurements shown in the City of Rochester Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) database.
J. Most restrictive. Where ambiguity remains and a boundary cannot be
definitively established, any area in question shall be deemed to be in
the more restrictive of the adjoining districts.
§ 275-1.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-1.14
1:329
§ 275-1.14. Examples.
There are numerous examples made throughout this chapter for illustrative
purposes only. These are labeled.
§ 275-1.15. Headings.
Under this chapter, many sections, and subsections, are preceded by a
heading. These are provided to facilitate use of this chapter only. Only the
language in the sections and subsections which follow the headings should
be construed as the actual language of this chapter.
§ 275-1.16. Conditional uses and special exceptions.
Many departures from stated standards are allowed by conditional use or by
special exception. These departures are articulated throughout the chapter.
See Article 21, Conditional Uses, and Article 22, Special Exceptions, for
criteria in evaluating these departures from standards.
§ 275-1.14 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-1.16
1:330
ARTICLE 2
Definitions and Terminology
[Amended 2-3-2015; 7-7-2015]
§ 275-2.1. General provisions.
A. When used in this chapter, the words, terms, and phrases listed in
§ 275-2.2 and the acronyms and abbreviations listed in § 275-2.3 of
Article 2, Definitions and Terminology, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them therein, unless a contrary meaning is clearly indicated or
implied.
B. Ordinary meanings. Words, terms, and phrases that are not defined in
Article 2, Definitions and Terminology, shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings or those that the context may clearly imply.
C. Regulations. In cases where there is a conflict in the definition of a
word, term, phrase, or acronym given herein and that given in the City
of Rochester Site Plan Regulations or City of Rochester Subdivision
Regulations, the definition given herein shall be determining.
D. Interpretations; dictionary. The Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to
interpret or define words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter that
are not defined in Article 2, Definitions and Terminology. In case of
conflicting definitions from various general dictionaries the definitions
given in the Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary shall be
determining.
E. Designations in this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, the words
"this chapter" refer to this entire Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 275 of the
City of Rochester General Ordinances. The words "this article" refer to
a specific portion of this chapter, as designated by an article number
(such as "Article 1" or "Article 2"). The words "this section" refer to a
specific portion of an article designated by a section number (such as
"§ 275-1.1" or "§ 275-3.2"). The words "this subsection" refer to a
specific portion of a section as designated by a letter or number [such
as "A" or "(1)" or "(a)"]. [Amended 3-5-2019]
F. Specific words. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, the word
"may" is permissive, and the word "should" indicates a preferred or
encouraged but not necessarily a required course of action. The present
tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular. "Occupied" or
"used" shall be considered as though followed by "or intended,
arranged or designed to be occupied or used." "Includes" (or
"including") means "includes, but is not limited to." The word "person"
includes an individual, firm, association, condominium association,
organization, partnership, trust, entity, company or corporation as well
as an individual.
§ 275-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.1
1:331
§ 275-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTER — Pursuant to RSA 672:3 "Abutter" means any person whose
property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across
the street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land
use board. For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes
of notification, the term "abutter" shall include any person who is able to
demonstrate that his/her land will be directly affected by the proposal under
consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of
a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being
under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term
"abutter" means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in
RSA 356-B:3, XXIII. For purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality
of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being
under a manufactured housing park form of ownership as defined in RSA
205-A:1, II, the term "abutter" includes the manufactured housing park
owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is
directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by
the local land use board.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — An independent dwelling unit subordinate to
a single-family house. (See Article 23, Accessory Uses.)
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE —
G. Other sections. Specialized sets of definitions are given in other
sections in this chapter. In case of conflict between a definition given in
a section and that given in another section, the definition given in the
other section shall apply only within that specific section. Additional
definitions are provided in the following sections: Aquifer Protection
Overlay District (§ 275-10.3), Aviation Overlay District (§ 275-11.1),
Conservation Overlay District (§ 275-12.6), Flood Hazard Overlay
District (§ 275-13.3), Historic Overlay District (§ 275-14.6), and signs
(§ 275-29.11).
A building or structure that:
Is not attached to the principal building or structure on a lot or
tract;
(1)
Accommodates a use customarily or reasonably associated with the
use of the principal building or structure;
(2)
Is incidental and subordinate to the primary building, structure, or
use; and
(3)
Is located on the same lot or tract as the principal building,
structure, or use.
(4)
A.
§ 275-2.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:332
ACCESSORY USE — A use that:
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The development of a new use for an older building or
for a building originally designed for a different purpose.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility providing day or evening time care
for five or more persons over 16 years of age who are in need of supervision
or assistance or a facility that is not located in the home of the provider.
ADULT DAY-CARE HOME — Daytime care in the home of the provider for
up to four persons (at any one time) over 16 years of age who are in need of
supervision or assistance and who are not related to the provider.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS — Includes, without limitation,
adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture
theaters, adult cabarets, and/or massage parlors. When used in connection
with the phrase "adult-oriented establishments," the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
Examples include garages, driveways, parking lots, sheds, signs,
fences, and light poles.
B.
A. Is customarily or reasonably associated with the principal use;
B. Has hours of operation the same as or less than the principal use;
C. Is incidental and subordinate to the principal use; and
Is located on the same lot or tract as the principal use. (For
determinations whether a proposed use is an accessory use see Article
23, Accessory Uses.) (See also "secondary use.")
D.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes,
DVDs, any digital or electronic media or magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas as defined below, for sale, rental, or
display to patrons thereof, including but not limited to establishments
having facilities for the presentation of adult entertainment, as defined
below, including adult-oriented films, movies or live entertainment, for
observation by or display to patrons therein.
A.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
establishment which, during a substantial portion of the total
presentation time, features live performances involving adult
entertainment.
B.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
C.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:333
AGENT (OF OWNER) — Any person who can show written evidence that he/
she is acting on behalf of the property owner.
AGRICULTURE — See "farm."
AIRPORT — A facility used for landings and takeoffs by commercial and
private fixed wing or rotary wing aircraft. It typically includes aircraft
storage and service facilities.
ALLOWED USE — A use permitted by right, by conditional use, by special
exception, or by another approval process.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity of fewer than 50 persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons
therein.
D.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion pictures, live performance, display or dance or any type
performance which has as a significant or substantial portion of such
performance any actual or simulated performance of specified sexual
activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas,
removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime,
modeling, or any other personal services offered customers.
E.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or place primarily in the
business of providing non-therapeutic massage services which involve
performance of specified sexual activities and/or the touching or
manipulation of specified anatomical areas (in contrast to a legitimate
massage studio employing licensed massage therapists).
F.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
(3)
G.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals, pubic region;
(b) Buttocks;
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
(c)
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly tumescent state, even if
completely opaquely covered.
(2)
H.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:334
ALTERNATE TOWER STRUCTURE (or STEALTH FACILITY) — Innovative
siting techniques that shall include man-made trees, inclusion in or on
bell steeples, clock towers, hose towers, existing light poles, and similar
alternative-design mounting methods that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennas.
ANTENNA — See "tower."
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A building, pole, telescoping mast,
tower, or other such structure which supports an antenna or radio
frequency spectrum repeaters.
ANTIQUE SHOP — See "retail establishments."
APARTMENTS or APARTMENT BUILDINGS — See "dwelling, apartment
building," "dwelling, mixed-use," "dwelling, multifamily," and "security
apartment."[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
APPLICANT — Any person, agent, firm, association, condominium
association, organization, partnership, trust, entity, company or corporation
that submits an application for approval to the City of Rochester under this
chapter.
AQUACULTURE — The organized propagation of harvestable estuarine or
marine plant or animal species.
ARCADE — A continuous passageway parallel to and open to a street, open
space, or building, usually covered by a canopy or permanent roofing.
ARTERIAL ROAD — The highest order public road, one which carries a
high volume of traffic (exceeding 5,000 vehicles per day) at relatively high
speeds, and is largely used for travel between areas within the City and
areas beyond the City. Its primary function is to provide mobility (through
travel) rather than access to adjoining property.
ARTIST STUDIO — A place where an artist produces individual handmade
crafts and works of art. Those works produced on site may or may not be
displayed and sold on the premises.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A residential development for older persons
that offers a moderate level of support for residents, possibly including
recreation, counseling, and medical services and assistance with daily
living. Common dining facilities are featured with limited or no cooking
facilities in the individual units. (See also "nursing home" and "senior
housing.")
AUTOMOBILE — See "vehicle."
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE — The average of finished ground level along
the perimeter of a building's exterior walls.
AWNING or CANOPY — A structure attached to a building that shelters the
building's windows or doors and/or pedestrians from weather.
BANK — A business where money is kept for savings or commercial
purposes, invested, supplied for loans, or exchanged. Banks customarily
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:335
include credit unions, counter service by tellers, drive-through service, and
automated money machines.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — See "lodging facility, bed-and-breakfast."
BEDROOM — A room in a dwelling used, or intended, primarily for sleeping.
BOARDINGHOUSE (or ROOMING HOUSE) — A dwelling operated as a
business or on a not-for-profit basis providing rooms for rent on a daily,
weekly, or other basis. The rooms do not include cooking facilities and thus
are not individual dwelling units. Meals may or may not be provided by
the owner/operator. Such rooms generally serve as the primary residence
(of whatever duration) for the occupants though they may be available also
as lodging for visitors. [This use is distinguished from a group home (see
definition below under community residence-1) or bed-and-breakfast.]
BOAT — See "vehicle."
BUFFER — An area within a subject property, generally situated adjacent
and parallel to the property line, which serves to screen, soften or minimize
a development's visual, auditory, or other impacts upon adjoining
properties. A buffer may be composed of open space, existing vegetation
(trees and/or shrubs), newly planted vegetation, fences, walls, berms, or a
combination of these.
BUILDABLE LOT — A lot intended for development which meets the
requirements of RSA 674:41.
BUILD-TO LINE (or MAXIMUM SETBACK LINE) — The opposite of a
conventional setback, i.e., an imaginary line located parallel to, and a
specific distance from, the front or side lot line up to which the building
facade must touch or extend beyond.
BUILD-TO ZONE — A zone at the front of a lot, parallel to the front lot line,
within which the front building facade must be located.
BUILDING — A structure that provides or can provide housing, shelter,
or enclosure for people, animals, vehicles, equipment, or other personal
property and which is fully enclosed and protected from the weather with
one or more floors (whether finished or not), walls on all sides, and a roof.
(See also "structure.")
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the total lot area which is
covered by building footprints.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The ground area enclosed by the exterior
surfaces of the foundation walls of a building, together with the area of all
covered porches and other roofed portions.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The primary facade of a building which faces and
is parallel to or nearly parallel to a public or private street.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the finished grade to the
top of the highest roof beams on a flat or shed roof, to the deck level on a
mansard roof, and the average distance between the eaves and the ridge
level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:336
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector or Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services of the City of Rochester or agent thereof.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The horizontal distance between buildings on
the same lot.
CAFE — See "eating and drinking establishments."
CAMPGROUND —
CAR — See "vehicle."
CARETAKER APARTMENT — A dwelling unit that is incorporated into, and
is accessory to, a residential or nonresidential use and is occupied by an
owner or an employee of the business occupying the principal use and
having a gross floor area not exceeding 750 square feet. (See Article 23,
Accessory Uses.)
CARPORT — A structure designed to provide storage space for a vehicle,
consisting of no more than two walls and a roof. A carport is accessory to,
and may be attached to or detached from, the principal building.
CATERER — An establishment which prepares ready-to-consume food on
premises to be delivered and served off premises.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A permit certifying that a structure
complies with the requirements of the City of Rochester and may be lawfully
occupied for appropriate uses.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — See day care-3.
CITY — The government of the City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
CITY COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Rochester, New
Hampshire.
CLASS VI ROAD — All existing public ways other than Class I through V
roads, all roads discontinued as open highways and made subject to gates
and bars, and all roads which the City has not maintained and repaired
in suitable condition for travel for at least five successive years. (See RSA
229:5, VII.)
CLUB — A facility exclusive to club members and their guests, which may
or may not include a dining area, lounge, meeting spaces, a function hall,
and limited, small-scale recreational facilities. "Club" includes fraternal
A tract of land where sites are rented or used as a temporary use
for recreational purposes or organized retreats (not for permanent or
year-round residential use). Visitors sleep in tents, tent-like structures,
primitive cabins, recreational vehicles, motor homes, camping trailers,
or under other primitive conditions.
A.
An outdoor facility organized for campers (generally children) to spend
all or part of the summer away from home, living in tents, tent-like
structures, primitive cabins, or under other primitive conditions,
participating in organized activities such as sports and arts and crafts,
and eating together in a central dining facility (also called "camp").
B.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:337
organizations, veterans' groups, service groups, and other not-for-profit
organizations with common interests, but does not include country clubs,
health clubs, and houses of worship.
CO-LOCATION — Placement, on a single supporting component, of
communications and other utility distribution equipment, devices and
hardware that serve more than one provider.
CODE OF ORDINANCES (GENERAL ORDINANCES) — The entire body of
ordinances adopted by the City Council, of which this chapter is only one
part.
COLLECTOR ROAD — A mid-level public road, one which generally carries
fewer than 5,000 vehicles per day. Its function is to provide both mobility
(through travel) and access to adjoining property.
COMMERCIAL USE — A use, activity, or enterprise which is carried on
as a business or for profit by the operator (as opposed to governmental,
nonprofit, volunteer, or household activities).
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle registered for commercial use.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building that accommodates recreational,
education, entertainment, and cultural activities for use by residents of the
individual community (subdivision, manufactured home park, multifamily
development, or neighborhood) or the general public.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE-1 (or GROUP HOME) — A dwelling, licensed
by or operated by a governmental agency, for the purpose of providing
ongoing care and oversight to a special population of persons who are
physically, mentally, or emotionally handicapped (as defined in Title VIII of
the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Act of 1988)
or for orphans and neglected children. Authorized supervisory personnel
are present on the premises at all times. A community residence-1 has no
more than six individual residents. (See also "community residence-2" and
"residential facility.")
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE-2 (or HALFWAY HOUSE) — A dwelling, licensed
by or operated by a governmental agency, for the purpose of providing
interim care and oversight for participants of a program of rehabilitation
for persons convicted of a crime or recovering from substance abuse prior
to their complete re-entry into society. Authorized supervisory personnel
are present on the premises at all times. A community residence-2 has no
more than six individual residents. (See also "community residence-1" and
"residential facility.")
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A site where decomposition processes are used
on solid waste to produce compost. Solid waste includes leaves, grass,
manures, and non-meat and non-dairy food production wastes received from
residential, commercial, industrial nonhazardous and community sources,
but does not include biosolids or medical waste.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district when
it is shown that such use in a specified location will comply with all the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:338
in this chapter and authorized by the approving authority. (See Article 21,
Conditional Uses.)
CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL — The terms that a development must comply
with whether specified in this chapter, the Site Plan Regulations or
Subdivision Regulations, or the specific approval of a project.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for business and professional
meetings, often with accommodations for sleeping, eating, entertainment,
exhibits and recreation.
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Conservation Commission of the
City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION (or OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION or
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION) — A subdivision in which a substantial portion of
land which would otherwise be buildable is permanently preserved as open
space. (See Article 33, Conservation Subdivisions.)
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD — A site upon which vehicles or
equipment (such as bulldozers, front-end loaders, and backhoes) or
materials used by professional contractors in construction, land clearing,
landscaping or other similar activities are stored. This includes the office
used by the contractor as an accessory use. Land upon which any of the
above items are temporarily stored on site during the course of an active
construction project is not considered a contractor's storage yard.
CONVENIENCE STORE — See "retail establishments."
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision in which most or all of the
buildable land is allocated to building lots, roads, and infrastructure with
relatively little buildable land dedicated to open space.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COUNTRY CLUB — A facility catering predominately to club members and
their guests, which may or may not include a dining area, a lounge, meeting
spaces, a function hall, and significant recreational facilities such as a
swimming pool, tennis courts, and a golf course.
COURT or COURTYARD — An open space wholly or partially surrounded by
the wings of one building or multiple buildings.
COVERAGE — Unless otherwise specified, "coverage" refers to "lot
coverage." (See "building coverage" and "lot coverage.")
DAY-CARE CENTER (also called "day care-3") — A state-licensed facility
providing day or evening time care for seven or more preschool age children
(at any one time) with more than one provider or a facility that is not
located in the home of the provider (also known as "child-care center,"
"preschool," or "nursery school"). (This use includes the "family group childcare
home" and the "group child-care center" as defined by the State of New
Hampshire.)
DAY CARE - FAMILY (also called "day care-2") — Daytime care for up to six
preschool age children (at any one time) in the home of the provider plus, on
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:339
an after-school basis, up to three school age children who attend a full-day
program outside of the day-care home. The numbers of children set forth
here include the provider's own biological, adopted, step, or foster children
if those children are less than 10 years of age. (This use is the same as the
"family child-care home" as defined by the State of New Hampshire.)
DAY-CARE RESIDENCE (also called "day care-1") — Daytime care for up to
three children (at any one time), not including the provider's own children,
in the home of the provider.
DECK — An unroofed platform, either freestanding or attached to a
building. May be supported by pillars or posts.
DENSITY — The number of families, dwelling units, households, or housing
structures per unit of land.
DEVELOPER — The person(s), firm, organization, or other entity carrying
out development of property.
DEVELOPMENT —
Human activity that causes change to real estate that requires a permit
or approval from any department of the City of Rochester, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, parking, excavation, or drilling operations, storage of
materials, division of land into parcels, demolition, and installation of
signs and fences.
A.
"Development" does not include the following:
Work by a highway or public works department or railroad
company for the maintenance or improvement of a road or railroad
track, if the work is carried out on land within the right-of-way.
(1)
Work by a public utility maintaining, installing, or building mains,
pipes, cables, tunnels, power lines, towers, poles, tracks, etc.
(2)
Work conducted entirely on the interior of a structure that does not
increase the intensity of impact on the City.
(3)
A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any property
(notwithstanding the definition of a condominium conveyance as a
subdivision as set forth in RSA 672:14, I, stating that "subdivision"
means the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium
conveyance).
(4)
The creation or termination of rights of access, easements, or
covenants unless in violation of any condition of approval issued by
the Planning Board.
(5)
(6) Planting of landscaping materials.
B.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:340
DEVELOPMENT, MULTIFAMILY — A development containing two or more
buildings containing three or more residential units in total on the same lot.
Multifamily development can take many forms.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (or DBH) — The elevation at which the size
of an established tree is customarily measured, 4 1/2 feet above grade.
DISTRIBUTION CENTER — A facility where a set of products is stored
for distribution to retailers and/or wholesalers or directly to consumers.
A warehouse, in contrast, often contains the goods from a single entity,
whereas a distribution center often contains the goods from multiple
entities.
DRIVE-THROUGH USE — A use offering window service to drivers in
vehicles, typically including fast-food restaurants, pharmacies, and banks.
DWELLING — A building containing one or more residential units. Lodging
facilities, recreational vehicles, motor homes, travel trailers, and structures
intended for transient or short-term occupancy are not considered
dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
DWELLING, APARTMENT BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof
which contains five or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MIXED-USE — A building with one or more dwelling units
contained within a mixed-use (MU) building, such as apartments over
commercial uses.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more residential units with separate cooking and toilet facilities for
each dwelling on one individual lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (or SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE) — A detached
dwelling which:
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building which:
Contains exactly one residential unit (except for accessory apartments,
where permitted);
A.
B. Is not attached to any other dwelling or residential unit; and
Occupies its own individual lot on which there is no other dwelling or
principal use.
C.
A. Contains exactly two residential units;
B. Is not attached to any other dwelling or dwelling unit; and
Occupies its own individual lot on which there is no other dwelling or
principal use.
C.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:341
EARTH EXCAVATION (or MINING or RESOURCE EXTRACTION) — The
commercial removal of materials on or below the surface of the earth,
including soil, sand, gravel, rock, stones, clay, peat, or other mineral
deposits or organic substances in accordance with RSA 155-E. This does
not include the removal of vegetation or materials incidental to agriculture,
development site work, or building construction.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
EASEMENT — The right to use another person's land for a stated purpose.
It can involve a general or specific portion of the property.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS —
CAFE (or COFFEE SHOP) — A restaurant not exceeding 1,000 square
feet which:
Has a character as an informal gathering place or place for
customers to linger and read, socialize, use computers, and/or the
like; and
(1)
Is oriented toward serving coffee, tea, and other nonalcoholic
beverages, excluding drive-through use.
(2)
A.
FOOD STAND — An eating establishment in which prepared food and
beverages are sold in a ready to consume state from a food cart, truck,
or stand situated out of doors.
B.
LOUNGE — A section of a restaurant that sells alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises (as an accessory use). [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
C.
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment that stays open late at night, serving
alcohol and food, and generally providing music, dancing, and/or
entertainment.
D.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment situated in a building in
which prepared food and beverages are sold to customers in a ready
to consume state. Food is generally eaten on the premises at tables,
booths, or a counter but may be prepared for take-out. Alcohol may
be served to customers along with food as an accessory use. (See
"restaurant, drive-through" and "food stand.")
E.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A restaurant which includes a
drive-up window that allows customers to receive their food directly in
their vehicles.
F.
TAVERN (also known as "bar" or "pub" or "nano brewery" or "winery"
or "distillery") — A commercial establishment that sells alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises. This may include the
actual production of those alcoholic beverages on the premises, the
carry-out sales of those beverages produced on the premises, and the
production and sale of food products on the premises. [Amended
6-6-2017]
G.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:342
ELDERLY HOUSING — See "senior housing."
EMERGENCY SERVICES FACILITIES — A facility which may operate 24
hours each day, seven days each week, including fire, law enforcement, and
emergency medical and veterinary services.
EXOTIC ANIMALS — Include any nonindigenous feline, nonhuman primate,
nonindigenous bear, wolves, and nonindigenous dogs except domestic dogs,
any unusual pets such as mammals, birds, or reptiles, and any
nontraditional livestock such as reindeer, ostrich and emu, water buffalo,
and American bison among others.
FACTORY RETAIL STORE — A retail sales operation (as an accessory use)
at a factory or warehouse limited to goods produced by or for the company
in the usual course of its business.
FAIR — A large-scale entertainment event, such as an annual summer/
fall fair, situated on land on which significant permanent structures have
been erected largely to serve the fair. A special, small-scale, temporary
entertainment event lasting no more than 10 days such as a carnival,
bazaar, or circus situated on land on which no significant permanent
structures have been erected largely to serve the fair is considered an
accessory use.
FARM — All uses and activities as articulated in RSA 21:34-a. (Also see
"farmer's market," "forestry," "livestock," "plant nursery," and "roadside
farm stand.")
FARM, GROWING OF CROPS — All uses and activities as articulated in
RSA 21:34-a but excluding the commercial raising, keeping or handling
of livestock, poultry, horses, dogs, fur-bearing animals, fish, bees, and any
other animals.
FARMERS' MARKET — A market held in an open area or in a structure, on
private or on public property, where individual sellers offer for sale to the
public primarily agricultural produce dispensed from booths or off the back
of trucks located on site.
FLAG LOT — See "lot, flag."
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the areas of all floors of a building as
measured from the exterior faces of the walls, excluding unfinished cellars
and attics, porches, garages and utility areas.
FLORIST — See "retail establishments."
FOOD STAND — See "eating and drinking establishments."
FORESTRY — The cultivation and harvesting of trees for commercial
purposes. This does not include clearing of trees in conjunction with
building development.
FRONTAGE (or STREET FRONTAGE) — The width of a lot bordering on and
providing access to a public street but excluding limited access highways,
as defined by RSA 230:44, such as the Spaulding Turnpike, Route 16 and
associated accessways to the Milton town line.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:343
FUEL STORAGE — Bulk storage of fuel, natural gas, propane, gasoline,
or any petroleum-based products to be used for off-site distribution. "Fuel
storage" includes aboveground tanks, below-ground tanks, and storage
within fuel trucks when those trucks are parked on site overnight while
holding fuel. (See "tank storage facility.")
FUNCTION HALL (or PLACE OF ASSEMBLY) — A public, private, or
commercial facility, located in a building, established for the purpose of
hosting public and private events of a social, recreational, or civic nature.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial or cremation, related rituals, and storage and sale of caskets, urns,
and other related materials.
GARAGE — An attached or detached structure used primarily for the
storage of vehicles.
GAS STATION (or FILLING STATION) — A site where gasoline or other
petroleum products or fuels are sold/dispensed on a retail basis. Minor
vehicle maintenance is considered an accessory use.
GENERAL ORDINANCES — The entire body of ordinances adopted by the
City Council, of which this chapter is only one part.
GOLF COURSE — A property laid out with at least nine holes for playing
the game of golf. It may include a clubhouse with services to golfers. "Golf
course" does not include:
GREEN SPACE — A portion of a buildable lot that has been permanently set
aside as undeveloped land. (Also see "buildable lot" and "open space.")
GROCERY STORE — See "retail establishments."
HARDSCAPE (or HARDSCAPING) — Consists of the inanimate elements of
landscaping, especially any masonry work or woodwork. For example, stone
walls, concrete or brick patios, tile paths, wooden decks and wooden arbors
would all be considered part of the hardscape.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE/WASTE — Hazardous waste materials are
classified as such by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services under RSA 147-A:2.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
HEALTH CLUB — Also called a fitness studio, gym or exercise center,
having members who pay a fee to use its health and fitness facilities and
equipment, often including courses for aerobics, a wellness area, and rooms
for weight lifting, massage, etc., courts for handball, racquetball, etc., and,
often, a swimming pool, sauna, etc.
HELIPAD — A facility used for landings and takeoffs by helicopters as a
nonresidential accessory use.
A driving range except as an accessory use to a regular nine- or
eighteen-hole golf course; or
A.
B. Miniature golf facilities.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:344
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission of
the City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or business activity which is
conducted by a resident within his/her own dwelling or in a garage or
barn-type outbuilding and which is clearly subordinate to the principal
residential use. Home occupations are designated as home occupation-1, -2,
and -3. (See Article 24, Home Occupations.)
HOSPITAL — A large-scale and multi-departmental institution providing
medical and surgical care for the sick and injured, largely on an in-patient
basis. Related facilities may include outpatient departments, offices,
laboratories, training and teaching facilities, conference facilities, food
service, and dormitories. (See also "office, medical.")
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — Refer to RSA 72:23, III.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food within the
dwelling unit.
HOUSEHOLD PET — An animal that is customarily kept for personal use or
enjoyment within the home.
HOUSING UNIT SALES — A business engaged in the display and sale of
manufactured housing or presite built housing units.
IN-LAW APARTMENT — A semi-independent living area (not to exceed 400
square feet) that is part of a larger dwelling unit. An in-law apartment
may have its own bedroom, bathroom, and cooking facilities but it has no
separate walkable entrance to the outside. Access to the in-law apartment
is exclusively from within the larger dwelling unit such that the resident of
the in-law apartment is inextricably a member of the household occupying
the larger dwelling unit.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract of land that is planned, developed, and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses.
INDUSTRY (or MANUFACTURING) — The manufacture, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, processing, packaging, research, and development of
products.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — The processing or manufacturing of products
predominantly using basic raw materials or the significant use of
flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials, solvents or reactive
chemicals or which includes operations which result in significant noise,
glare, odor, dust, smoke, or vibration which can be detectable beyond
the building. Includes industries or processes which require large water
volumes or wastewater treatment needs and those which will generate
truck traffic trips that increase the background volumes by 10% or more
or which have truck traffic patterns likely to have a measurable impact on
noise levels between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in adjacent residential areas.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:345
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — Industry that works predominantly with previously
prepared, manufactured, or processed materials or parts. Light industry
generally includes assembly, fabrication, research and development, officetype
uses, most high technology production, and packaging.
INDUSTRY, RECYCLING — The Recycling Industrial District is established
to accommodate large-scale, land-intensive landfill, recycling, and junkyard
type uses on parcels 11 acres or larger.
JUNKYARD — A place used for storing and keeping, or storing and selling,
trading, or otherwise transferring old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags,
batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or
wrecked motor vehicles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, or other old or scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material. As used in this definition, the term includes,
but is not limited to, the following types of junkyards:
KENNEL (COMMERCIAL) — A commercial establishment for the boarding,
day care, breeding, training, and/or selling of dogs, cats, or other household
pets. Kennels are subject to the provisions found in RSA 466:6, Group
Licenses.
LANDSCAPING MATERIALS — Living trees, shrubs, ground cover, soils,
grass, fences, and other similar natural and decorative features.
LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENT-1 — A business providing clothing and linen
washing and drying services for walk-in retail customers, offered either as
self-service or as fee for service. A laundry establishment-1 does not exceed
1,000 square feet and no dry cleaning is performed on site.
LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENT-2 — A business providing clothing and linen
washing, drying, and/or dry-cleaning services for retail and wholesale
Automotive recycling yards, meaning a motor vehicle junkyard, as
identified in Subsection C, the primary purpose of which is to salvage
multiple motor vehicle parts and materials for recycling or reuse;
A.
Machinery junkyards, as defined in RSA 236:112, III; and [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B.
Motor vehicle junkyards, meaning any place, not including the principal
place of business of any motor vehicle dealer registered with the
Director of Motor Vehicles under RSA 261:104 and controlled under
RSA 236:126, where the following are stored or deposited in a quantity
equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles:
Motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for
legal use according to their original purpose, including motor
vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for
parts or for use of the metal for scrap; and/or
(1)
Used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper,
cordage, or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which
has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle.
(2)
C.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:346
customers, offered either as self-service or as fee for service. A laundry
establishment-2 does not exceed 3,000 square feet.
LAUNDRY ESTABLISHMENT-3 — A business providing large-scale
commercial/industrial clothing and linen washing, drying, and/or drycleaning
services.
LIVESTOCK — Animals raised as beasts of burden or as sources of meat,
milk, honey, leather, wool, or other products.
LOCAL ROAD — The lowest order road with the lowest traffic volumes and
design speeds. The primary functions of a local road are to provide access
to the property bordering it and to distribute that traffic to collector and
arterial roadways.
LODGING FACILITY — A facility offering short-term overnight
accommodations for paying transient guests. Visitors to a lodging facility
have their primary residence elsewhere.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat,
subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used,
developed, or built upon and as defined in RSA 674:24, II.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of area of a lot which is covered by
building footprints, decks, patios, other structures with impervious or
largely impervious surfaces, pavement, concrete, driveways, and parking
areas (whether paved, dirt, or gravel).
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line
(in most cases measured from the mid points of each).
LOT LINE, FRONT — The common boundary with the road right-of-way.
(For corner and double frontage lots see Article 19, Dimensional
Regulations.)
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building which contains one owneroccupied
dwelling unit and a short-term commercial lodging facility
operated by the owner-occupant. The facility contains up to six private
guest rooms with individual or shared bathrooms and no cooking
facilities. Meals may be offered to overnight guests only.
A.
HOTEL — A commercial lodging facility with private rooms or suites,
each having its own bathroom. Access to every guest room is through
a central lobby and interior corridors. Hotels may include other
accessory services oriented primarily to their overnight guests,
including function rooms, conference space, limited restaurants, and
limited shops.
B.
MOTEL (or MOTOR LODGE) — A commercial lodging facility with
private rooms, each having its own bathroom. One enters the guest
rooms directly from out of doors, either at ground level or via an upper
level open corridor.
C.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:347
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line opposite (and generally parallel or roughly
parallel to) the front property line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Those lot lines connecting the front and rear lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is described in a deed which was lawfully
recorded in the Strafford County Registry of Deeds prior to the enactment
of planning and zoning regulations in Rochester or which, if not so deeded,
is a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plan of which was lawfully
recorded in the Registry.
LOT WIDTH — The width of a lot measured in a straight line between the
side lot lines at the front lot setback line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting upon two or more
intersecting roads.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot with frontage on parallel streets (its
front and rear lot lines). (See also "lot, corner" and "lot, triple frontage"
in this section and double frontage lots under Article 19, Dimensional
Regulations.)
LOT, FLAG — A lot with less than the required frontage on a public road but
with sufficient buildable area at the rear. The access area is construed as
the "flagpole" with the rear area as the "flag."
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot or a double frontage lot.
LOT, TRIPLE FRONTAGE — A lot with frontage on three sides. (See also
"lot, corner" and "lot, double frontage" in this section and triple frontage
lots under Article 19, Dimensional Regulations.)
LOUNGE — See "eating and drinking establishments."
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure, meeting the federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, commonly
known as the HUD Code, transportable in one or more sections, which,
in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site has at least 320 square
feet of habitable space, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and
electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured housing as defined here
does not include presite built housing as defined in RSA
674:31-a.[Amended 9-6-2016]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK — A single parcel of land on which are
placed at least two or more manufactured housing units. Manufactured
housing units are placed on individual sites rather than individual platted
lots. Roads, utilities, and other infrastructure throughout the park are
privately owned. A manufactured housing park is specifically approved as
such by the Planning Board.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING SUBDIVISION — A major subdivision (i.e.,
involving construction of a new City road) of a parcel into individual
surveyed and platted lots for the placement of manufactured homes. A
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:348
manufactured housing subdivision is specifically approved as such by the
Planning Board.
MARINA — A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing
of boats. This includes land facilities for storage.
MEDICAL OFFICE — See "office, medical."
MINI-WAREHOUSE (or SELF-STORAGE) — One or more buildings
containing separate, self-contained, private storage spaces leased or rented
to individuals.
MINIMUM LOT AREA — The computed area contained within a lot that
meets the dimensional standards of this chapter, excluding very poorly
drained soils and steep slopes greater than 25%.
MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT — The computed area
contained within a lot for each additional dwelling unit that meets the
dimensional standards of this chapter, excluding very poorly drained soils
and steep slopes greater than 25%.
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured housing."
MODULAR HOUSING OR STRUCTURE (or PRESITE BUILT HOUSING) —
Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly
or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in off-site
manufacturing facilities in conformance with the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development minimum property standards and local
building codes, for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building
lot. A modular home is separate and distinct from a manufactured housing
unit.
MONUMENT PRODUCTION — The production and/or sales of markers for
gravestones generally made of stone, including the outside display and
storage of monuments.
MOTEL — See "lodging facility, motel."
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD — See "junkyard"
MULTIFAMILY — See "dwelling, multifamily."
MUSEUM (or EXHIBIT HALL) — A nonprofit, public, or commercial
institution operated principally for the purpose of acquiring, preserving,
and exhibiting to the public objects of historical, cultural, scientific, or
artistic interest. It may also sell related items of interest as an accessory
use.
NIGHTCLUB — See "eating and drinking establishments."
NON-BUILDABLE LAND — Land that cannot be built upon due to legal
restrictions such as covenants or easements.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which was lawfully established but which
does not conform to the current requirements of this chapter, as amended,
related to area, frontage, or other elements.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:349
NONCONFORMING PROPERTY — A lot, site, structure, or use which does
not conform to one or more requirements of this chapter, as amended,
but which was lawfully established prior to the adoption of the chapter
provision(s) with which it does not comply.
NONCONFORMING SITE — A development which was lawfully established
but which does not conform to one or more of the current requirements of
this chapter, as amended, related to any elements of site layout or design.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building or other structure which
was lawfully established but which does not conform to one or more of
the current requirements of this chapter, as amended, related to setback,
height, size, or other elements.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which was lawfully established but which
is no longer permitted in the zoning district, as amended, in which it is
located.
NURSING HOME (also called "convalescent home," "rehab center," "home
for the aged," "retirement home" or "rest home") — An extended or
intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide intensive
convalescent or chronic care to residents 24 hours per day. No formal
cooking facilities are included in the individual rooms/units. (See also
"assisted living facility" and "senior housing.")
OFFICE — A building, portion of a building, or leasable space in which
work of a predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical nature is
performed. It may contain multiple separate offices. An office is generally
furnished with desks, tables, files, computers, and office and
communications equipment. There are no walk-in retail consumer sales
nor services nor production/manufacture of any physical products for sale,
with any exceptions detailed in this chapter. An office may also be an
accessory use to a principal use such as a retail store or factory. "Office"
excludes "office, medical," "office, professional" and "retail services" (see
those definitions).
OFFICE, MEDICAL (or HEALTH CLINIC or MEDICAL FACILITY) — A
building, portion of a building, or leasable space in which on-site mental and
physical health care on an outpatient basis is provided. Practitioners may
include physicians, surgeons, nurses, dentists, chiropractors, psychologists,
mental health counselors, and other such similar health care professionals.
(Also see "hospital.")
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A building, portion of a building, or leasable
space housing professionals such as lawyers, architects, engineers,
surveyors, designers, teachers, accountants or others who through training
are qualified to perform services of a professional nature and where no
storage or sale of merchandise (other than limited incidental merchandise)
exists. "Office, professional" excludes "office," "office, medical" and "retail
services" (see those definitions).
OPEN SPACE — A separate lot ("open space lot") or portion of a buildable
lot (also called "green space") designated as protected, undeveloped land.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:350
(Also see "buildable lot" and "green space" in this section and open space
requirements in Article 19, Dimensional Regulations.)
PARCEL (or TRACT or LAND UNIT) — A lot, a portion of a lot, or multiple
lots (or portions thereof) on which development may occur.
PARKING FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — A parking lot or parking garage
used as an independent business venture for the short-term parking of
automobiles on an hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly basis for a fee.[Added
5-7-2019]
PARKING FACILITY, PUBLIC — A parking lot or parking garage, owned by a
municipal or public entity, used for the short-term parking of automobiles on
an hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly basis, and which may require permitting
or usage fees.[Added 5-7-2019]
PARKING GARAGE — A multilevel structure used for the storage of
automobiles.
PARKING LOT — An off-street, ground-level open area that provides storage
for motor vehicles.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION — A continuous perimeter foundation of
masonry constructed underneath a building in accordance with the City of
Rochester Building Codes.
PERMITTED USE — Any use allowed in a zoning district "by right" in
contrast to a conditional use, a use permitted by special exception, or an
accessory use. Nonetheless, there are numerous requirements which may
apply and there is a significant review process involved for most permitted
uses in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the Site
Plan Regulations and Subdivision Regulations. (Also see "accessory use,"
"conditional use," and "special exception" in this section and Article 20,
Standards for Specific Permitted Uses.)
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments serving
individual necessities, including but not limited to barbershops, beauty
salons and spas, massage services by masseurs/masseuses, personal
laundry/dry-cleaning services, tattoo parlors, and travel agencies.
PHARMACY — See "retail establishments."
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (or PUD) — A special zoning designation
that allows the owner of a large parcel of land to propose his/her own
development project largely independent of current land use requirements.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Rochester.
PLANT NURSERY — Land and associated structures, including
greenhouses, used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers, and other plants for sale
on site or at another location. Limited related landscaping and decorative
items are frequently sold on site as well.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision showing surveyed lot lines with bearings
and dimensions.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:351
PORCH — A roofed projecting structure connected to a building that may
be enclosed by screen, latticework, broad windows, or other light frame
walls extending from the main structure. A front porch is elevated above the
surface of the ground, has front steps, a railing, and porch posts or columns.
It provides direct access to the building but is not habitable year round.
PORKCHOP SUBDIVISION — A special subdivision that allows a limited
number of flag lots in order to help preserve scenic roads and discourage
development of new culs-de-sac on back lots. (See "porkchop subdivisions"
in Article 21, Conditional Uses.)
PRESITE BUILT HOUSING — See "modular housing."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which the principal use is conducted
(in contrast to an accessory structure). (Also see "accessory structure.")
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary activity that occurs on a lot, i.e., that
activity which is the most prominent and visible, engages the most people,
and has the most significant impacts. (Also see "accessory use" and
"secondary use.")
PRINTING FACILITY — A large-scale establishment (over 3,000 square feet)
for printing services. It is oriented toward commercial customers rather
than walk-in retail customers. (See also "retail services" which encompasses
photocopying.)
PRIVATE ROAD — A private travel way, providing access to two or more
lots, which has its own platted right-of-way, separate from any of those lots.
(Does not include "shared driveway.")
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — See "office, professional."
PROHIBITED USE — A use which is not specifically permitted by right, by
conditional use, or by special exception and which is not an accessory use.
RECREATION, INDOOR — A commercial facility within a building devoted
to active sports and recreation. "Indoor recreation" may include billiard
parlors, pinball/video arcades, health clubs, fitness centers, paintball,
bowling alleys, indoor sports arenas, swimming pools, and gymnasiums.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR — An open air commercial facility, including open
air roofed structures, devoted to active sports and recreation. "Outdoor
recreation" may include ball fields, miniature golf, driving ranges, archery
ranges, outdoor paintball, sports arenas, amusement parks, skating rinks,
swimming pools, tennis courts, cross-country ski centers, and water slides.
"Outdoor recreation" does not include shooting ranges or facilities with
individual motorized vehicles such as go-carts, race cars, or motorcycles.
RECREATION, PARK — A noncommercial outdoor passive or active
recreational facility serving the general public or residents of a particular
neighborhood. It is owned or managed by the government, a land developer,
a homeowners' association, or similar entity.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (or RV) — A vehicular-type portable structure
without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and is
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:352
primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational
and camping purposes. An RV is not considered a dwelling unit.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A type of solid waste facility that consists of
a building used for the collection, temporary storage, and/or processing
of recyclable material for efficient shipment by such means as baling,
compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting or cleaning.
When any of these activities occur outside of a fully enclosed building,
the use may be considered a junkyard. (See also "composting facility,"
"junkyard," "industry, recycling," and "solid waste facility.")
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A facility primarily used for
scientific or product research, investigation, testing, or experimentation.
Depending on the exact nature of the activities this use is also encompassed
by office, software development, light industry, or heavy industry
classifications.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision, established neighborhood,
apartment or townhouse complex, manufactured housing community, or
other multifamily development.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — A facility serving the same function (and
following the same requirements) as either a Community Residence-1 or
-2 but with more than six individual residents. (Also see "Community
Residence-1" and "Community Residence-2.")
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Vacant land zoned residential or land
currently in residential use.
RESTAURANT — See "eating and drinking establishments."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — See "eating and drinking
establishments."
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS —
ANTIQUE SHOP — A store that sells exclusively (or nearly exclusively)
antiques and collectibles. Under this chapter an antique or collectible
is a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, unusual functional
object, or the like, that is at least 30 years old. An antique does not
include any vehicles.
A.
CONVENIENCE STORE (or CORNER STORE) — A retail store
containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area which sells
everyday goods including freshly prepared food products, groceries,
household items, newspapers, magazines, over-the-counter drugs and
sundries. A convenience store does not include a gas station as an
accessory use.
B.
FLORIST — A retail sales operation involving the sales, arrangement,
and potting of flowers and small plants. This may include limited
cultivation of plants, limited sales of unpotted and larger plants, and
limited sales of decorative items as accessory uses.
C.
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:353
RETAIL SALES — A commercial operation that involves the display, sale,
and/or lease/rental of physical goods to the general public or businesses.
"Retail sales" does not involve the provision of personal or business
services, except where incidental to the sale of physical goods. (Also see
"retail services," "vehicle sales, new" and "vehicle sales, used.")
RETAIL SERVICES — See "retail establishments."[Added at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land used for the location of a street, walkway,
or utility line that is separate and distinct from the lots adjoining it. (Also
see "easement.")
GROCERY STORE — A retail store containing 2,000 square feet or more
of gross floor area which primarily sells prepackaged food products,
fresh produce, and meat but also may sell freshly prepared food and
other convenience and household goods. (Also see "convenience
store.")
D.
PHARMACY — A retail sales operation, not exceeding 3,000 square
feet, involving the filling of prescriptions and sale of over-the-counter
drugs, health and beauty products, and medical appliances and
equipment.
E.
RETAIL SERVICES — A facility for providing direct personal or business
services to walk-in customers. "Retail services" does not include retail
sales except for incidental items related to the service, as an accessory
use, or the leasing/rental of equipment or goods if stored on the
premises. (Also see "office," "retail sales," and "service establishment.")
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
F.
SECONDHAND SHOP — A retail establishment with a primary stock
of used or secondhand items with a maximum floor area up to 4,000
square feet.
G.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Retail, wholesale, and business services
of a more intensive nature than "retail services" including repair of
heavy equipment, machines with engines, and furniture involving the
significant use of chemicals; rental of large or heavy equipment; and
other miscellaneous activities with greater potential performance
impacts, as reasonably determined by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
H.
TRADE SHOP — A workshop with under 5,000 square feet used for
the building trades or for custom production, service, or repair work,
including but not limited to carpentry, plumbing, HVAC work, electrical
work, welding, furniture making and restoring, cabinetmaking, sign
making, upholstering, painting, fabrication and finish of stone work
such as grave markers, other monuments, counter tops and curbing,
and similar activities but excluding work related to vehicles or engines.
I.
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:354
ROADSIDE FARM STAND — A small-scale, informal roadside structure for
the seasonal sale of agricultural produce, flowers, Christmas trees, and
related goods, produced on site or at another location.
SAWMILL — A commercial operation providing sawing, milling, planing, or
similar services and products from timber.
SAWMILL, TEMPORARY — A portable facility for the sawing, milling,
planing, or similar processing of timber harvested from the site upon which
the temporary sawmill is located. (See "sawmill, temporary" under Article
23, Accessory Uses.)
SCHOOL, K-12 — A public, private, or parochial educational facility,
licensed by the State of New Hampshire, that provides a curriculum of
elementary and secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens,
elementary schools, junior high schools, and high schools.
SCHOOL, OTHER — A public, private, or commercial establishment that
provides a curriculum of academic, technical, or vocational instruction
beyond the high school level or one which offers instruction in other areas
such as music, arts, dance, martial arts, business, or driving.
SECONDARY USE — A use located on the same lot as a principal use but
which is clearly of lesser scale, impact, or visibility than the principal use. A
secondary use is not an accessory use as it is largely independent from the
principal use. (See also "accessory use" and "principal use.")
SECONDHAND SHOP — See "retail establishments."
SECURITY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit which is attached to or located
with an allowed primary business use and occupied by the business owner,
family member or employee whose accessory purpose is to provide security
and/or protection of the business premises. (See Article 23, Accessory
Uses.)
SENIOR HOUSING — A residential development for older persons who own
or rent their own independent dwelling units. Generally, little or no support
is provided on site for activities of daily living. Pursuant to RSA 354-A:15,
to qualify as senior housing a development is occupied solely by persons 62
years of age and older; at least 80% of the units within a development are
occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older; or the development
is defined as senior housing according to a formula acceptable to state or
federal housing authorities. (See also "assisted living facility" and "nursing
home.")
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — See "retail establishment."
SETBACK — The minimum distance from a lot boundary line that certain
types of structures or other objects, elements, or activities must be placed.
Setbacks are measured perpendicular to lot lines and extend for the full
width or depth of the lot, accordingly. (See "setback, general" and "setback,
special"; note that in common usage the term "setback" usually refers to
general setbacks.) (See the Tables of Dimensional Standards in Article 19.)
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:355
SETBACK AREA — An area on a lot within which a setback applies, i.e.,
within which certain types of structures may not be placed.
SETBACK, FRONT — The minimum setback established from the front
property line.
SETBACK, GENERAL — The minimum distance from a lot boundary line
from which buildings, roofed structures, open air decks, and porches must
be placed as specified in the Tables of Dimensional Standards in Article
19. (In common usage, general setbacks are usually simply referred to as
"setbacks.")
SETBACK, REAR — The minimum setback established from the rear
property line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The minimum setback established from the side
property lines.
SETBACK, SPECIAL — In addition to the setbacks listed in the Tables
of Dimensional Standards there are several use-specific and situationalspecific
setbacks noted throughout this chapter. The more restrictive
setback will apply.[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
SHARED DRIVEWAY — A private travel way providing access to two or
more lots by way of an easement across one or more of those lots. (Also see
"private road.")
SHELTER — A facility providing temporary daytime, evening, and/or
overnight shelter to homeless or indigent people or people in need of a
protective environment due to threatening circumstances. A shelter may
also provide food, personal care, and counseling services.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.[Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
SIGN — (For definitions of numerous sign types see Article 29, Signage.)
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, single-family."23
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:356
SITE PLAN — The plan for the development of one or more lots.
SITE PLAN REGULATIONS — The City of Rochester Site Plan Regulations.
SMALL WIND ENERGY — A wind energy conversion system consisting of
a wind generator, tower and associated control or conversion electronics,
which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less and which is used
primarily for on-site consumption.
SNACK BAR/CONCESSION STAND — An accessory facility which sells food
and beverages for consumption on the premises.
SOLAR PANEL — A panel that converts the sun's radiation into energy for
use.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — A location or system for resource recovery,
recycling, collection, source separation, storage, transportation,
processing, treatment or disposal of solid waste. Devices, equipment, and
other structures required or ordered to be installed at a solid waste facility
by the Department of Environmental Services, State of New Hampshire,
shall be deemed to be an accessory use of a solid waste facility. The
term "solid waste facility" includes devices, equipment, buildings, uses and
structures for the treatment, processing or beneficial use of by-products
resulting from the treatment, processing or disposal of solid waste (such as
landfill gas and landfill leachate).
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — The use of a building or lot, or a departure from
standards otherwise applicable, which may be permitted under this chapter
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "solid waste facility" shall
specifically exclude hazardous waste facilities including those
regulated under the NHDES Hazardous Waste Rules (New Hampshire
Code of Administrative Rules Chapters Env-Hw 100 to 1100) and socalled
waste-to-energy facilities involving the incineration of solid
waste. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A.
For the purpose of the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter
relative to the authorization and operation of a solid waste facility, all
definitions contained in Chapter 149-M of the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated and applicable regulations promulgated thereunder
(e.g., New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapters Env-Hw
100 to 1100) as presently enacted or the corresponding provision(s) of
any recodification or amendment thereof shall apply, unless a specific
and more restrictive definition of any applicable term shall be adopted
as part of this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B.
"Solid waste facility" includes, but is not limited to, composting facility,
junkyard, and recycling facility. (See also "composting facility,"
"junkyard" and "recycling facility.")
C.
23.Editor's Note: The definition of "single-unit dwelling" which immediately followed this
definition was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:357
only by approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, subject to meeting
certain criteria. (See Article 22, Special Exceptions.)
STABLE — A noncommercial facility used for the boarding and exercising of
horses or other farm or work animals as an accessory use. (See also "stable,
commercial.")
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — A commercial facility used for the boarding
and exercising of horses or other farm or work animals for financial
consideration and/or bartering of goods and services.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials that form a construction for
use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of land or water.
SUBDIVISION — The platting of a lot or the division of a lot, tract or parcel
of land into two or more lots, plots or sites (or as may be defined under the
Subdivision Regulations or RSA 672:14).
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A subdivision that is not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision that involves three lots or less.
SUBORDINATE — Secondary in importance.
TANK STORAGE FACILITY — An open air facility containing large,
aboveground containers for the bulk storage of material (other than fuel) in
liquid, powder or pellet form. (See also "fuel storage.")
TAVERN — See "eating and drinking establishments."
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure (such as a tent or
canopy) with a flexible sheathing material such as fabric, canvas, rubber,
or plastic used as a workplace or for the enclosure or storage of property,
vehicles, or animals. (See "temporary structures" under Article 23,
Accessory Structures.)
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue the use upon the expiration of the time period.
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any wireless
communications facility designed for short-term use only for a special event
or while a permanent wireless communications facility is under
construction.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
THEATER — A building or space devoted to motion pictures, dramatic and
musical performances and other entertainment before a live audience.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of trees from their
growing site and/or the attendant operation of mobile or portable chipping
mills and of cutting and skidding machinery, including the creation and use
of skid trails, skid roads, and haul roads.
TOWER — A support structure consisting of a monopole, guyed structure,
or freestanding multi-legged structure.24
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.2
1:358
TRADE SHOP — See "retail establishments."
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE — An operation providing passenger
transportation services with taxicabs, limousines, vans, buses, and other
such vehicles, where the vehicles are stored on site.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A site where cargo or containers are stored and
where trucks load and unload or transfer freight on a regular basis. It
may also include temporary storage areas for trucks and facilities servicing
trucks.
TWO FAMILY — See "dwelling, two-family."
UPLAND — All lands not defined as wetlands.
URBAN AGRICULTURE — The noncommercial growing of food and limited
animal husbandry in residential neighborhoods to support the individual
grower and/or his/her family. This would include the replacement of
ornamental plantings with food-producing plants and the raising of eggproducing
fowl specifically excluding roosters.
USE — The specific purpose or activity for which a building, structure, or
lot is arranged, intended, designed, occupied, utilized or maintained.
UTILITY, OTHER —
UTILITY, POWER GENERATION — A facility producing energy from gas,
oil, coal, wood, nuclear, waste, hydro, and other materials for commercial
purposes.
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter, not otherwise
permitted within the subject zoning district, which may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment (see Article 4, Zoning Board of Adjustment).
VEGETATIVE BUFFER, DENSE — A natural and/or planted vegetative
buffer which shall provide year-round screening, e.g., evergreen plantings.
VEHICLE (or MOTOR VEHICLE) — Any self-propelled device that uses
an internal combustion, battery-powered, or electric engine and which
requires a valid registration legally issued by a governmental authority
in order to be operated on a public way. "Vehicle" includes automobiles,
trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, motor homes, motorized campers,
motorcycles, motor scooters, off-road vehicles, all-terrain vehicles,
snowmobiles, tractors, other farm vehicles, construction vehicles, and
boats.
A. A facility providing any form of broadband services.
B. A facility producing or treating gas, water or wastewater, or sewage.
These facilities are commercial and industrial by nature but may be
privately owned.
C.
24.Editor's Note: The definition of "townhouse" which immediately followed this definition
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 275-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.2
1:359
VEHICLE SALES, NEW — A business engaged in the sale of primarily new
vehicles or other large equipment items which are customarily stored and
displayed out of doors or in the rental or leasing of such vehicles and
equipment. For a dealer of new vehicles, servicing and repair of vehicles is
considered an accessory use.
VEHICLE SALES, USED — A business engaged in the sale of three or more
new or used vehicles. Light repairs on, and preparation of, those specific
vehicles offered for sale on site is considered an accessory use.
VEHICLE SERVICE — A business engaged in the servicing, cleaning, repair,
and/or body restoration of vehicles.
VETERINARY CLINIC — A facility used by one or more licensed
veterinarians to provide health care for animals. Overnight care is not
provided except as part of the necessary medical treatment of an animal.
"Veterinary clinic" may also include animal grooming.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials, whether for the building owner or for other parties. A warehouse
may be an accessory use to a retail or industrial operation, generally carried
out in another building or other section of the same building. An office may
be an accessory use to a warehouse.25
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (or WCF) — Any towers, poles,
or other support structures, attached antennas, and accessory structures
and elements used for the transmission or reception of signals for radio,
television, paging systems, personal communications services, cellular
telephone systems, or for any other spectrum-based systems. Mobile vehicle
mounted or transported systems, such as used for mobile news
organizations, are not considered wireless communications facilities under
this chapter. See "alternate tower structure," "antenna" and
"tower."[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
YARD SALE, COMMERCIAL — The outdoor sale of used items in a manner
that does not meet the standards established for residential yard sales
specified under Article 23, Accessory Uses.
YARD SALE, RESIDENTIAL — An outdoor sale of used personal or
household items held on the seller's premises. Also known as "garage sale,"
"yard sale," "rummage sale," "tag sale," "attic sale," "moving sale," or "junk
sale." Allowed as an accessory use in residential districts. (See Article 23,
Accessory Uses.)
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT — A development plan where singlefamily
dwellings are placed right up to or very close to one of the side lot
lines. The same side setback is reduced to near zero for all of the houses on
a block in order to create a larger usable side yard on the opposite side.
25.Editor's Note: The definition of "wireless communications facility" which immediately
followed this definition was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 275-2.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-2.3
1:360
§ 275-2.3. Abbreviations. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
When the following abbreviations are used in this chapter, they shall have
the meaning attached:
DBH Diameter at Breast Height
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FCC Federal Communications Commission
HDC Historic District Commission
NHDES The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
PUD Planned Unit Development
RSA The New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
ZBA The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Rochester
Where no definition is listed in the above article refer to the City's Chief
Planner.
§ 275-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2.3
1:361

ARTICLE 3
Administration
§ 275-3.1. General provisions.
A. Zoning Administrator. This chapter shall be administered and
interpreted by the Zoning Administrator, who shall be appointed by the
Rochester City Manager. The City Manager may, at his/her option,
designate a different individual to serve as Zoning Enforcement Officer,
with responsibility for enforcing this chapter. If the City Manager does
not make such a separate appointment, enforcement responsibilities
shall be vested in the Zoning Administrator. Furthermore, the Zoning
Administrator and Zoning Enforcement Officer may assign or designate
all or some of their duties to others subject to approval of the City
Manager.
B. Appeals. Any person who believes that the Zoning Administrator has
made an error in any interpretation or application under this chapter
may appeal that decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as an
administrative appeal. (See Article 4, Zoning Board of Adjustment.)
C. Recourse for prohibited uses. Where an applicant is informed that his/
her proposed project does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter, if the applicant nonetheless believes that there is justification
for the project then he/she has four options:
(1) Appeal. Appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if
the administrative decision is believed to be incorrect (see Article
4, Zoning Board of Adjustment);
(2) Variance. Apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a variance if
it is believed that special circumstances surrounding the property
justify a departure from the requirements of this chapter (see
Article 4, Zoning Board of Adjustment);
(3) Map amendment. Apply for a map amendment to rezone the
subject property to a zoning district which permits the desired use
or activity (see § 275-3.5, Amendments, below); or
(4) Text amendment. Apply for a text amendment to accommodate the
desired use or activity within the existing zoning district (see
§ 275-3.5, Amendments, below).
D. Fees. Application fees and other pertinent fees may be established
under this chapter. Fees shall be established specifically as part of this
chapter or separately by the Rochester City Council.
E. Outside review. As outlined in RSA 676:4, I(g), any applicant may be
assessed reasonable fees to cover the cost of special investigative
studies, review and inspections by outside consultants, and review of
documents by the City Attorney.
§ 275-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3.1
1:363
F. Entering property.
(1) The Zoning Administrator and the Zoning Enforcement Officer (if
different from the Zoning Administrator), and their staff, shall have
the authority to make any on-site inspections which might be
necessary to carry out their duties in the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Furthermore, every applicant for a permit or approval under this
chapter or under the Site Plan Regulations or the Subdivision
Regulations, by virtue of submitting the application, shall be
deemed to have consented to any inspection(s) of the subject
property that may be reasonably necessary for the City's officials,
employees, board members, or other agents to make informed
decisions relative to the application and to determine compliance
after approval with the subject permit or approval.
(3) Refusal by an applicant to consent to such inspection may be
grounds for denial of any permit or approval where such inspection
is reasonably necessary to make any determinations relevant to the
application.
(4) It is understood that any City officials must use all due care and
consideration when entering property under this chapter.
G. Vesting. See RSA 674:39 in relation to vesting of projects.
H. Government land uses and development. See RSA 674:54 in relation to
use and development by government agencies.
I. Public uses. For all public uses, in addition to the provisions of RSA
674:54, it is requested of local, state, and federal governments that a
public hearing before the Planning Board be held, with certified notices
to abutters and posting of a public notice at least 10 days in advance of
the public hearing, and that the following be submitted to the Planning
Board:
(1) A statement indicating the need for the facility or use, the criteria
used in selecting a site, the location of alternative sites that were
considered, and the reasons for selecting the specific site;
(2) A statement discussing conformity with this chapter, the intent of
this chapter, the Site Plan Regulations and/or Subdivision
Regulations, the Master Plan, and other governmental policies and
plans;
(3) A report about potential impacts and plans to mitigate impacts
(including traffic and other impacts listed in Article 28,
Performance Standards); and
(4) All documentation, materials, and engineering detail ordinarily
required under the Site Plan Regulations.
§ 275-3.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-3.1
1:364
§ 275-3.2. Effect of other laws. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 275-3.3. Permitting.
No application shall be approved nor shall any permit or approval be issued
except in compliance with all pertinent provisions of this chapter and all
requirements imposed under site plan and subdivision review. Where a
proposal is subject to site plan or subdivision review, no permit or approval
shall be issued until that review is conducted unless otherwise
appropriately waived or adjusted. The following permits are required under
this chapter (and under other sections of this chapter):
J. Pending ordinance changes. In accordance with RSA 676:12,
concurrent with the adoption of this chapter, the Rochester City Council
also votes to be subject to the provisions of RSA 676:12, I, wherein once
the first legal notice for a proposed change in this chapter is published
pursuant to RSA 675:7, unless exempted by RSA 676:12, VI, no building
permit may be issued for any use or activity which would not be
permitted under the proposed zoning change. Once final action is taken
on the proposed zoning change, the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services may issue or deny the building permit based upon
whether the zoning in place at that time (after final action) allows the
use or activity or not.
K. Designee. Any City official or board or commission may designate any
particular task or responsibility under this chapter to another official or
board or commission, unless otherwise prevented from doing so by law.
A. Most restrictive provision. Where a provision of this chapter differs
from any provision contained in any other applicable statute,
regulation, ordinance, code, standard, or policy, that provision which
imposes the greatest restriction or the highest standard shall govern.
B. Overriding state or federal law. Where any state or federal law
overrides any provision(s) of this chapter, the state or federal law shall
be determining and any affected portions of this chapter may be
disregarded or interpreted as necessary to comport with the overriding
law.
A. Building permit. No building or other structure as required by the City
of Rochester Building Code, as amended, shall be constructed, altered,
enlarged, or moved unless a building permit for such action has been
issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services. In
accordance with RSA 676:13, I, no building permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any building or activity unless it is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Sign permit. No sign regulated by Article 29 shall be installed, erected,
placed, displayed, altered, or enlarged unless a sign permit for such
§ 275-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3.3
1:365
§ 275-3.4. Enforcement.
action has been issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services.
C. Fence permit. No fence or wall regulated by Article 23, Accessory Uses,
shall be installed, erected, or expanded unless a fence permit has been
issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services.
D. Driveway permit. No driveway, access point, or curb cut connecting a
lot to a public road shall be constructed or installed unless a driveway
permit has been issued in accordance with all requirements of this
chapter and all other City, state, and federal regulations and policies.
The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services or
Commissioner of Public Works may waive the requirement for issuance
of a specific driveway permit accessing a City road where a site plan
application indicating details of the proposed driveway or access point
has been duly approved by the Planning Board.
E. Certificate of occupancy. No building or structure hereafter erected or
altered (wholly or partly) or moved shall be used or occupied until the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services has issued a
certificate of occupancy for the building or structure specifying the use
to which it may be put. The Director may withhold issuance of a
certificate of occupancy pending completion of required site
improvements; compliance with this chapter and the Site Plan
Regulations/Subdivision Regulations; compliance with any conditions of
approval; compliance with pertinent City, state, and federal
requirements; and submission of required information and
documentation; and for other appropriate reasons. (See RSA 676:13.)
F. Foundation certification. Footings/foundations for all new building
construction shall be certified by a State of New Hampshire licensed
land surveyor prior to any further construction.
A. This chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions set
forth in RSA 676:15, 676:17, 676:17-a, 676:17-b and other applicable
law.
B. It is the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this
chapter.
C. Any and all appropriate measures may be taken to enforce this chapter
and to prevent, restrain, correct, abate, or mitigate any alleged
violations, including, but not limited to, issuing notices of violation,
cease-and-desist orders, fines and penalties, local land use citations,
injunctions, or warnings; withholding of permits or approvals, where
applicable; seeking to negotiate a reasonable solution with the alleged
violator; or referring the alleged violations to the City Solicitor or the
City of Rochester Police Department, or to other local, state, and
federal agencies. See RSA 676:15 to 676:17-b.
§ 275-3.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-3.4
1:366
§ 275-3.5. Amendments.
D. The owner of record of a property is responsible for ensuring that his/
her/its property complies in full with all provisions of this chapter.
E. Any person, partnership, association, company, corporation or
individual who or which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any other person
and, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall
be punished by a civil fine as set forth in RSA 676:17.
F. Every violation of these regulations shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
G. Safe site conditions. Any person, company, or other entity who or which
has been served with a notice and ceases any work or other activity
shall not leave any structure or lot in such a condition as to be a hazard
to public health or safety or a detriment to the general welfare.
H. Where any successful legal action is brought by the City to enforce this
chapter, the City may recover its out-of-pocket costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees actually expended in pursuing the legal action (in
accordance with RSA 676:17, II).
A. Procedure. The procedure for amending this chapter is specified in RSA
675:2 and 675:7. Amendments to this chapter may be initiated by any
citizen, the Planning Board, the City Council, the Mayor, the City
Manager, or any department or other City board or commission in
accordance with this chapter. The chronological steps for enacting
zoning amendments are as follows:
(1) Petition form. A blank petition form is obtained from the Planning
and Development Department.
(2) Submission.
(a) The petition is completed and returned to the City Clerk's
office along with a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.) and any
other pertinent materials. In the case of text amendments (see
Subsection B below) the petition shall include specific
proposed language.
(b) The fee is not charged, and the formal petition form need not
be used, for amendments initiated by any board, commission,
department, or other City official acting in an official capacity.
(3) The City Clerk's office forwards a copy of the petition to the
Planning and Development Department.
(4) Deadline. See RSA 675:2 and 675:7.
(5) Council consideration.
§ 275-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3.5
1:367
(a) The petition is placed on the City Council agenda for
consideration. At its discretion, the Council may deny the
petition at this stage. If acceptable, it is sent to the City
Attorney to place it into legal form.
(b) At the discretion of the City Manager, this step may be skipped
and the petition may be sent directly to the City Attorney to
place into legal form.
(6) Legal form. The City Attorney places the petition into legal form.
(7) First reading. City Council holds first reading on the petition. At its
discretion the Council may deny the petition at this stage. When a
petition is denied at any stage, the Council may elect to initiate an
alternative amendment or to request that the Planning Board
formulate an alternative amendment.
(8) Planning Board recommendation.
(a) The Planning Board makes a formal recommendation on the
petition. The Board must make its recommendation within 45
days of first reading. At its discretion, the City Council may
extend this time frame up to an additional 30 days.
(b) If the Planning Board recommends against a zoning
amendment, a two-thirds vote of the City Council shall be
required to adopt the amendment. If the Planning Board does
not submit a recommendation within 45 days of first reading
(or as may be extended by the City Council) or if it does not
make a recommendation, then it shall be deemed a favorable
recommendation for the purpose of this subsection herein.
(c) Where the Planning Board initiates an amendment, the
proposal shall not be sent to the Board for a recommendation.
(9) Public hearing. A public hearing is held, either by the full City
Council or by a subcommittee of the City Council. The public notice
must be placed in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10
days prior to the public hearing and it must be posted in at least
two public locations. The full text of the proposed amendment need
not be included in the notice if an adequate statement describing
the proposal is stated in the notice.
(10) Second reading.
(a) Second reading is held and the amendment is either adopted or
denied. Any proposed amendment shall require a majority
affirmative vote of Council members present in order to pass
except where the Planning Board has recommended denial (as
discussed above). The City Council shall take final action on
any petition within 120 days of first reading (except in the case
of protest petitions; see Subsection C below).
§ 275-3.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-3.5
1:368
(b) The Council may make minor changes to the proposed
amendment at second reading/adoption, provided the
amendment remains substantially the same as that which was
advertised for the public hearing.
(11) Filing. A copy of any approved zoning amendments is placed on file
with the City Clerk for public inspection. A copy is also sent to the
New Hampshire Office of Energy and Planning.
B. Types of amendments. There are two types of zoning amendments as
follows. The procedure for amendments is the same except where
noted.
(1) Map amendment (also called a "rezoning"), where the zoning
district for a lot, parcel, multiple lots, or a part of a lot is changed.
(2) Text amendment, where written language in this chapter is
changed.
C. Protest petition.
(1) In accordance with RSA 675:5, adoption of an amendment that is
the subject of a protest petition shall require a favorable vote of 2/3
of all the members of the City Council present and voting. In order
to qualify as a protest petition, a protest against a proposed map
amendment must be signed by either:
(a) The owners of 20% of the gross land area included in the
proposed change; or
(b) The owners of 20% of the land area situated within 100 feet
immediately adjacent to the land contained in the proposed
change or land across a road from the land contained in the
proposed change.
(2) The address of the subject property must be included on the
petition and the property owners signing the petition must identify
themselves on the petition by name and address so that the City
Clerk may identify them as interested and affected parties.
(3) The protest petition must be submitted to the City Clerk at least
seven days prior to the date at which second reading is scheduled.
Copies of the protest petition will be distributed to City Council
members.
(4) Any individual protest petition may apply to only one proposed
zoning amendment. Separate protest petitions must be submitted
for multiple amendments.
(5) In the case of a protest petition, the City Council shall act within
120 days of the date of first reading.
§ 275-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-3.5
1:369

ARTICLE 4
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building Code Board of Appeals
§ 275-4.1. Powers of Board.
The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building Code Board of
Appeals shall include those prescribed in RSA 674:33, 674:33-a, and 674:34,
as amended.
A. Administrative appeals. In accordance with RSA 676:5, the Board shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the City of Rochester in the
administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this chapter.
B. Variances.
(1) The Board may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a variance
from the terms of this chapter if it determines that all of the
following conditions are met:
(a) The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
(b) The spirit of this chapter is observed;
(c) Substantial justice is done;
(d) The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
(e) Literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
result in an unnecessary hardship, as follows:
[1] For purposes of this condition, "unnecessary hardship"
means that, owing to special conditions of the property
that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
[a] No fair and substantial relationship exists between the
general public purposes of the chapter provision and
the specific application of that provision to the
property; and
[b] The proposed use is a reasonable one.
[2] If the criteria in Subsection B(1)(e)[1] above are not
established, an unnecessary hardship will be deemed to
exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the
property that distinguish it from other properties in the
area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict
conformance with this chapter, and a variance is therefore
necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.
(2) The Board shall determine whether to grant a variance by voting on
each of the criteria in Subsection B(1) separately. The Board shall
§ 275-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4.1
1:371
grant a variance only if each of the five criteria receives at least
three votes in the affirmative. [Added 12-5-2017]
(3) Each criteria receiving at least three votes in the affirmative or
negative must include findings of fact to support such vote; said
findings of fact must each receive at least three votes in the
affirmative. [Added 12-5-2017]
(4) Notwithstanding Subsection B(1) and (2), the Board may grant a
variance from the terms of this chapter without a finding of a
hardship arising from conditions of a premises subject to this
chapter when reasonable accommodations are necessary to allow a
person or persons with a recognized physical disability to reside in
or regularly use the premises, provided that: [Amended
12-5-2017]
(a) Any variance granted under this subsection shall be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter;
and
(b) In granting any variance pursuant to this subsection, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may provide, in a finding included
in the variance, that the variance shall survive only so long as
the particular person has a continuing need to use the
premises.
C. Special exceptions.
(1) The Board grants special exceptions for particular uses and
activities as listed in the Tables of Uses in Article 18, Use
Regulations, and as articulated in Article 22, Special Exceptions.
(2) The Board shall grant a special exception only if it reasonably
determines that all of the following base criteria are met (in
addition to those criteria and conditions included for specific uses
in Article 22):
(a) Location. The specific site is an appropriate location for the
proposed use or structure;
(b) Neighborhood. The proposed use would not be detrimental,
injurious, obnoxious, or offensive to the neighborhood;
(c) Traffic. The proposed use would not create an undue hazard or
nuisance to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(d) Public facilities. Adequate and appropriate facilities and
utilities would be provided to ensure the proper operation of
the proposed use or structure; and
(e) Master Plan. The proposed use or structure is consistent with
the spirit of this chapter and the intent of the Master Plan.
§ 275-4.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-4.1
1:372
D. Equitable waivers.
(1) When a lot, other division of land, or structure is discovered to be in
violation of a physical layout or dimensional requirement of this
chapter, the ZBA shall, upon application by the property owner,
with the burden of proof being on the property owner, grant an
equitable waiver from that specific requirement only if the Board
makes all of the following findings:
(a) Late discovery. The violation was not noticed or discovered by
any owner, former owner, owner's agent or representative, or
municipal official until after a structure in violation had been
substantially completed, or until after a lot or other division of
land in violation had been subdivided by conveyance to a bona
fide purchaser for value;
(b) Good faith error. The violation was not an outcome of
ignorance of the law, failure to inquire, obfuscation,
misrepresentation, or bad faith on the part of any owner,
owner's agent or representative, but was instead caused by
either a good faith error in ordinance interpretation or
applicability made by a municipal official in the process of
issuing a permit over which that official had authority;
(c) No adverse impact. The violation does not constitute a public
or private nuisance, nor diminish the value of other property in
the area, nor interfere with or adversely affect any present or
permissible future uses of any such property; and
(d) Cost of correction. Due to the degree of past construction or
investment made in ignorance of the facts constituting the
violation, the cost of correction so far outweighs any public
benefit to be gained that it would be inequitable to require the
violation to be corrected.
(2) Ten years passage. In lieu of the findings required under
Subsection D(1)(a) and (b) immediately above, the owner may
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that the violation has
existed for at least 10 years and that no enforcement action,
including written notice of violation, has been commenced against
the violation during that time by the City or any person directly
affected.
E. Administrative appeals under the Building Code. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment functions as the Building Code Board of Appeals. Upon an
appeal filed by any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building
Inspector dealing with the Building Code, the ZBA may vary the
application of any provision of the Building Code in any particular case
when, in its opinion, the enforcement of the Building Code would do
manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of
the Building Code and the public interest.
§ 275-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4.2
1:373
§ 275-4.2. Additional provisions.
§ 275-4.3. Procedures.
A. Minimum vote to approve. The concurring vote of at least three
members of the Board is required to approve any application or to
overturn any decision of an administrative official (RSA 674:33, III).
B. Assuming powers of administrative official. In exercising its powers
under § 275-4.1A and B above, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and may make such order or decision as
ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
C. Setting conditions. In granting any approval under § 275-4.1 above, the
Board may stipulate any reasonable conditions it deems necessary as
part of that approval.
D. Deadline for administrative appeal. Any administrative appeal to the
Board under § 275-4.1A and E above must be filed within the time frame
specified in the Board's bylaws.
E. Stay of proceedings. The effect of an appeal, including suspension of
permits and stay of proceedings, shall be as stated in RSA 676:6.
F. Submitted materials. Any documentation, drawings, renderings, or
other physical materials submitted to the Board by the applicant or his/
her agent concerning features of proposed buildings, structures, sites,
parking, uses, signage and other elements shall be deemed conditions
of the approval (subject to appropriate adjustment and modification)
where:
(1) It was clearly indicated or implied that the applicant intended to
develop/use the property in accordance with the materials
submitted; and
(2) The Board clearly relied upon the nature of the design or proposal
contained in the materials in its approval.
G. Submission requirements. The ZBA may stipulate what particular
information is required in order to properly review an application. The
Board may continue or postpone any review where insufficient
information or documentation is submitted.
A. Public hearings.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on
every application that comes before the Board. A public notice of
the public hearing shall be posted and notification of abutters shall
be mailed for each application according to the process described
in RSA 676:7.
§ 275-4.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-4.3
1:374
§ 275-4.4. Administration.
(2) The Board shall hear all abutters; holders of conservation,
preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions; and all nonabutters
who can demonstrate that they are affected directly by the
proposal under consideration. The Board may hear non-abutters as
it reasonably deems appropriate.
(3) Any party may appear in person or be represented by his/her agent
or attorney at the public hearing.
(4) Any interested party may also submit comments to the Board,
either in advance of the hearing or at the hearing.
B. Rehearing procedures. Procedures for rehearings before the ZBA are
prescribed in RSA 677:2 and 677:3.
C. Appeal process. The process for appealing ZBA decisions is prescribed
in RSA 677:4 through 677:14 and 677:16.
A. Membership.
(1) Pursuant to RSA 673:3 and 673:6, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall consist of five members plus up to five alternates. In
accordance with Section 74 of the Rochester City Charter, the
Mayor shall appoint members annually for staggered three-year
terms. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired terms.
(2) A member may be removed from the Board for cause in accordance
with RSA 673:13.
B. Rules of procedure. The ZBA shall adopt rules of procedure/bylaws to
govern its business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and RSA 676:1.
C. Conflict of interest. Members shall be disqualified from participating in
the hearing of any issue where there is a conflict of interest in
accordance with RSA 673:14 and the Board's rules of procedure.
D. Fees. The City Council shall set fees for applications submitted to the
ZBA.
§ 275-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4.4
1:375

ARTICLE 5
Residential Zoning Districts
§ 275-5.1. General terms.
The uses permitted by right, conditionally, or by special exception are
displayed in Table 18-A, Residential Uses. Dimensional regulations are
displayed in Table 19-A, Dimensional Standards - Residential
Districts.26Other applicable requirements for development within any
residential zoning district are presented throughout this chapter.
§ 275-5.2. General development standards.
The following standards apply to all property in the "R" Districts:
A. Driveways.
(1) Driveway location. Where site plan or subdivision review is
required, the location of the driveway will be determined by the
Planning Board during its review and after input from the
Department of Public Works. If the location of any driveway needs
to be modified during the permitting process for the driveway, the
applicant shall notify the Planning and Development Department. If
the modification is determined to be minor by the Chief Planner, it
shall be approved administratively without the need to go back to
the Planning Board.
B. Parking areas.
(1) Side and rear setbacks. Parking areas/parking lots shall not be
located in front setback areas (see definition in Article 2), nor
forward of the front facade except for parking situated within
clearly defined driveways. Parking areas/parking lots shall be
located in the side or rear.
(2) Screening from the street. All parking areas/parking lots, except
for parking situated within clearly defined driveways, for all uses
other than single- or two-family dwellings shall be fully screened
from the street unless it is located in rear setbacks.
(3) Screening from abutters. All parking areas/parking lots, except for
parking situated within clearly defined driveways, for all uses other
than single- or two-family dwellings shall be fully screened from
abutting properties.
(4) Off street or designated spaces. All parking must be situated off
street, outside of the public right-of-way, except for parking in
marked and designated on-street parking lanes/spaces.
C. Garages and outbuildings.
26.Editor's Note: The tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 275-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5.2
1:377
§ 275-5.3. Residential-1 and Residential-2 Districts (R1 and R2).
§ 275-5.4. Agricultural District (AG). [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
The AG District includes mostly outlying areas of the City; such areas may
or may not be serviced by City water or sewer services.
(1) No part of any freestanding or attached garage or other
outbuilding shall be located in the front setback (see definition for
"setback, front" in Article 2).
(2) No freestanding garage or other outbuilding/structure which
exceeds 200 square feet may be made of prefabricated metal or
undressed poured concrete (except for foundations).
A. Character of districts. The primary goals of the R Districts are:
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) To enhance these older residential areas through sensitive, smallscale
infill construction, building renovation, and redevelopment;
and
(2) To foster new development in remaining open areas.
B. The R1 District is intended to allow single-family neighborhoods and
thus allows single-family use with few other allowed uses. The R2
District allows for a mix of residential types and limited nonresidential
uses.
A. Objectives. The objectives of the district are to:
(1) Preserve the rural character of outlying areas of the City. The
district includes many sensitive ecological, agricultural, historic,
cultural, and archaeological resources.
(2) Maintain the area's natural and scenic qualities embodied in its
forests and fields, wetlands, streams, ponds, and historic
farmsteads.
(3) Promote the preservation of open space.
(4) Preserve existing farms and promote expansion of agricultural
activity.
(5) Permit the establishment of recreational, resort, and tourism
facilities based upon natural and cultural resources.
B. Specific development standards.
(1) The development of conservation and village plan alternative
subdivisions is encouraged for the protection of open space and to
§ 275-5.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-5.4
1:378
§ 275-5.5. Neighborhood Mixed-Use District (NMU).
protect the ecological, agricultural, historic, cultural, and
archaeological resources of any site.
(2) All nonresidential uses, except agricultural uses, shall require
additional setbacks and/or dense buffering to eliminate impacts to
other allowed uses in the zone.
A. District location. This district is located in various areas throughout the
City.
B. Objectives. The objectives of the district include:
(1) Function. The Neighborhood Mixed-Use District is established
largely to serve adjacent residential neighborhoods. The NMU
District allows, for example, a small convenience store, laundry
facility, real estate office, personal services establishment, and daycare
center.
(2) Character of district.
(a) Smaller in scale, in area of coverage, size of buildings, and
scope of operations.
(b) Located at the edge of neighborhoods, on or in very close
proximity to collector and arterial roads.
(c) Well connected to those neighborhoods.
(3) Design. The NMU District calls for thoughtful design of parking,
lighting, signage, architecture, location of entrances, location of
dumpsters, and other matters. Parking should be located on street
(parallel or diagonal) or through well located and screened small
lots in side or rear yards.
(4) Appropriate locations. The NMU District might also be located
close to public institutions like schools, churches, day-care centers,
senior citizen centers, and recreation centers, as well as at transit
stops.
C. Development standards.
(1) Uses.
(a) Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities are permitted
in the district by conditional use.
(b) Outdoor uses. Outdoor uses, such as dining, cafes, and seating
(all of which shall be accessory to an allowed primary approved
use), may be established within the public right-of-way or on
other City property by approval of the City Council.
§ 275-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5.5
1:379
(c) Nonresidential uses are permitted by right in existing
buildings only; nonresidential uses are permitted as new
construction only by conditional use.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Build-to zone. There is a build-to zone between zero and 20
feet. This zone may be altered by conditional use where
appropriate for civic uses, where not practical, or for other
design considerations.
(b) Side/rear setbacks. There are no minimum side setbacks
except for spacing between buildings as specified in the
Building/Fire Code. The Planning Board may alter the rear
setbacks by conditional use, where appropriate, such as to
accommodate rear decks for dining, to accommodate
pedestrian-oriented facilities, or to allow for optimal uses of
lots consistent with the intent of this section, provided that any
reduction does not interfere with or negatively impact abutting
properties, particularly residential properties.
(3) Parking areas.
(a) Rear setbacks. Within the NMU District parking is allowed in
rear yards but may be permitted in side yards by conditional
use. Parking is not allowed in front yards.
(4) Architectural standards.
(a) The building footprint for any individual nonresidential
building shall not exceed 4,000 square feet. The maximum
length of building frontage is 75 feet. The Planning Board may
waive either of these requirements by conditional use where it
determines that the intent of providing for smaller-scale
buildings in the NMU Zone is met through special design
approaches.
(b) The architectural regulations under the Site Plan Regulations
should be strictly applied to ensure that new buildings and
renovations are harmonious with the character of nearby
residential neighborhoods.
§ 275-5.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-5.5
1:380
ARTICLE 6
Commercial Zoning Districts
[Amended 1-12-2016]
§ 275-6.1. Introduction.
The Downtown Master Plan provides guidance in revitalizing the downtown.
It is hoped that downtown Rochester remains the heart of the City, as an
active place that is densely populated and used by all citizens, in different
ways and at different times. It is emphasized that carefully crafted laws,
pertaining to driveway access, parking, signage, lighting, and building
layout and design, are necessary to ensure that the Downtown Commercial
District remains vibrant.
§ 275-6.2. General terms.
Uses which are permitted by right, conditionally, or by special exception are
listed in Article 18, Use Regulations. Dimensional regulations are presented
in Article 19, Dimensional Regulations. Other applicable requirements for
development within commercial zoning districts are presented throughout
this chapter.
§ 275-6.3. Downtown Commercial District (DC).
A. Pedestrian orientation. The DC, NMU and OC Zoning Districts have a
strong pedestrian orientation. The districts are structured to
accommodate the automobile as well, but not at the expense of
pedestrian character.
B. Automobile orientation. The HC, and some areas of the OC, Districts
have a strong automobile orientation. Nonetheless, quality of design
and attention to pedestrian character is still important in these zones as
people will still be walking to and within the sites.
A. District location. The most intensive pedestrian-oriented commercial
area in the City is the DC District where there is the strongest sense of
enclosure. Buildings are predominantly multistory, of masonry
construction, and built right to the sidewalk, with a clear, consistent,
relatively uninterrupted street wall (with the side walls of buildings
butting up to each other).
B. Objectives.
(1) Provide for a mix of uses within the zone.
(2) Preserve existing historic architectural structures and designs.
(3) Provide for the adaptive reuse of existing historic and non-historic
structures.
(4) Encourage commercial and City-wide redevelopment.
§ 275-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6.3
1:381
(5) Provide for safe pedestrian and non-automotive travel within the
district.
(6) Provide for minimum to no restrictions on hours of operations.
(7) Encourage both rental and ownership opportunities for residential
housing in the district.
C. Development standards.
(1) Uses.
(a) (Reserved)27
(b) Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities are permitted
in the DC District by conditional use only. Where permitted,
they must be situated in the rear of the building or in the side
of the building only if location at the rear is not practical.
(c) Outdoor uses. Outdoor uses, such as dining, cafes, seating (all
of which shall be accessory to an allowed primary approved
use) and sidewalk vendors, may be established within the
public right-of-way or on other City property by approval of the
City Council.
(2) Setbacks.
(a) Front build-to line/zone.
[1] In the DC District a build-to line of five feet is established
for all commercial buildings and for additions to such
buildings fronting on the street (it is preferred that the
building be built right up to the sidewalk with no setback).
[2] In the DC District a build-to zone between five feet and 10
feet is established for all noncommercial buildings and for
additions to such buildings fronting on the street.
[3] The build-to line and build-to zone may be altered by
conditional use where appropriate, such as for churches
and civic-type buildings, which may warrant a larger front
setback and landscaped or hardscaped yard, or to create
pedestrian-oriented amenities such as pocket parks or
plazas or upon a finding that the build-to line or zone is not
practical or to conform to prevailing existing setbacks.
(b) Side/rear setbacks.
[1] There are no minimum side setbacks except for spacing
between buildings as specified in the Building and Fire
Codes. Also see special setbacks in Note 1 on Table 19-B.28
27.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(a), First floor, was repealed 5-7-2019.
28.Editor's Note: Table 19-B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-6.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-6.3
1:382
§ 275-6.4. Office Commercial District (OC).
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
[2] The Planning Board may alter the rear setbacks by
conditional use, where appropriate, such as to
accommodate rear decks for dining, to accommodate
pedestrian-oriented facilities, or to allow for optimal uses
of lots consistent with the intent of this section. The
Planning Board must determine that any reduction does
not measurably interfere with or negatively impact
abutting properties, particularly residential properties.
(3) Parking requirements. [Amended 5-7-2019]
(a) See site plan regulations.
(4) Parking areas. Within the DC District parking is not allowed in front
yards and is allowed in rear and side yards by conditional use.
A. District location. This district is located in transitional areas as well as
along the major nodes and corridors. The OC District includes some
older structures that have been converted to commercial uses and also
includes some larger, undeveloped sites.
B. Objectives.
(1) The purpose of the district is to preserve the wood-frame
architecture, as much as feasible, with a mix of residential and lowimpact
nonresidential uses (office, institutional, bed-andbreakfasts,
and limited retail up to 2,500 square feet).
(2) Allows for large-scale office, institutional, hospitality, and civic uses
and is ideally oriented toward campus-type settings.
(3) Oriented toward open, suburban-type corridors. The district is
distinctly automobile oriented.
(4) Orientation. See Figure 4-D - Recommended Site Design in OC
District, below.
Figure 4-D - Recommended Site Design in OC District
§ 275-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6.4
1:383
§ 275-6.5. Highway Commercial District (HC).
(5) Mixed use within the district and within individual buildings is
encouraged.
C. Development standards.
(1) Uses.
(a) Nonresidential uses are permitted by right in existing
buildings and new construction.
(b) Drive-through facilities are not permitted in this district.
(2) Build-to zone. There is a build-to zone between 10 and 20 feet. This
zone may be altered by conditional use where appropriate for civic
uses, where not practical, or for other design considerations.
(3) Parking areas.
(a) Screening. Any on-site parking must be fully screened from the
street (except for driveway and pedestrian passageways).
(b) Location. Within the OC District parking is allowed in rear
yards only but may be permitted in side yards upon a finding
that off-street parking is appropriate in this situation, rear yard
parking is not practical, the side yard parking will be
completely screened, and there will be no significant adverse
impact on the streetscape.
(c) Fronting on the street. New off-street parking areas on lots
fronting on the street, situated in front yards, or visible in any
prominent manner from the street are not permitted. In the
course of site plan review for new applications any existing
parking areas or lots that do not meet this requirement shall be
mitigated to the extent fair and practical (see Article 30,
Nonconforming Property).
(d) Driveways. Where driveways are approved, parking is
permitted within the driveway portion located in front and side
yards.
(4) Driveways. No part of any driveway or curb cut may be located in
front of the front facade of any primary building; rather, they must
be situated along or in close proximity to side lot lines, unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board, Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department, or Department of Public Works.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
(5) New buildings. The architectural regulations under the Site Plan
Regulations should be strictly applied.
A. District location.
§ 275-6.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-6.5
1:384
(1) The HC District tends to be located further from the City center
and is oriented toward larger parcels, larger buildings, high-value
development, and retail sales (i.e., "big box development," large
shopping centers, and franchise development). The HC District
may include parcels of land located on both the easterly and
westerly sides of the main traffic artery. These parcels will benefit
from any improvements to be made to the main traffic artery.
(2) Parcels located on the side of the main traffic artery may have
direct contact with, and benefit from, the service road planned to
be built alongside the main traffic artery and intersections
connecting to this service road, if and when opportunities for
construction of this service road and these intersections develop.
B. Objectives.
(1) The HC Districts are geared toward high-volume automobile traffic
and, accordingly, less stringent design standards are appropriate.
(2) Provide landowners and developers with flexible yet clearly defined
requirements.
(3) Minimize infrastructure cost to the City through good planning for
the district as a whole rather than based upon individual lots.
(4) Maximize the developable areas on the parcels within the district
through creation of flexible dimensional requirements.
(5) Minimize traffic impacts to the main traffic artery through
implementation of a service road and shared intersections with the
main traffic artery.
C. Development standards.
(1) Architectural renderings, landscaping, signage, and lighting shall
be required in the HC commercial corridors.
(2) The HC District includes older, tighter and more built-out
commercial strips with smaller lots, smaller buildings, and less
room for new development. The full range of conventional
automobile-oriented uses is permitted in the HC District, fast food,
drive-through restaurants, car washes, and retail stores, along with
warehouses and light industry. The HC District is the only district in
which the sale of exclusively used automobiles (without also
requiring sales of new automobiles) is permitted.
(3) The HC District permits larger signs and taller light poles.
(4) Parking. Parking in front of buildings and large lots fronting the
road is acceptable within the HC Districts.
D. HC District pavement dimensional regulations. For new construction,
the setbacks shown in the table below shall apply to pavement used for
§ 275-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6.5
1:385
parking and interior accessways. Driveways into the site from the
service road are exempt from these setbacks. These setbacks guarantee
a minimum ten-foot wide area for landscaping around the perimeter
of the site (five feet plus five feet for adjoining lots along the side lot
lines). This subsection shall supersede perimeter landscaping buffer
requirements (15 feet along the front and 10 feet along the side lot
lines) established in the Site Plan Regulations.
Minimum Property Line Setbacks (in feet)
Front Side Rear
Pavement 10 5 10
E. HC District service road regulations. The following requirements apply
to those lots situated alongside the main traffic artery, on which the
planned service road and access roads leading to or from the service
road are to be situated.
(1) Rights-of-way. To the extent practical and appropriate, as
determined by the Planning Board, as part of any proposed site
plan or subdivision plan, each landowner/developer shall
incorporate into his/her plan, on the subject land, a sixty-foot wide
right-of-way for the construction of the service road and/or access
road(s). The right-of-way shall traverse the subject lot from the
southerly lot line to the northerly lot line, as appropriate, and in the
case of any access road, from the easterly to the westerly lot line,
as appropriate, in accordance with the layout of the planned
service road and access road(s).
(2) Temporary termination. Where the service road has not been built
on the lot adjacent to the subject property, a temporary cul-de-sac
shall be built on the subject property to provide for an appropriate
turnaround and future connection to the service road on that
adjacent lot. Appropriate provisions may be established by the
Planning Board to facilitate seamless connection of that cul-de-sac
in the future to a service road on the adjacent lot, when that road
may be constructed. The temporary cul-de-sac shall conform to the
City of Rochester Subdivision Regulations.
(3) Intersections with the main traffic artery. As part of any site plan or
subdivision plan, the landowner/developer shall incorporate
predetermined access points onto the main traffic artery into his/
her plan.
(4) NHDOT. Developers shall coordinate with the New Hampshire
Department of Transportation (NHDOT) regarding the design of
the access roads and any intersections with the main traffic artery,
where it is a state highway.
F. HC District road design standards. [Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 275-6.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-6.5
1:386
(1) Service and access roads for new construction shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) Right-of-way: 60 feet.
(b) Lane width (each): 12 feet.
(c) Paved shoulder (each): four feet.
(d) Sidewalk (bituminous): five feet.
(e) Grass strip: five feet (between road and sidewalk).
(f) Curb: determined by site plan review.
[1] Sloped: side without sidewalk.
[2] Vertical: side with sidewalk.
(g) Cross-sectional requirements:
[1] Wearing course: one inch (NHDOT Item 403.11).
[2] Bearing course: two inches (NHDOT Item 403.11).
[3] Crushed gravel: six inches (NHDOT Item 304.3).
[4] Bank-run gravel: 12 inches (NHDOT Item 304.2).
(2) All materials shall be installed in compliance with NHDOT
specifications and the City of Rochester Subdivision Regulations.
G. HC District stormwater management requirements.
(1) Stormwater controls for each individual site plan shall be designed
in compliance with the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual
Volume 2, or the most recent version. To ensure adequate
stormwater control given the more flexible dimensional
regulations, these design guidelines shall be followed regardless of
any requirement imposed as part of the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services alteration of terrain
permitting (for 100,000 square feet +\- of disturbed surface).
(2) The Planning Board shall consider proposals for use of innovative
stormwater control structures, such as porous pavement,
bioretention areas, gravel wetlands, etc. If the Board concludes
that use of these structures is in order, then:
(a) It may be appropriate to allow for interior landscaped islands
within parking lots to be constructed without perimeter
curbing if the curbing would interfere with the routing of the
stormwater.
§ 275-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6.5
1:387
(b) The Planning Board is hereby empowered to adjust parking
requirements specified in Article 26, Roads and Parking,
herein.
H. HC District utility standards for new construction.
(1) All utilities shall be underground.
I. HC District parking lot interconnections.
(1) Where practical, and not impeded by wetlands or other physical
constraints, parking lots shall be interconnected between sites.
(2) Appropriate cross easements shall be developed between
properties to accommodate parking lot interconnections.
J. HC District design standards.
(1) Trash and delivery areas. The lots situated between the service
road and the main traffic artery call for special treatment because
they have double frontages.
(a) Whenever practical, and not impeded by wetlands or other
physical constraints, trash and delivery areas shall be located
off of a shared access driveway between sites.
(b) The access driveway may be located at/along the side lot
line(s), with each lot having its own trash and delivery area
located off this access driveway.
(c) Trash, delivery, and loading areas shall be well screened from
the main traffic artery.
(2) Facade treatment. Building facades fronting on the service road
and the main traffic artery shall both be treated as front facades,
both thereby meriting attractive treatment, under the architectural
standards included in the City of Rochester Site Plan Regulations.
(3) Outdoor seating. Restaurant proprietors are encouraged to include
seasonal outdoor seating.
(4) Signage. All provisions of Article 29, Signage, herein shall apply.
K. Adjustments in requirements. Since a number of the requirements
specified in this section are design oriented, the Planning Board may
adjust any requirements of HC District pavement dimensional
regulations, HC District service road regulations, HC District road
design standards, HC District stormwater management requirements,
HC District utility standards, and HC District design standards, on a
case-by-case basis, where it reasonably determines that strict
application of any requirement is impracticable due to particular
conditions on a given site.
§ 275-6.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-6.5
1:388
ARTICLE 7
Industrial Zoning Districts
§ 275-7.1. General terms.
Uses which are permitted by right, conditionally, or by special exception are
listed in Article 18, Use Regulations. Dimensional regulations are presented
in Article 19, Dimensional Regulations. Other applicable requirements for
development within any industrial zoning district are presented throughout
this chapter.
§ 275-7.2. General Industrial District (GI).
§ 275-7.3. Recycling Industrial District (RI).
A. Objectives.
(1) The district is flexible in allowing nearly the full range of industrial
operations, as well as high-impact uses which might not
conventionally be considered industrial: sawmills, powergenerating
plants, and warehouse and distribution facilities. It also
may accommodate those uses generally classified as assembly, high
technology, precision manufacturing, research and development,
light industrial, and similar office-type functions (see Article 2
definitions for "industry, light" and "industry, heavy").
(2) Maintain flexibility in siting the General Industrial District because
of design standards which manage potential environmental
impacts.
(3) Exercise a minimal to moderate level of aesthetic review based
upon the level of segregation from retail-type businesses,
residential areas, and ecological resources.
B. Development standards.
(1) All manufacturing, processing, assembly, fabrication, servicing and
repair operations must be carried out within an entirely enclosed
building unless waived by conditional use.
(2) No industrial building or operation shall be situated closer than
100 feet to the boundary line of any adjacent residential property.
The Planning Board may reduce this setback to 50 feet by
conditional use or where the use is accessory to a primary
commercial use.
(3) The use, processing, and generation of hazardous substances is
strictly regulated in accordance with all applicable local, state, and
federal law.
A. Objectives. The Recycling Industrial District is established to
accommodate large-scale, land-intensive landfill, recycling, and
§ 275-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-7.3
1:389
junkyard type uses such as those situated off Rochester Neck Road.
The facilities should be designed for maximum efficiency, compatible
with their natural surroundings, and incorporate sufficient buffers to
insulate surrounding residential areas from adverse impacts.
B. Development standards.
(1) Any outside processing activities and storage facilities shall be fully
screened from the road and from any abutting residential property.
This requirement shall not apply to active landfills whose elevation
practically precludes such screening.
(2) No landfill, recycling, or junkyard operation shall be situated closer
than 200 feet to the boundary line of any adjacent residential
property.
§ 275-7.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-7.3
1:390
ARTICLE 8
Granite Ridge Development (GRD)
§ 275-8.1. Purpose.
Well-planned commercial districts provide many benefits. For the
community, tax revenue is maximized, infrastructure burden is reduced,
and traffic impacts are minimized. For landowners and developers good
planning allows for a process that is coherent, flexible and easy to navigate.
The Granite Ridge Development Zone (GRD) is intended to:
§ 275-8.2. Delineation of Granite Ridge Development Zone.
§ 275-8.3. Pavement dimensional regulations.
The setbacks shown in the table below shall apply to pavement used for
parking and interior accessways. Driveways into the site from the service
road are exempt from these setbacks. These setbacks guarantee a minimum
ten-foot-wide area for landscaping around the perimeter of the site (five
feet plus five feet for adjoining lots along the side lot lines). This section
shall supersede perimeter landscaping buffer requirements (15 feet along
A. Provide landowners and developers with flexible yet clearly defined
requirements.
B. Minimize infrastructure cost to the City through good planning for the
district as a whole rather than based upon individual lots.
C. Maximize the developable areas on the parcels within the district
through creation of flexible dimensional requirements.
D. Minimize traffic impacts to Route 11 through implementation of a
service road and shared intersections with Route 11.
A. The zone includes those parcels of land so identified on the Zoning Map
of the City of Rochester, New Hampshire, which accompanies this
chapter and is on file in the offices of the Director of Planning and
Development and the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.29
B. The Granite Ridge Development Zone includes parcels of land located
on both the easterly and westerly sides of Route 11/Farmington Road.
These parcels will benefit from any improvements to be made to Route
11/Farmington Road. Parcels located on the westerly side of Route 11/
Farmington Road may have direct contact with, and benefit from, the
service road planned to be built on the westerly side of Route 11/
Farmington Road and intersections connecting to this service road, if
and when opportunities for construction of this service road and these
intersections develop.
29.Editor's Note: For the primary and secondary areas of the Granite Ridge Development see
the tables at the end of this article.
§ 275-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8.3
1:391
the front and 10 feet along the side lot lines) established in the Site Plan
Regulations.
Minimum Property Line Setbacks (in feet)
Front Side Rear
Pavement 10 5 10
§ 275-8.4. Granite Ridge Development Study.
This article was created pursuant to the March 2009 "Granite Ridge
Development Study, Farmington Road, Rochester, New Hampshire,"
prepared by CLD Consulting Engineers. This study should be referred to for
reference in designing, reviewing, and approving proposed site plans and
subdivision plans.
§ 275-8.5. Service road regulations.
The following requirements apply to those lots situated on the westerly side
of Route 11/Farmington Road, on which the planned service road and access
roads leading to or from the service road are to be situated.
§ 275-8.6. Road design standards. [Amended 3-5-2019]
A. Rights-of-way. To the extent practical and appropriate, as determined
by the Planning Board, as part of any proposed site plan or subdivision
plan, each landowner/developer shall incorporate into his/her plan, on
the subject land, a sixty-foot-wide right-of-way for the construction of
the service road and/or access road(s). The right-of-way shall traverse
the subject lot from the southerly lot line to the northerly lot line, as
appropriate, and in the case of any access road, from the easterly to the
westerly lot line, as appropriate, in accordance with the layout of the
planned service road and access road(s).
B. Temporary termination. Where the service road has not been built on
the lot adjacent to the subject property, a temporary cul-de-sac shall be
built on the subject property to provide for an appropriate turnaround
and future connection to the service road on that adjacent lot.
Appropriate provisions may be established by the Planning Board to
facilitate seamless connection of that cul-de-sac in the future to a
service road on the adjacent lot, when that road may be constructed.
The temporary cul-de-sac shall conform to the City of Rochester
Subdivision Regulations.
C. Route 11 intersections. As part of any site plan or subdivision plan, the
landowner/developer shall incorporate predetermined Route 11 access
points into his/her plan.
D. NHDOT. Developers shall coordinate with the New Hampshire
Department of Transportation (NHDOT) regarding the design of the
access roads and any intersections with Route 11.
§ 275-8.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-8.6
1:392
§ 275-8.7. Stormwater management requirements.
§ 275-8.8. Utility standards.
A. Service and access roads shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Right-of-way: 60 feet.
(2) Lane width (each): 12 feet.
(3) Paved shoulder (each): four feet.
(4) Sidewalk (bituminous): five feet.
(5) Grass strip: five feet (between road and sidewalk).
(6) Curb: granite.
(a) Sloped: side without sidewalk.
(b) Vertical: side with sidewalk.
(7) Cross-sectional requirements:
(a) Wearing course (minimum): one inch (NHDOT Item 403.11).
(b) Bearing course: two inches (NHDOT Item 403.11).
(c) Crushed gravel: six inches (NHDOT Item 304.3).
(d) Bank-run gravel: 12 inches (NHDOT Item 304.2).
B. All materials shall be installed in compliance with NHDOT
specifications and the City of Rochester Subdivision Regulations.
A. Stormwater controls for each individual site plan shall be designed in
compliance with the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual Volume 2. To
ensure adequate stormwater control given the more flexible
dimensional regulations, these design guidelines shall be followed
regardless of any requirement imposed as part of the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services alteration of terrain permitting
(for 100,000 square feet +\- of disturbed surface).
B. The Planning Board shall consider proposals for use of innovative
stormwater control structures, such as porous pavement, bioretention
areas, gravel wetlands, etc. If the Board concludes that use of these
structures is in order, then:
(1) It may be appropriate to allow for interior landscaped islands
within parking lots to be constructed without perimeter curbing if
the curbing would interfere with the routing of the stormwater.
(2) The Planning Board is hereby empowered to adjust parking
requirements specified in Article 26, Roads and Parking, herein.
§ 275-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8.8
1:393
§ 275-8.9. Parking lot interconnections.
§ 275-8.10. Design standards.
§ 275-8.11. Adjustments in requirements.
Since a number of the requirements specified in this Article 8, herein,
are design oriented, the Planning Board may adjust any requirements of
§ 275-8.3, Pavement dimensional regulations, § 275-8.5, Service road
regulations, § 275-8.6, Road design standards, § 275-8.7, Stormwater
management requirements, § 275-8.8, Utility standards, and § 275-8.10,
Design standards, on a case-by-case basis, where it reasonably determines
that strict application of any requirement is impracticable due to particular
conditions on a given site.
A. All utilities shall be underground.
B. Utilities into individual sites shall be run from the common utility lines
to be placed in the service road right-of-way.
C. Service connections for utilities for pad sites, if any are created, shall
be provided within the service road right-of-way.
A. Where practical, and not impeded by wetlands or other physical
constraints, parking lots shall be interconnected between sites.
B. Appropriate cross easements shall be developed between properties to
accommodate parking lot interconnections.
A. Trash and delivery areas. The lots situated between the service road
and Route 11 call for special treatment because they have double
frontages.
(1) Whenever practical, and not impeded by wetlands or other physical
constraints, trash and delivery areas shall be located off of a shared
access driveway between sites.
(2) The access driveway may be located at/along the side lot line(s),
with each lot having its own trash and delivery area located off this
access driveway.
(3) Trash, delivery, and loading areas shall be well screened from
Route 11.
B. Facade treatment. Building facades fronting on the service road and
Route 11 shall both be treated as front facades, both thereby meriting
attractive treatment, under the architectural standards included in the
City of Rochester Site Plan Regulations.
C. Outdoor seating. Restaurant proprietors are encouraged to include
seasonal outdoor seating.
D. Signage. All provisions of Article 29, Signage, herein shall apply.
§ 275-8.8 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-8.11
1:394
Primary Area of Granite Ridge Development
PID Address Acres Owner
0208-0001-0000 126 Farmington
Road
82.50 Adamian Construction
& Dev.
0208-0001-0001 116 Farmington
Road
34.18 Infinity Properties
Rochester
0208-0002-0000 0 Farmington Road 32.00 The Kane Co. Inc.
0208-0004-0000 148 Farmington
Road
1.30 John & Carolyn Meader
0208-0005-0000 150 Farmington
Road
0.63 Roslyn Stone & Carolyn
Meader
0208-0006-0000 154 Farmington
Road
1.05 Alkurabli LLC
0208-0006-0001 152 Farmington
Road
0.94 Richard Ottino
0208-0007-0000 160 Farmington
Road
1.33 160 Farmington Road
Realty Trust
0216-0001-0000 20 Farmington
Road
15.00 Robert Beranger
0216-0002-0000 22 Farmington
Road
2.60 Robert Beranger
0216-0003-0000 0 Farmington Road 2.90 Robert Beranger
0216-0004-0000 36 Farmington
Road
17.10 Northgate Investment
Properties
0216-0005-0000 46 Farmington
Road
1.24 Gene V. Roe
0216-0006-0000 48 Farmington
Road
5.62 Casaccio Real Estate
Holdings
0216-0007-0000 58 Farmington
Road
7.60 Casaccio Real Estate
Holdings
0216-0008-0000 60 Farmington
Road
6.30 Packy's Investment
Properties
0216-0009-0000 68 Farmington
Road
20.00 Stratham Industrial
Properties
0216-0010-0000 76 Farmington
Road
21.00 PSNH
0216-0011-0000 92 Farmington
Road
85.00 Stratham Industrial
Properties
0216-0017-0000 5 Lydall Way 12.00 State of New Hampshire
DOT
§ 275-8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8.11
1:395
Primary Area of Granite Ridge Development
PID Address Acres Owner
0216-0019-0000 0 Farmington Road 4.50 PSNH
0216-0020-0000 8 Crane Drive 6.09 Newport Partners LLC
0216-0021-0000 33 Crane Drive 4.80 Spinelli Realty Trust
0216-0022-0000 27 Crane Drive 6.35 Black Marble Realty
Trust
0216-0023-0000 21 Crane Drive 3.16 Black Marble Realty
Trust
0216-0024-0000 7 Crane Drive 4.01 Four Hidden Road Trust
0216-0025-0000 47 Farmington
Road
2.80 Poulin Realty
Acquisition
382.00
Secondary Area of Granite Ridge Development
PID Address Acres Owner
0208-0008-0000 174 Farmington
Road
60.00 Diane Smith
0208-0008-0001 176 Farmington
Road
11.61 Robidas Properties LLC
0208-0009-0000 178 Farmington
Road
4.30 Rochester/Rural District
0208-0010-0000 180 Farmington
Road
1.02 WAH Realty
Corporation
0208-0011-0000 184 Farmington
Road
4.00 Bonnie J. O'Shea
0208-0015-0000 0 Farmington Road 0.29 City of Rochester
0208-0016-0000 0 Farmington Road 1.66 Robert Rowe
0208-0017-0000 127 Farmington
Road
8.90 Robert Rowe
0208-0018-0000 17 Sterling Drive 2.02 Raven Realty
0208-0018-0001 18 Sterling Drive 2.85 Raven Realty
0208-0018-0002 27 Sterling Drive 5.04 Axis Property Holdings
LLC
0208-0018-0003 23 Sterling Drive 1.55 Raven Realty
0208-0018-0004 0 Sterling Drive 0.64 Raven Realty
0208-0019-0000 123 Farmington
Road
1.16 Black Dog Car Wash
LLC
§ 275-8.11 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-8.11
1:396
Secondary Area of Granite Ridge Development
PID Address Acres Owner
0208-0019-0001 115 Farmington
Road
1.25 Hermitage Place LP
0208-0019-0002 131 Farmington
Road
0.57 JMB Automotive Group
LLC
0209-0001-0000 105 Farmington
Road
1.70 Rudolph Tetreault
0216-0012-0000 4 Little Falls
Bridge Road
1.89 Ralph Torr Rev. Trust
0216-0013-0000 0 Little Falls
Bridge Road
11.80 State of New Hampshire
DOT
0216-0018-0000 95 Farmington
Road
3.50 Motiva Enterprises LLC
0216-0018-0001 83 Farmington
Road
2.25 Joseph Blanchette
0216-0018-0002 77 Farmington
Road
3.60 Rochester Hospitality
LLC
0216-0019-0000 0 Farmington Road 4.50 PSNH
0216-0020-0000 8 Crane Drive 6.09 Newport Partners LLC
0216-0021-0000 33 Crane Drive 4.80 Rose Realty LLC
0216-0022-0000 27 Crane Drive 5.30 Black Marble Realty
Trust LLC
0216-0023-0000 21 Crane Drive 3.16 Black Marble Realty
Trust LLC
0216-0024-0000 7 Crane Drive 4.01 Four Hidden Rod Road
Realty Trust
0216-0025-0000 47 Farmington
Road
2.60 Poulin Realty
Acquisitions LLC
0216-0026-0000 0 Farmington Road 68.00 Donald & Bonnie Toy
0216-0028-0000 23 Farmington
Road
1.70 Miles Cook III
0216-0028-0001 25 Farmington
Road
0.10 City of Rochester
0216-0029-0000 21 Farmington
Road
2.41 Cardinals Seafarer
Restaurant
0221-0154-0000 2 Farmington Road 20.80 Jean Edgerly Trust
0221-0156-0000 14 Farmington
Road
1.20 Renee & Louanne
Cardinal
0221-0157-0000 0 Farmington Road 1.20 Wayne Cardinal
§ 275-8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8.11
1:397
Secondary Area of Granite Ridge Development
PID Address Acres Owner
0221-0158-0000 14 Farmington
Road
1.30 Rene & Luanne
Cardinal
0221-0159-0000 10 Farmington
Road
2.45 Lawrence Shapiro Trust
0221-0160-0000 18 Farmington
Road
1.32 Michael & Jean Garzillo
0221-0162-0000 18A Farmington
Road
6.40 Richard & Phyllis
Glidden
0221-0163-0000 20 Farmington
Road
3.20 Robert & Karen
Beranger
0221-0164-0000 17 Farmington
Road
0.91 Rene G Cardinal &
Cardinal Way
0221-0165-0000 11 Farmington
Road
1.70 Seckendorf Real Estate
0221-0166-0000 9 Farmington Road 1.10 MIB LLC Greenwood
Inn
0221-0167-0000 7 Farmington Road 0.30 Basel Alkurabi
0221-0168-0000 3 Farmington Road 14.00 Charles Karacas
290.15
§ 275-8.11 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-8.11
1:398
ARTICLE 9
Special Zoning Districts
§ 275-9.1. General terms.
Uses which are permitted by right, conditionally, or by special exception are
listed in Article 18, Use Regulations. Dimensional regulations are presented
in Article 19, Dimensional Regulations. Other applicable requirements for
development within any special zoning district are presented throughout
this chapter.
§ 275-9.2. Airport Special (AS) District.
The purpose of the Airport Special District is to accommodate the needs of
Skyhaven Airport subject to appropriate limitations. This zone shall allow
such additional uses that support airport operations, including but not
limited to aircraft storage, repair and maintenance, flight instruction, and
aircraft chartering. An airport is a unique facility which merits a special
zoning designation. The primary permitted uses are aviation related but
numerous activities which support the vitality of the airport or which are
logical compatible activities are also allowed by right or as accessory uses.
For the purposes of this section, an "accessory use" is broadly defined as
one that the owner of the airport has determined is compatible with and
enhances the vitality of the airport.
§ 275-9.3. Hospital Special (HS) District.
The purpose of the Hospital Special District is to accommodate the needs
of primary health care services and medical or surgical care to persons,
including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as
laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and
staff residences, subject to appropriate limitations.
§ 275-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9.3
1:399

ARTICLE 10
Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APOD)
[Amended 6-16-2015]
§ 275-10.1. Authority.
The City of Rochester hereby adopts this article pursuant to the authority
granted under RSA 674:16, in particular RSA 674:16, II, relative to
innovative land use controls.
§ 275-10.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preserve, maintain, and protect from
contamination existing and potential groundwater supply areas that may
be available for use as a current or future source of supply for Rochester's
municipal water system. This article serves as a public education tool
to provide residents and small businesses awareness on typically
unrecognized hazards.
§ 275-10.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of rock, sand, or gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water. (NHDES
Model Groundwater Protection Ordinance, Chapter 2.5, Protection of
Groundwater and Surface Water Resources, Innovative Land Use Planning
Techniques)
FUEL STORAGE — See Article 2 of this chapter.
GASOLINE STATION — See Article 2 of this chapter.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table
in soils and geologic formations. (RSA 485-C:2, VIII, the Groundwater
Protection Act)
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE COLLECTION PROJECT — Any
location that accumulates, collects, transfers, or otherwise manages
household hazardous waste. (Section Env-Hw 103.66, New Hampshire Code
of Administrative Rules).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface through which regulated substances
cannot pass when spilled. The term includes concrete and asphalt unless
unsealed cracks or holes are present, but does not include earthen, wooden,
or gravel surfaces or other surfaces that could react with or dissolve when
in contact with the substances stored on them. [Section Env-Wq 401.03(c),
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules]
JUNKYARD — See Article 2 of this chapter.
REGULATED CONTAINER — Any device in which a regulated substance
is stored, transported, treated, disposed of, or otherwise handled with a
§ 275-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-10.3
1:401
capacity of greater than or equal to five gallons. [Section Env-Wq 401.03(g),
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules]
REGULATED SUBSTANCE — Any of the following, with the exclusion of
all substances used for the treatment of drinking water or wastewater at
facilities approved by the Department of Environmental Services30 [Section
Env-Wq 401.03(h), New Hampshire Code of Administrative
Rules]:[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
ROCHESTER MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — The public treatment and
distribution system, which consists of water treatment plants, water main
pipes, storage tanks, booster stations, and service connections that convey
potable water for domestic, fire protection, and other community uses.
SANITARY PROTECTIVE RADIUS — Area around a public water supply
well which must be maintained in its natural state as required by Section
Env-Dw 301.06 (small community wells) and Section Env-Dw 302.06 (large
community wells), New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules.
SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE — The depth from the mineral soil surface
to the uppermost soil horizon that contains 2% or more distinct or
prominent redoximorphic features that increase in percentage with
increasing depth as determined by a licensed hydrogeologist, soils scientist,
wetlands scientist, engineer or other qualified professional approved by the
Planning Board or the shallowest depth measured from ground surface to
free water that stands in an unlined or screened borehole for a period of
one week or more.31 (Section Env-Wq 1502.49, New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules, NHDES Alteration of Terrain)
Petroleum products and their by-products of any kind, and in any form,
including but not limited to petroleum, fuel, sludge, crude oil refuse
or oil mixed with wastes and all other liquid hydrocarbons regardless
of specific gravity and which are used as motor fuel, lubricating oil,
or any oil used for heating or processing. Shall not include natural
gas, liquefied petroleum gas or synthetic natural gas regardless of
derivation or source. (RSA 146-A:2, III, Oil Discharge or Spillage in
Surface Water or Groundwater); or
A.
Any substance that contains a regulated contaminant for which an
ambient groundwater quality standard has been established pursuant
to RSA 485-C:6; or
B.
Any hazardous substance listed in 40 CFR Part 302, Table 302.4.
Reportable quantities of hazardous substances as listed in 40 CFR Part
302, Table 302.4, under column heading final RQ pounds (Kg).
C.
30.Note: These chemicals are excluded from the definition of regulated substances within
State Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wq 401 because they are used in the treatment of
wastewater and drinking water supplies and are not considered to pose a significant risk
to groundwater.
31.Note: This definition includes a focus on both soil morphology and groundwater hydrology.
§ 275-10.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-10.3
1:402
SNOW DUMP — A location where snow is placed for disposal from any
off-site location (i.e., cleared from roadways and/or motor vehicle parking
areas). (NHDES Model Groundwater Protection Ordinance, Chapter 2.5,
Protection of Groundwater and Surface Water Resources, Innovative Land
Use Planning Techniques)
STRATIFIED DRIFT AQUIFER — A geologic formation of predominately
well-sorted sediment deposited by or in bodies of glacial meltwater,
including gravel, silt, or clay, which contains sufficient saturated permeable
material to yield significant quantities of water to wells. (RSA 485-C:2, XIV,
the Groundwater Protection Act)
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water well or well field supplying a community public water
system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move toward
and reach such water well or well field. (RSA 485-C:2, XVIII, the
Groundwater Protection Act)
§ 275-10.4. District boundaries.
The Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APOD) is an overlay district that is
superimposed over the existing zoning. The APOD shall impose additional
requirements and restrictions beyond the base zoning. Boundaries of the
APOD shall be referenced by the latest edition of the map titled "City of
Rochester Aquifer Protection Overlay District." The district shall include:
§ 275-10.5. Applicability.
This article applies to all uses in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District,
except for those uses exempt under this article (see § 275-10.11).
§ 275-10.6. Performance standards.
The following performance standards apply to all uses in the Aquifer
Protection Overlay District unless exempt under this article (see
§ 275-10.11):
A. All delineated wellhead protection areas around existing and potential
municipal production water wells, including a protective radial distance
of 1,000 feet32 around those wells (see definition for "wellhead
protection area" in § 275-10.3).
A. For any use that will render impervious more than 20%33 of any lot or
5,000 square feet of land disturbance of any lot, whichever is greater, a
stormwater management and erosion control plan, approved by the
Planning Board and prepared in accordance with Chapter 218,
32.Note: The protective radius around the municipal production wells pertains to rock
blasting activities.
33.Note: Two times the percentage of impervious surface area at which stream quality
decreases (USGS, 2005).
§ 275-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-10.6
1:403
§ 275-10.7. Permitted uses.
All uses permitted by right or allowed by special exception in the underlying
district are permitted unless they are prohibited uses or conditional uses
in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District. All uses must comply with the
performance standards unless specifically exempt under this article (see
§ 275-10.11).
§ 275-10.8. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District:
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control, of the City Code shall be
provided.
B. Animal manures, fertilizers, and compost must be stored in accordance
with the Manual of Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Agriculture
in New Hampshire, New Hampshire Department of Agriculture,
Markets, and Food, revised June 2011, and any subsequent revisions.34
C. All regulated substances within regulated containers or hazardous
substances listed under 40 CFR 302.4 with a capacity equal to or
greater than the reportable quantity must be used and stored in
accordance with Part Env-Wq 401, Required Best Management
Practices for Groundwater Protection, New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules.
D. All activities related to rock blasting must adhere to NHDES WD-10-12,
Best Management Practices for Blasting, Rock Blasting and Water
Quality Measures That Can Be Taken To Protect Water Quality and
Mitigate Impacts, prepared 2010, and any subsequent revisions.
A. Development or operation of a solid waste facility.
B. Outdoor storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals in bulk.
C. Development or operation of a junkyard.
D. Development or operation of a snow dump.
E. Development or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon.
F. Development or operation of a petroleum bulk plant or terminal.
G. Development or operation of gasoline stations.
H. Use of powdered ammonium nitrate fuel oil and explosives that contain
perchlorate during blasting activities.
34.Note: See http://www.agriculture.nh.gov/publications-forms/documents/bmp-manual.pdf.
§ 275-10.6 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-10.9
1:404
§ 275-10.9. Conditional uses.
The Planning Board may vary the provisions herein by granting a
conditional use permit in accordance with RSA 674:21, II, to allow for a
use which is otherwise permitted in the underlying district. The following
conditions shall apply to all uses in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District:
A. Storage, handling, and use of regulated substances in quantities
exceeding 55 gallons per container or 660 pounds per container35 at
any one time provided that an adequate regulated materials response
plan has been submitted. This plan must address:
(1) Description of the physical layout and a facility diagram, including
all surrounding surface waters and wellhead protection areas.
(2) Contact list and phone numbers for the facility response
coordinator, cleanup contractors, and all appropriate federal, state,
and local agencies which must be contacted in case of a release to
the environment.
(3) List of all regulated substances in use and locations of use and
storage.
(4) Description of containment and/or diversionary structures or
equipment to prevent regulated substances from infiltrating into
the ground.
(5) List of positions within the facility that require training to respond
to spills of regulated substances.
(6) Prevention protocols that are to be followed after an event that
causes large releases of any regulated substance.
B. Any use that will render impervious more than 20% of any lot or 5,000
square feet of land disturbance, whichever is greater, provided that an
adequate stormwater management plan has been submitted. This plan
shall be prepared in accordance with Chapter 218, Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control, of the City Code.
C. Projects that will excavate more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of
bedrock through rock blasting activities within a two-year period or are
within a radial distance of 1,000 feet from a municipal production well,
provided that an adequate groundwater monitoring plan has been
submitted.
(1) This plan must address:
35.Note: According to the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration's
Emergency Response Guidebook, large spills are defined as containers that are greater
than 55 US gallons (208 liters) for liquids and greater than 660 pounds (300 kilograms)
for solids with regard to initial isolation and protection action distances. This is a
standard that is used by the bulk of the voluntary first responder organizations.
§ 275-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-10.9
1:405
§ 275-10.10. Existing nonconforming uses.
Existing nonconforming structures and uses are exempt from this article
under RSA 674:19. Any existing nonconforming structures and uses must
be in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.
§ 275-10.11. Exemptions.
The following uses are exempt from the specified provisions of this article
as long as they are in compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal
requirements:
(a) Identification of potential sensitive receptors and evaluation
hydrogeological background information.
(b) Identification of monitoring well locations and install
monitoring wells, where appropriate.
(c) Collection of background water quality samples to identify, or
rule out, preexisting groundwater contamination issues and to
establish background chemistry levels and performance
criteria for groundwater quality.
(d) Collection of periodic groundwater samples, including but not
limited to nitrite/nitrates, as well as standard analysis for
inorganic chemical, volatile organic chemical, and synthetic
organic chemical contaminates as designated in Parts Env-Dw
703 through Env-Dw 705, and ambient groundwater quality
standards as designated in Part Env-Or 603, New Hampshire
Code of Administrative Rules, from the groundwater
monitoring points during blasting, as well as collect water level
data, when pertinent.
(e) Collection of post-blast groundwater samples (conducting
multiple rounds of sampling may be prudent, and/or sampling
could be ongoing for extended periods if contamination is
detected as a result of the blasting).
(2) The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require a performance
guarantee or bond in an amount and with conditions satisfactory to
the Board to be posted to ensure completion of construction of any
facilities required for compliance with the performance standards.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
A. Any private residence, excluding home occupations, is exempt from all
performance standards. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Any business or facility where regulated substances are stored in
regulated containers with a capacity of five or less gallons or where
§ 275-10.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-10.11
1:406
§ 275-10.12. Relationship between state and local requirements.
Where both the state and the municipality have existing requirements, the
more stringent shall govern.
§ 275-10.13. Maintenance and inspection.
hazardous substances are stored in containers with a capacity of less
than the reportable quantity is exempt from § 275-10.6C.
C. Storage of heating fuels for on-site use or fuels for emergency electric
generation, provided that storage tanks are indoors on a concrete floor
or have corrosion control, leak detection, and secondary containment in
place, is exempt from § 275-10.6C.
D. Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with
permanent fuel lines to enable the fuel to be used by that vehicle is
exempt from § 275-10.6C.
E. Storage and use of office supplies is exempt from § 275-10.6C.
F. Temporary storage of construction materials on a site where they are to
be used is exempt from § 275-10.6C if incorporated within the site
development project within six months of their deposit on the site.
G. The sale, transportation, and use of pesticides as defined in RSA
430:29, XXVI, are exempt from all provisions of this article.
H. Any non-reoccurring household hazardous waste collection projects
regulated under New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Sections
Env-Hw 401.03(b)(1) and 501.01(b) are exempt from § 275-10.6C.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
I. Underground storage tank systems and aboveground storage tank
systems that are in compliance with applicable state rules are exempt
from inspections under this article (see § 275-10.13).
A. For uses requiring Planning Board approval for any reason, a narrative
description of maintenance requirements for structures required to
comply with performance standards shall be recorded so as to run with
the land on which such structures are located at the Registry of Deeds
for Strafford County. The description so prepared shall comply with the
requirements of RSA 478:4-a.
B. Inspections shall be required to verify compliance with performance
standards. Such inspections shall be performed by City staff at
reasonable times with prior notice to the landowner.
C. All properties in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District known to City
staff as using or storing regulated substances in regulated containers
with a capacity greater than five gallons or hazardous substances with a
capacity greater than the reportable quantity, except for facilities
§ 275-10.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-10.13
1:407
§ 275-10.14. Enforcement procedures and penalties.
Any violation of the requirements of this article shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures and penalties detailed in RSA 676 or 485-C.
§ 275-10.15. Severability.
If any provision of this article is found to be unenforceable, such provision
shall be considered separable and shall not be construed to invalidate the
remainder of the article.
§ 275-10.16. Repeal.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are, to the
extent of the conflict, hereby repealed.
§ 275-10.17. When effective.
This article shall be effective upon adoption by the Rochester City Council.
where all regulated substances storage is exempt from this article (see
§ 275-10.11), shall be subject to inspections.
D. If applicable, a fee schedule shall be established by the City Council as
provided for in RSA 41:9-a. The Rochester City Council shall require the
fee be billed at an hourly rate as determined by the City of Rochester
Public Works Department for compliance inspections. The fee shall be
paid by the property owner.
E. City staff shall develop reporting and tracking criteria for properties in
the Aquifer Protection Overlay District that are subject to compliance
inspections. Property owners shall submit reports to the City on a
biennial (every other year) basis.
§ 275-10.13 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-10.17
1:408
ARTICLE 11
Aviation Overlay District (AOD)
§ 275-11.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water, whether constructed or not, which
has been approved as a site for landing and taking off of aircraft or utilized
by the public as a point of arrival or departure by air, hereinafter referred
to as "Skyhaven Airport."
AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE —
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, tree, smoke, steam, dust, or other
substance which obstructs the aerial approaches of Skyhaven Airport or
impairs the reasonable visibility in the vicinity thereof; electrical impulses
and disturbances which interfere with radio aids or communications; and
lights which might result in glare in the vision of pilots or aircraft or be
confused with airport lights.
BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE — A line parallel to the center line of the
runway which limits the location of any permanent structure. The location
of the building restriction line is shown and described on the Airport Layout
Plan.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any structure, tree, or use of land which does
not conform to a regulation prescribed in this article or an amendment
thereto as of the effective date of such regulations.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, or body politic, and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed or installed by man, including such
objects although regulated or licensed by other provisions of law.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
§ 275-11.2. Land subject to restrictions.
In order to carry out the purposes of this article, all of the land within the
boundaries of the approach zones and all of the land within a distance of
For Runway 33, an area which is 1,000 feet wide at a point 200 feet
from the end of the pavement and 4,000 feet wide at a point 10,200 feet
from the end of the pavement, or future pavement extended.
A.
For Runway 15, an area which is 1,000 feet wide at a point 200 feet
from the end of the pavement and 1,500 feet wide at a point 5,200 feet
from the end of the pavement, or future pavement extended.
B.
The center line of these areas shall coincide with the center line of the
landing strips extended.
C.
§ 275-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-11.2
1:409
12,000 feet from the airport reference point shown on the Rochester Airport
Approach Plan dated December 16, 1983 (attached hereto and made a part
hereof),36 is hereby declared subject to the restrictions of this article.
§ 275-11.3. Height limits.
No structure or tree shall be erected, altered, or allowed to grow within
the areas described in § 275-11.2 hereof above a slope ratio of 34 feet to
one foot measured from the end of Runway 33 or a ratio of 20 feet to
one foot measured from the end of Runway 15 or above a slope ratio of
seven feet to one foot measured from the side of the landing strips and
the approaches, or within an ellipse formed by connecting the ends of two
semicircles having radii of 10,000 feet from points located 200 feet beyond
the ends of pavement on center line extended at each end of Runways 15/
33 above a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation, except that the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant a variance of
this regulation where literal application or enforcement of the same would
result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted
would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and
be in accordance with the spirit of this article.
§ 275-11.4. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made
of the land described in § 275-11.2 hereof in such manner as to create
electrical interference with radio aids or communications between airport
and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport by the creation and discharge of
smoke, steam, dust, or other obstructions to visibility, or otherwise
endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
§ 275-11.5. Nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed in §§ 275-11.3 and 275-11.4 hereof shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of
any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective
date hereof or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change
in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date
of this article and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two years
thereof.
§ 275-11.6. Variances.
Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his/her property not
36.Editor's Note: The Airport Approach Plan is included at the end of this article.
§ 275-11.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-11.6
1:410
in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply
for a variance therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal
application of enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be
contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in
accordance with the spirit of this article.
§ 275-11.7. Permits.
§ 275-11.8. Hazard marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted under §§ 275-11.6 and 275-7 may, if such
action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of this article and
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner
of the structure or tree in question to permit the airport owner, at its own
expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights
as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard.
§ 275-11.9. Approach zone map.
A copy of said approach zone map shall become a part of the Zoning Map of
the City of Rochester, New Hampshire.
A. Future uses. No material change in violation of §§ 275-11.3 and
275-11.4 hereof shall be made in the use of land, and no structure or
tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established in
violation of §§ 275-11.3 and 275-11.4 hereof, unless a permit therefor
shall have been applied for and granted. Each such application shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired.
B. Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure, or tree may be
replaced, substantially altered, repaired or rebuilt, allowed to grow
higher, or replanted, within any of the areas of land described in
§ 275-11.2 hereof, a permit must be secured authorizing such
replacement, change, or repair if it is in violation of §§ 275-11.3 and
275-11.4 hereof. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a
nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become a greater
hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article,
or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for a permit for replacement, change, or
repair of existing use, structure, or tree shall be granted.
§ 275-11.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-11.9
1:411
Rochester, Skyhaven Airport Approach Plan
Adopted by New Hampshire Aeronautics Commission
April 1, 1968
Revised December 16, 1983
1. This Airport Approach Plan, prepared under the authority of Chapter
424:3 of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, is based
upon the ultimate development of a General Aviation Type Airport with
runway and landing strip as follows:
Runway 5,400 feet by 100 feet;
Landing Strip 5,800 feet by 300 feet.
2. Part 77, Federal Aviation Regulations establishes the standards used
to determine the limit of height of obstructions in the vicinity of the
airport.
3. The limit of height of obstructions shall be:
A. In the approach area to the landing strip for Runway 33, which is
1,000 feet wide at a point 200 feet from the end of the pavement
and 4,000 feet wide at a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
pavement, an inclined plane of 34:1 slope.
B. In the approach area to the landing strip for Runway 15, which is
1,000 feet wide at a point 200 feet from the end of the pavement
and 1,500 feet wide at a point 5,200 feet from the end of the
pavement, an inclined plane of 20:1 slope.
C. On the sides of the landing strip and approach areas, an inclined
plane of 7:1 slope.
D. 472 feet above sea level within the horizontal surface, which is a
plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation. This plane
is an ellipse formed by connecting the ends of two semicircles
having radii of 10,000 feet from points located 200 feet beyond
ends of pavement on center line extended at each end of Runway
15/33.
E. Within the conical surface, which is an inclined plane sloping
upward at a 20:1 ratio extending 4,000 feet outward from the
horizontal surface.
4. No provision of Section (3) shall limit the height of a structure or tree
to less than 30 feet above the ground upon which it is located.
5. The Airport Reference Point is located on the center line of Runway 15/
33, 2,650 feet from the southeast end of the runway and its elevation is
322 feet above sea level.
§ 275-11.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-11.9
1:412
Note: The following is for information only and is not a part of the Airport
Approach Plan:
A. The building restriction line is 300 feet from the center line of the
landing strip.
B. Acquisition of property rights will be necessary: (1) to remove
existing obstructions; (2) to control the height of objects in those
areas where the controlling inclined plane is less than 30 feet
above the ground.
§ 275-11.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-11.9
1:413

ARTICLE 12
Conservation Overlay District (COD)
§ 275-12.1. Objectives and characteristics.
Wetlands, ponds, and streams are significant natural resources of the City
because of their size or functional values, such as flood storage, wildlife
habitat, and the enhancement of water quality and/or quantity. The
preservation of these water resources promotes the general public health,
safety, welfare and convenience in our community. In particular the
regulations of the Conservation Overlay District (CO District) are intended
to:
§ 275-12.2. Overlay district defined.
The overlay district shall include rivers, lakes, ponds, perennial streams,
vernal pools, all jurisdictional wetlands and the surrounding upland areas
of each of these resources.
§ 275-12.3. Buffer defined.
In all cases the more restrictive buffer shall be used.
A. Maintain and enhance the quality and quantity of surface waters and
groundwater by preserving the ability of wetlands to filter pollution,
trap sediment, retain and absorb chemicals and nutrients, and produce
oxygen.
B. Minimize expense to the City and the public in providing and
maintaining essential services and utilities, such as wastewater
collection and treatment, drainage facilities, and public water supply,
which may arise because of the inappropriate use of land within the CO
District.
C. Minimize impacts to existing land uses and lots (see § 275-12.5,
Exemptions; preexisting residential structures, uses and lots).
D. Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, those wetland
areas, related water bodies and adjoining land which provide flood
protection; protect persons and property against the hazards of flood
inundation by assuring the continuation of the natural flow patterns of
streams and other watercourses; and provide for nutrient attenuation
and augmentation of stream flow during dry periods.
E. Encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located
within the CO District.
F. Protect native wildlife habitat and natural vegetation upon which a
variety of upland and aquatic species are dependent for purposes of
breeding or sustenance.
§ 275-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12.3
1:415
Buffer Location
75 feet Cocheco River, Salmon Falls River and Isinglass River from
the ordinary high-water mark of the river
50 feet Named streams and surface water from the ordinary highwater
mark listed in Table I below37
50 feet Edge of jurisdictional wetland consisting of very poorly
drained soils1
50 feet Edge of jurisdictional wetland consisting of poorly drained
soils1
50 feet Vernal pools2
Notes:
1. The precise location of a wetland boundary in any particular case must
be determined by on-site inspection by a New Hampshire certified
wetland scientist.
2. Vernal pools that shall be identified by a New Hampshire certified
wetland scientist and may be subject to review by the Conservation
Commission.
§ 275-12.4. Delineation process. [Amended 3-5-2019]
The edge of wet of these wetlands shall be determined by the delineation
process set forth in the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual,
1987, and the most recent version of the Regional Supplement to the
Corp of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual: Northcentral and Northeast
Region. When there is a dispute in the boundary, the landowner may appeal
the decision to the Planning Board with written recommendations by the
Conservation Commission.
§ 275-12.5. Exemptions; preexisting residential structures, uses and
lots.
The following are exempt:
A. All wetlands less than 1/2 acre in size, except vernal pools.
B. Wetland conditions resulting from the following: constructed drainage
structures, including but not limited to swales, ditches, and basins;
actively maintained agricultural/irrigation ponds; and septage lagoons.
C. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, the construction of
additions and extensions to one- and two-family dwellings and
accessory residential uses shall be permitted within the CO District
provided that:
37.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this article.
§ 275-12.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-12.5
1:416
§ 275-12.6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUFFER — The protected upland areas adjacent to wetlands and surface
waters in the Conservation Overlay District other than the wetlands
themselves.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The line on the shore, running parallel
to the main stem of the river, established by the fluctuations of water and
indicated by physical characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed
on the immediate bank, shelving, changes in the character of soil,
destruction of soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of
litter and debris, or other appropriate means that consider the
characteristics of the surrounding areas. Where the ordinary high-water
mark is not easily discernible, the ordinary high-water mark may be
determined by the Department of Environment Services. Source:
(1) The dwelling or residential use lawfully existed prior to the original
adoption of the Conservation Overlay District on October 7, 2003;
(2) The proposed construction conforms to all other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the City of Rochester; and
(3) The dwelling or use continues in its present use.
D. Lots of record, except that any lot requiring subdivision (i.e., that
creates two or more lots) or minor site/site plan review must meet the
requirements of this article.
E. Preexisting subdivisions and site plans. Exemptions:
(1) Subdivisions, site plans and planned unit developments approved
by the Planning Board and existing at the time of passage of this
article shall be exempt from this article, as governed by the
provisions of RSA 674:39.
(2) Completed applications approved by the Planning Board are
exempt from this article herein.
(3) Condominium conversions where there are no improvements
proposed to the site are exempt from this article.
F. This article becomes applicable in the following situations:
(1) Nonresidential site plans for additions, expansions, or changes in
use.
(2) Site plans for new commercial, industrial, or multifamily
development.
(3) New subdivisions.
§ 275-12.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12.6
1:417
Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, page 7 from the State of New
Hampshire web page, 1998.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A zoning district superimposed on one or more
established underlying zoning districts to impose supplemental restrictions
on uses in these districts.
POORLY DRAINED SOIL — As defined by high-intensity soil maps for New
Hampshire sponsored by the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New
England Special Publication No. 1, September 2002.[Amended 3-5-2019]
VERNAL POOLS —
VERY POORLY DRAINED SOIL — As defined by high-intensity soil maps
for New Hampshire sponsored by the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern
New England Special Publication No. 1, September 2002.[Amended
3-5-2019]
WETLAND — As defined by the National Food Security Act Manual (Soil
Conservation Service, 1994) and the Corps of Engineers Wetlands
Delineation Manual (1987) and the most recent version of the Regional
Supplement to the Corp of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual:
Northcentral and Northeast Region, those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for a life in saturated soil
conditions. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs
and similar areas.[Amended 3-5-2019]
Temporary bodies of water that flood each year for a few months during
the spring and summer. Vernal or "spring" pools fill up with melting
snow and early rains, then usually dry up by mid to late summer. Some
relatively deep pools may remain flooded for a few years but become
completely dry in seasons with very low rainfall. Autumnal pools fill
during the fall with rising groundwater.
A.
Because vernal pools are not permanently flooded, they do not support
fish populations and thus provide safe breeding sites for several
amphibian and invertebrate species, including wood frogs, spotted
salamanders, and fairy shrimp. These species have evolved life cycles
that depend on temporary pools.
B.
Vernal pools vary in size, ranging from several square feet to several
acres. They can be found in a variety of sites, such as isolated
depressions in the woods, kettle holes, and gravel pits. Many are within
larger wetlands, such as oxbows in river floodplains and pools in
forested swamps or scrub-shrub wetlands. Their common
characteristics are the absence of fish, temporary flooding regime, and
the presence of vernal pool species. Suitable pools must have enough
leaf litter and other debris to provide food sources and cover for the
species that breed in them. Source: ASNH Conservation Fact Sheet:
Vernal Pools.
C.
§ 275-12.6 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-12.7
1:418
§ 275-12.7. Buffer application.
Buffers are applied irrespective of lot lines and municipal boundaries,
except (as shown in the below diagram) that when a wetland is bounded by
City Class V or a state or federal highway, existing at the time of passage of
this article, buffers are not applied to properties directly across the right-ofway.
§ 275-12.8. Uses allowed.
A. The CO District is an overlay district. Where the provisions of this
article conflict with those of the underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive standards shall apply.
B. The following uses are allowed in this district:
(1) Wildlife habitat development and management.
(2) Conservation areas and nature trails, provided that the Planning
Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, reviews
and approves plans of such areas and trails prior to their
development.
(3) Recreation, including open-air recreational uses consistent with
the purpose and intent of this article, such as cross-country skiing,
ice skating, hiking, and photography.
(4) Education, including natural and environmental science walks,
wildlife and botanical studies and similar activities.
(5) Seasonally permitted hunting and fishing, as regulated by New
Hampshire Fish and Game Department.
(6) Forestry, including both logging operations and tree farming
subject to RSA 227-J:9. Logging and any associated road building
and/or skid trail construction shall be conducted in accordance
with the then-current Best Management Practices for Erosion
Control on Timber Harvesting Operations in New Hampshire
published by the UNH Cooperative Extension and New Hampshire
Department of Resources and Economic Development and the New
Hampshire Division of Forests and Lands, on file with this article
with the City Clerk.
(7) Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any fruit,
vegetable, floricultural or horticultural crops, conducted in
§ 275-12.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12.8
1:419
§ 275-12.9. Conditional use approvals.
Conditional use approval may be granted by the Planning Board (RSA
674:21, II) after proper public notice and public hearing.
accordance with Best Management Wetlands Practices for
Agriculture, July 1993, amended September 1998 (on file with this
article with the City Clerk), but not within 25 feet of the edge of the
adjacent wetland. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(8) The land surface within 25 feet of the edge of the wetland shall not
be altered. Herbicides and heavy equipment are prohibited within
25 feet of the edge of the wetland. New lawns may be established
beyond 25 feet from the edge of the wetland provided the wetland
has been delineated/flagged by a certified soil scientist.
Fertilization shall be limited to lime and wood ash.
(9) Removal of hazardous trees.
(10) Removal of invasive vegetation (see Notes on Native Trees and
Shrubs and Their Use in Landscaping, by the Rochester
Conservation Commission, on file with this article with the City
Clerk).
(11) Minor accessory structures of 200 square feet or less (in which
there is no storage of petroleum products, hazardous chemicals or
materials). Such accessory structures shall not be constructed with
any of the following materials: asphalt shingles or pressure-treated
or chemically treated/preserved wood.
C. Any uses not listed in this section are prohibited in the CO District.
A. The following uses are allowed with a conditional use approval:
(1) Roads and other accessways; drainageways; pipelines, power lines
and other transmission lines; docks, boat launches, and piers;
domestic water wells (and associated ancillary pipes and
equipment); and replacement septic tanks and leach fields where
evidence is submitted that no alternative location is available on
the property, provided that all of the following conditions are found
to exist:
(a) The proposed construction is essential to the productive use of
land not within the CO District.
(b) Design and construction methods will be such as to minimize
impact upon the wetlands and will include restoration of the
site consistent with the permitted use.
(c) There is no feasible alternative route on land controlled by the
applicant that does not cross the CO District nor has less
detrimental impact on the wetlands. Nothing in this section
§ 275-12.8 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-12.9
1:420
shall limit the applicant from exploring alternatives with
abutting property owners.
(d) Economic advantage is not the sole reason for the proposed
location of the construction.
B. Buffer reductions.
(1) Lots which are subject to the requirements of this CO District as
defined in §§ 275-12.2 and 275-12.3 above may be allowed a buffer
reduction of no more than 1/2 of any required buffer subject to all
applicable provisions of this chapter, in the following situations:
(a) Expansion of existing structures may be permitted for lots
located in the Industrial, DC, OC, and HC Districts.
(b) Construction of a new structure may be permitted for lots
located in the Industrial, DC, OC, and HC Districts.
(2) All the following conditions shall be met to allow buffer reductions:
(a) The structure for which the exception is sought cannot feasibly,
after consideration of all reasonable alternatives, be
constructed on a portion or portions of the lot which lie outside
the CO District, or the application of the CO District eliminates
greater than 50% of the buildable area located on the parcel or,
in the judgment of the Planning Board, the proposed site layout
would result in a significantly higher quality design.
(b) The proposed structure and use must be consistent with the
purpose and intent of this article and provisions must be made
to ensure that drainage from the structure will not adversely
impact any wetlands.
(c) There shall be no impervious areas for parking within the
reduced buffer for which the conditional use approval is
sought.
(d) The maximum building coverage is limited to 50% of the outer
half of the buffer zone, as shown in the diagram below.
(e) Best management practices must be demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board.
§ 275-12.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12.9
1:421
Buffer Reduction Examples
(3) Buffer reduction may also be obtained explicitly by issuance of a
NHDES dredge and fill permit, per § 275-12.10, Dredge and fill
permits.
C. Administration of conditional use approvals.
(1) The application shall be referred to the Conservation Commission
for review and comment prior to the Planning Board making any
final decision. In acting on the application, the Board shall consider
any report received from the Commission. The Board shall then
vote either to approve the application as presented, approve it with
conditions, or deny it.
(2) Prior to the granting of any conditional use approval under
Subsections A and B of this section, the applicant may be required
to submit a performance security in a form acceptable to the
Planning Board, depending on the scale of the proposed use and
potential threat to the wetlands. The security shall be submitted in
a form and amount with surety and conditions satisfactory to the
Planning and Development Department to ensure that the
construction will be carried out in accordance with the approved
design. The security shall be submitted to and approved by the
Planning and Development Department prior to the issuance of any
permit authorizing construction.
(3) The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a wetlands
impact assessment when necessary to evaluate an application
made under this article. The cost of this assessment shall be borne
by the applicant.
(4) As outlined in RSA 676:4, I(g), the applicant may also be assessed
reasonable fees to cover the cost of other special investigative
studies and for the review of documents required by particular
applications, reviews by the City's legal counsel, and any third
§ 275-12.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-12.9
1:422
§ 275-12.10. Dredge and fill permits.
§ 275-12.11. Mitigation.
CO District mitigation shall be provided in the same watershed, if required
by the Planning Board, at its discretion, with consideration of
recommendations by the Conservation Commission.
§ 275-12.12. Prohibited uses and activities.
§ 275-12.13. Board of Adjustment.
Any variance or appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in
accordance with RSA 676:5 and Article 4 of this chapter. Prior to holding a
public hearing on an appeal or variance, the Zoning Board shall forward a
copy of the plan and application to the Conservation Commission for review
and comment. The Conservation Commission shall, after reviewing the plan
and application, forward any appropriate recommendations to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for its consideration.
§ 275-12.14. Very poorly drained soils.
Any wetland or part of any wetland consisting of very poorly drained soils
shall not count toward the minimum lot area or density requirements of any
property in any zoning district.
party wetlands consultant as may be required by the Planning
Board.
A. Prior to filing an application for a New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES) dredge and fill permit, the applicant
is strongly encouraged to meet with the Conservation Commission to
ensure that the proposed dredge and fill is consistent with the intent of
this article.
B. An approved NHDES dredge and fill permit, once acted upon, will
change the CO District boundary, which will be applied from the new
edge of wetland.
A. Expansion of motor vehicle recycling and junkyards is prohibited.
B. There shall be no storage of petroleum products, hazardous chemicals
or materials.
C. Accessory structures shall not be constructed with any of the following
materials: asphalt shingles or pressure-treated or chemically treated/
preserved wood.
D. There shall be no parking or storage of unregistered vehicles.
§ 275-12.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12.14
1:423
Table I
Named Streams and Surface Water Table
Axe Handle Brook
(Rickers and Howard Brooks)
Heath Brook
Hurd Brook
Willow Brook
AKA Wardley Brook
Clark Brook
Baxter Lake
Rochester Reservoir
Hanson Pond
AKA Squamanagonic Pond
Little Long Pond
Champlin Pond
No name pond south of Champlin Pond
Note: The above streams have been identified in the Water Resource
Management and Protection Plan, prepared by the Southern New
Hampshire Planning Commission, dated February 1991 and on file in the
office of the Planning Board, as listed in Table I.
§ 275-12.14 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-12.14
1:424
ARTICLE 13
Flood Hazard Overlay District (FHOD)
§ 275-13.1. Authority and purpose.
This article, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, shall be
known as the "City of Rochester Floodplain Development Ordinance." The
regulations in this article shall overlay and supplement the regulations in
the City of Rochester Zoning Ordinance and shall be considered part of the
Zoning Ordinance for purposes of administration and appeals under state
law. If any provision of this article differs or appears to conflict with any
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall
be controlling.
§ 275-13.2. Regulatory floodway boundaries.
The following regulations in this article shall apply to all lands designated as
special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, Strafford County, New Hampshire,
together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated May 17,
2005, which are declared to be a part of this article and are hereby
incorporated by reference.
§ 275-13.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After
detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE or A99.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation.
§ 275-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13.3
1:425
BUILDING — See "structure."
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FLOODWAY) — An official map
of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated the regulatory floodway. This map should not be used to
determine the current flood hazard zone or base flood elevation; the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) will be used to make determinations of flood
hazard zones and base flood elevations.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and related erosion
areas having special hazards have been designated as Zone A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "Flood Elevation Study."
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary
for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building/repair
facilities but does not include long-range storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 275-13.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-13.3
1:426
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed wall of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on
a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the
term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers,
and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 275-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13.3
1:427
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot at any point. These areas are designated as floodways
on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM
or FIRM as Zones A, AO, A1-30, A99, and AH. (See "area of special flood
hazard.")
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages, or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage by any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the
cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure.
The market value of the structure should equal the appraised value prior
to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage,
the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes
of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
§ 275-13.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-13.3
1:428
any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, whether
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
§ 275-13.4. Restrictions in regulatory floodway zone.
The following regulations, as well as the regulations contained in
appropriate sections of this chapter, shall apply to the regulatory floodway
zone as delineated in § 275-13.2 above:
A. All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall
require a permit.
B. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall review
all building permit applications for new construction or substantial
improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a floodprone
area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(2) Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(3) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and
(4) Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. The placement of a manufactured housing unit is prohibited within the
designated regulatory floodway, except in existing manufactured
housing parks.
D. Within the regulatory floodway, any development or encroachment
(including fill) which would result in any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge is prohibited.
E. Where new and replacement water and sewer systems (including onsite
systems) are proposed in flood-prone areas, the applicant shall
provide the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services with
assurance that new and replacement sanitary sewage systems will be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and onsite
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during periods of flooding.
§ 275-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13.4
1:429
F. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall maintain
for public inspection, and furnish upon request, any certification of
floodproofing and the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and include whether or not such structures
contain a basement. This information must be furnished by the
applicant. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
G. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall review
proposed developments to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those governmental agencies from which approval is
required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to certify these assurances to
the Building Inspector.
H. Watercourses.
(1) In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, the applicant for such authorization shall notify the
Wetlands Board of the New Hampshire Environmental Services
Department and submit copies of such notification to the Director
of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services. Further, the applicant
shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those
adjacent communities as determined by the Director.
(2) Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the
applicant shall submit to the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services certification provided by a registered
professional engineer assuring that the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse has been maintained.
(3) Along watercourses that have a designated regulatory floodway, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are allowed within the
designated regulatory floodway that would result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge.
In Zone A, the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data
available from a federal, state, or other source as criteria for
requiring that development meet the floodway requirements of this
article.
(4) Along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway
designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones
A1-30 on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
§ 275-13.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-13.4
1:430
§ 275-13.5. Standards.
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community.
A. In special flood hazard areas the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services shall determine the one-hundred-year flood
elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data
available:
(1) In Zones A1-30 and AH, refer to the elevation provided in the
community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM or
FHBM.
(2) In unnumbered A Zones, the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
one-hundred-year flood elevation data available from federal, state,
development proposals submitted to the community (example:
subdivisions, site approvals, etc.) or other source.
(3) In Zone AO, the one-hundred-year flood elevation is determined by
adding the elevation of the highest adjacent grade to the depth
number specified on the FIRM or, if no depth number is specified on
the FIRM, at least two feet.
B. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services' one-hundredyear
flood elevation determination will be used as criteria for requiring
in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, AO and A that:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the one-hundred-year flood level.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the one-hundred-year flood level or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards or practice for meeting the provisions
of this article.
(3) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
§ 275-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13.5
1:431
§ 275-13.6. Variances and appeals.
at or above the base flood level and be securely anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A, A1-30, AH
and AE on the City's FIRM must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the permit requirements for placement of manufactured
homes located on the Rochester FIRM.
(4) New construction and substantial improvements.
(a) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding are permitted provided the enclosed areas meet the
following requirements:
[1] The enclosed area is unfinished or flood-resistant, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
[2] The area is not a basement; and
[3] Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings have a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exist of floodwaters.
(5) Proposed structures to be located on slopes in special flood hazard
areas, Zones AH and AD, shall include adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed structures.
§ 275-13.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-13.6
1:432
A. Any order, requirements, decision or determination of the Building
Inspector made under this article may be appealed to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5.
B. If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by RSA
674:33, I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing, in addition
to the usual variance standards under state law, that:
(1) The variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense.
(2) If the requested variance is for activity within a designated
regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge will result.
(3) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing
that the issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood level
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.) for one hundred dollars
($100.) of insurance coverage and such construction below the base
flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions.
D. The community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including
their justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in
its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance
Administrator.
§ 275-13.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13.6
1:433

ARTICLE 14
Historic Overlay District (HOD)
[Amended 3-5-2019]
§ 275-14.1. Table of contents.
§ 275-14.1. Table of contents
§ 275-14.2. Purpose and intent
§ 275-14.3. Applicability
§ 275-14.4. Historic District Commission
§ 275-14.5. Definitions
§ 275-14.6. Designation of Historic District
§ 275-14.7. Identification of Historic District
§ 275-14.8. Delineation of Historic District
§ 275-14.9. Effect of inclusion in Historic
District
§ 275-14.10. Development involving property
within Historic District
§ 275-14.11. Historic District demolition permit
§ 275-14.12. Historic District relocation permit
§ 275-14.13. Determination of hardship
§ 275-14.14. Demolition by neglect
§ 275-14.15. Appeals
§ 275-14.16. Enforcement
§ 275-14.2. Purpose and intent.
A. This article is established by the Rochester City Council pursuant to and
in accordance with NH RSA 673:4 and 674:44a through 674:50. The
purpose of the Rochester Historic Overlay District is to promote the
general welfare of the community by:
(1) Safeguarding the cultural, social, political, and economic heritage
of the City;
(2) Fostering the preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of
structures and places of historic, architectural, and community
value;
(3) Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of
the past;
(4) Furthering the attractiveness of the City of Rochester to home
buyers, tourists, visitors, and shoppers, thereby providing
economic benefit to the City;
§ 275-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.2
1:435
§ 275-14.3. Applicability.
This article applies to all properties located within the boundaries of the
Historic Overlay District.
§ 275-14.4. Historic District Commission.
(5) Conserving and improving the value of property in the District; and
(6) Enhancing opportunities, where applicable, for financial benefits
for owners of historic properties through grants, low interest loans,
tax credits, and other tax benefits.
B. New construction is an essential process in a vital community,
representing the current phase of an evolution that has been ongoing
since the settlement of Rochester. There are a number of ways of
designing new buildings and additions that will meet the objectives of
this article. State of the art contemporary architecture is appropriate,
and encouraged, provided that it is respectful of the historic fabric of
the District.
A. Membership.
(1) Composition. The Historic District Commission shall consist of
seven regular members and up to five alternate members. Two
seats among the regular members are designated for one member
of the City Council and one member of the Planning Board,
respectively. Likewise, two seats among the alternate members are
designated to one member of the City Council and to one member
of the Planning Board, respectively, which two alternate members
may only sit for the regular City Council and Planning Board
members, respectively. All Commission members shall be
appointed in accordance with the provisions of Section 74 of the
Rochester City Charter.
(2) Qualifications. All members shall be residents of the City of
Rochester. In reviewing the qualifications of a candidate for the
Commission, the Council/Planning Board shall consider his/her
demonstrated interest and experience in, and knowledge of,
historic preservation and his/her ability to administer this article
consistent with its purpose and intent. To the extent that such
persons are available the Council/Planning Board shall seek
members with backgrounds or interest in the fields of architecture,
planning, historic preservation, history, archaeology, anthropology,
engineering, construction, real estate, and law. At least one
member shall live or work in the Historic District.
(3) Appointments. The members of the Historic District Commission
shall be appointed for terms of three years. Initial appointments
shall be staggered so that subsequent terms will not be
coterminous.
§ 275-14.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.4
1:436
B. Powers and duties. The Historic District Commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
(1) Applications. Reviewing and approving, approving with conditions,
or denying applications for certificates of approval.
(2) Consultation. Calling upon City staff, citizens, abutters to
applicants, and professionals, as it sees fit, for input, consultation,
and recommendations on matters before the Commission.
(3) Surveys. Conducting small area or community-wide surveys of
historic, architectural, and cultural resources.
(4) National register. Nominating structures and districts for listing in
the National Register and reviewing all proposed National Register
nominations within the City; keeping a record of all properties
which are included in the local historic districts, listed in the
National Register, and determined eligible for National Register
listing.
(5) Planning. Preparing historic resources components of local master
plans and ensuring that historical resources are considered at
every level of local decision-making.
(6) Advice and advocacy. Advising other agencies of local, state, and
federal government regarding, and advocating on behalf of, the
identification, protection, and preservation of local historic,
architectural, archaeological, and cultural resources.
(7) Liaison. Acting as a liaison between local government and
individuals or organizations concerned with historic preservation.
(8) Other applications. Commenting on applications for site plan/
subdivision approval, zoning amendments, variances, special
exceptions, and other approvals affecting property in the Historic
District or other historic resources.
(9) Amendments. Investigating and recommending to the Planning
Board and City Council amendments to this article and appropriate
areas for designation as historic districts.
(10) Education. Educating individual members of the Commission,
municipal officials, property owners, and the public about the
historic district and historic preservation.
(11) Signage and recognition. Developing and administering a system of
markers and monuments recognizing individual properties and the
district and acknowledging special contributions toward historic
preservation by members of the community.
(12) Budget. Developing and submitting an annual request for funds to
the City Council if desired. Subject to the availability of funds, the
Commission may retain consultants.
§ 275-14.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.4
1:437
§ 275-14.5. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this article only.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter,
housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY (STRUCTURE OR SITE) — Also known as an
"historic property." A property that contributes positively to the Historic
Overlay District's architectural quality and integrity as a result of its
location, design, history, condition, quality, age, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and/or association.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — This encompasses the
building itself and those individual elements which are integral to the
building and are visible on the exterior. It includes colors, materials,
texture, arrangement, architectural detailing and trim, the roof, windows,
doors, foundation, steps, ramps, porches, decks, awnings, hardware, and
light fixtures.
HARDSHIP — A situation where denial of the applicant's request to perform
particular work upon a specific property that is not in conformance with the
standards of this article would cause substantial difficulty for the applicant
due to significant financial expense, loss of use of the property, diminution
in the usability of the property, or impairment of the ability of an existing
business to function effectively. (Note that this definition is different from
the concept of hardship used elsewhere in this chapter regarding
applications for variances.)
HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT — Also known as "Historic District" and
"District." An overlay zone district as described in this chapter.
MASSING — The shapes, sizes, and arrangement of the three-dimensional
forms that compose a building.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY — A property which, due to its recent
vintage (generally less than 50 years), incompatible design, incompatible
and irretrievable alterations, or deteriorated condition, would not be
considered to contribute to that character or quality of the District which
the City seeks to preserve.
PROPORTION — The relation of one dimension to another, such as the
height of a window compared to its width. Proportion affects visual order
through coordination of such elements as height, width, depth, and spacing.
PUBLIC WAY — A road, sidewalk, footpath, trail, park, or navigable
waterway owned by the City of Rochester or another governmental agency
and intended to be accessible to the public.
(13) Rules and regulations. Adopting, and from time to time amending,
rules and regulations which are consistent with the intent of this
article and appropriate state statutes.
(14) Other. Undertaking any other appropriate action or activity
necessary to carry out its mission as embodied in this article.
§ 275-14.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.5
1:438
SCALE — The perception of the size of a building or building element
relative to the human body or other buildings or objects in the vicinity.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the
ground. Examples include buildings, fences, walls, signs, and light fixtures.
TRADITIONAL — Sensitive to, evocative of, or harmonious with any
particular style of architecture established prior to 1950 or the prevailing
patterns, forms, or styles of architecture dating from the original settlement
of the United States up to 1950.
§ 275-14.6. Designation of Historic District.
A. Procedures for designation. The Rochester Historic District functions
as a zoning overlay district. It is the role of the Historic District
Commission to evaluate properties within the overlay district and to
designate specific properties as contributing properties. The District
boundaries may be amended and new historic districts may be
designated and delineated following the amendment procedure
described in this chapter38 with the provision that:
(1) The Historic District Commission may initiate such amendments;
(2) The Historic District Commission shall have an opportunity to
comment on any such proposed amendments prior to enactment by
the Codes and Ordinances Commission and by City Council; and
(3) The Historic District Commission shall designate individual lots or
parcels of land within the overlay district as contributing property
upon determination by the Historic District Commission that the
criteria for designation within this section are met.
B. Criteria for designation. Any building, group of buildings, site, property,
group of properties, or area (collectively referred to herein as "site")
proposed for inclusion in the Rochester Historic District should
generally (but not necessarily) be at least 50 years old and possess one
or more of the features listed below. These criteria should be
considered when the Commission, Planning Board and/or City Council
deliberate the enlargement or reduction of an existing district or the
creation of a new district. In any district which contains multiple
properties or structures, not every property or structure need meet
these criteria; rather the district overall should embody a meaningful
degree of continuity, cohesiveness, integrity, and a prevailing
conformance with one or more of the criteria.
(1) The site embodies distinguishing characteristics of, or high quality
in, design, detailing, materials, craftsmanship, or a particular
architectural style.
38.Editor's Note: See § 275-3.5, Amendments.
§ 275-14.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.6
1:439
§ 275-14.7. Identification of Historic District.
(2) Its antique age, good condition, and special features make it
worthy of preservation.
(3) Its unique location and characteristics make it an established and
appreciated element or visual landmark for the community.
(4) The site is identified as the work of a master builder, designer,
architect, engineer, or landscape architect whose individual work
was influential in the development of the City of Rochester, region,
state, or nation.
(5) The site contributes to the visual continuity of the District.
(6) One or more significant cultural, social, political, economic, or
military events in the history of the City of Rochester, region, state,
or nation occurred at the site.
(7) The site is identified with a person or persons of historic
significance.
A. This district may be referred to as the "Historic Overlay District,
"HOD," or "Rochester Historic District." A Zoning Map of the Rochester
Historic District," as amended, which shows the Historic Overlay
District, is hereby incorporated as part of this article and is on file with
the City Clerk. Within the District are contributing and noncontributing
buildings as identified by the Historic District Commission and on file
with the City of Rochester Planning and Development Department. The
Zoning Map and all the notations, references, district boundaries, and
other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this article
as if all were fully described therein. See § 275-14.8 which lists
properties in the district by Assessor's Map and lot numbers.
B. Surveys, maps and historic context papers. The Planning and
Development Director or designee shall conduct or cause to be
conducted such preliminary surveys, studies or investigations as
deemed necessary or advisable to adequately inform the Historic
District Commission of those properties located within the City which
represent Rochester's history. The Planning and Development Director
or designee shall memorialize the results of surveys, studies and
investigations in a series of historic inventory forms, maps and/or
historic context papers. Said inventory forms, maps, and context papers
shall be maintained by the Planning and Development Department and
shall be made available for public inspection at all reasonable times.
These resources shall be referenced by the Historic District
Commission when reviewing applications for changes or boundary
adjustments within the Historic Overlay District.
§ 275-14.6 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.8
1:440
§ 275-14.8. Delineation of Historic District.
The Rochester Historic District is defined as that area made up of the lots
listed below as delineated on the Rochester Tax Maps. Unless otherwise
noted or shown on the map, all of the land composing each lot shall be
considered to lie within the District. The District also includes all City
property necessary to make a contiguous district. (Note that in the case of
discrepancy between the Zoning Map and this list of lots, the Zoning Map
shall be determining.) Lots in the District include:
§ 275-14.9. Effect of inclusion in Historic District.
A. Tax Map 116, Lots 156-162, and 201-204;
B. Tax Map 120, Lots 322-324, 332-340, 342, 342-1, 343, 346, 347, 351,
352, 354, 355, 358-367, 379-381, 383-390, 392-408, and 419-422;
C. Tax Map 121, Lots 9-18, 28, 29, 361-364, 366-368, 368-1, 369-400; and
D. Tax Map 125, Lots 1, 181, 182, and 202-204.
A. Approvals required. Any development involving properties included
within the boundaries of the Historic Overlay District, unless
determined exempt, requires the approval of a certificate of no negative
effect or a certificate of approval before a building permit or any other
work authorization will be issued by the City.
B. Design guidelines.
(1) The Historic District Commission has adopted design guidelines,
hereinafter referred to as "the guidelines." These guidelines set
forth the standards necessary to preserve and to maintain the
historic and architectural character of the Historic Overlay District.
The standards apply to the exterior features of properties within
the District and are intended to offer assistance to property owners
undertaking construction, rehabilitation, alterations, or other
exterior changes. The guidelines will be periodically reviewed by
the Historic District Commission and amended at a public hearing
as needed.
(2) The guidelines will be used in the review of requests for certificate
of no negative effect or certificates of appropriateness.
Conformance with applicable guidelines is strongly recommended
for the approval of any proposed project.
(3) The guidelines effectively replace the architectural regulations
under the site plan regulations for properties located within the
Historic Overlay District. The architectural regulations and site
plan regulations and associated reviews do not apply.
C. Special consideration for contributing and noncontributing buildings
within the Historic District. To preserve and maintain the historic and
architectural character of the District, the Historic District Commission
§ 275-14.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.9
1:441
§ 275-14.10. Development involving property within Historic
District.
No building, structure, significant ground disturbance or sign may be
constructed, altered, repaired, relocated or otherwise improved within the
boundaries of the Historic Overlay District until sufficient information is
submitted to the City of Rochester Planning Office and approved in
accordance with the procedures established within the Municipal Code.
or City Council may approve variations from the requirements set forth
in the Land Use Code and may make recommendations to the Chief
Building Official who has the authority to grant certain exceptions from
the International Building Code (IBC) through the provisions of the
International Existing Building Code (IEBC).
D. To the extent practicable and appropriate, as determined by City staff
and the Commission, applicants may file applications for various
permits, to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Building
Department, etc., simultaneously, or in any appropriate order, in order
to save time. This provision, however, shall not be construed in a
manner which would prevent the Commission from conducting a
thorough review as it sees fit.
E. All City authorities, including the Historic District Commission and City
Council, are authorized to grant economic and developmental benefits
to historic properties within the Historic District.
F. In cases where the Historic District Commission has purview, the
Planning Board shall not have jurisdiction over architectural design.
The architectural regulations under the site plan regulations shall not
apply. Nonetheless, the Planning Board shall review all other elements
of a site otherwise subject to its review.
G. Property owned by the City of Rochester shall be subject to review and
approval by the Commission in like manner to all other property in the
City situated within the district; provided, however, that a vote by 2/3 of
the total membership of the Rochester City Council may override any
vote of the Commission pertaining to land or property owned by the
City of Rochester.
A. Exempt activity. A certificate of appropriateness or certificate of no
negative effect shall not be required for the following activities. A
project may be subject to other requirements within this chapter.
(1) Work completed on a single-family or duplex building within the
Historic Overlay District.
(2) Structures which are not buildings as defined in this article (such
as light poles, street furniture, and fences).
(3) Work performed on the interior of buildings that does not effect the
exterior appearance.
§ 275-14.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.10
1:442
(4) Land uses. Land uses are not be regulated through this article
herein nor by the Commission. Permitted uses are set forth
elsewhere in this chapter. However, in cases where the applicant is
unable or unwilling to develop a design which conforms to the
guidelines and requirements herein because of unusual constraints
in the nature of the proposed use, the Commission is by no means
required to issue a certificate of approval simply to accommodate
that permitted use. (Example: A gasoline station might be
permitted in the Historic District, but if no design is presented for
which the appearance of the canopy and the pump stations meet
the standards of this article, then the application should be denied,
even though this specific permitted use may thereby be precluded.)
(5) Elements which are appurtenant to a building but which are not
integral to the building, including antennas, satellite dishes,
flagpoles, mailboxes, window air conditioning units, and similar
elements.
(6) Installation or removal of any plants.
(7) Color of paint or stain of wood siding with the condition that the
paint color or stain is from an approved historic paint color palette.
Refer to the City of Rochester Planning Staff for approved historic
paint color palettes.
(8) Installation of pavement or other impervious or semi-impervious
material in an already established parking area.
(9) Minimally intrusive work that does not adversely affect the historic
character of the property or District as determined by Planning
Staff.
B. Certificate of no negative effect.
(1) An application for a certificate of no negative effect may be made to
the City of Rochester Planning and Development Department for
approval of work that has no adverse effect on the physical
appearance or character-defining features of a property located
within the Historic Overlay District. An application for a certificate
of no negative effect may be approved by the Planning and
Development Director or designee with no further review if it
meets the requirements set forth below.
(a) The Planning and Development Director or designee shall issue
a certificate of no negative effect within 14 days after receipt of
a complete application if:
[1] It is determined that the activity is an eligible work item
and meets the City Historic Preservation Design
Guidelines; and
§ 275-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.10
1:443
[2] Any modifications to the proposed work requested by the
Planning and Development Director or designee are
agreed to by the owner/applicant; and
[3] The proposed work will not diminish, eliminate or
adversely affect the significant historic and/or
architectural character of the subject property or Historic
District in which it is located.
(b) An application for a certificate of no negative effect shall
include the following:
[1] Elevations or drawings of plans not less than 1/8 inch
showing the proposed work.
[2] Photographs, building material samples and other
exhibits, as needed, to accurately depict location, extent
and design of proposed work.
[3] Demonstrated compliance with applicable design
guidelines.
(c) The following work shall be considered for a certificate of no
negative effect:
[1] Replacement of architectural features which creates no
change to the exterior physical appearance of the building
or structure.
[2] Installation of awnings on historic properties.
[3] Signs.
[4] Alterations to noncontributing buildings within the
Historic Districts that have no adverse effect on its historic
or architectural character.
[5] Alterations to non-street-facing facades on contributing
buildings within the Historic District that have no adverse
effect on its historic or architectural character.
[6] Small structures or additions of 250 square feet or less in
size.
[7] Installation of site improvements, such as walkways,
patios, decks, or similar significant features.
(2) In the event that the Planning and Development Director or
designee determines that the issuance of a certificate of no
negative effect is not appropriate or the design guidelines are not
met, the owner may apply for a certificate of appropriateness from
the HDC.
§ 275-14.10 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.10
1:444
C. Certificate of approval. An application for a certificate of approval shall
be submitted to the Rochester Historic District Commission through the
Planning and Development Department no fewer than 10 days prior to a
Commission meeting. However, upon an affirmative vote of at least four
members of the Commission this deadline may be reduced on a case-bycase
basis for good cause.
(1) Intent. It is the intent of this article to make the review process as
simple and pleasant as practical. The applicant need only submit
those materials which the Commission reasonably determines are
necessary to conduct an appropriate review.
(a) On small or straightforward projects submission of the
application, a letter of intent, a verbal description, and/or one
or more sketches drawn by the applicant may suffice.
(b) In the case of more elaborate proposals or those potentially
having a significant impact upon sensitive properties, any or all
of the materials listed below may be required as the
Commission sees fit. While the use of an architect is not
required under this article, there will be many situations where
it will be difficult to provide appropriate drawings and to meet
the objectives of this article without the use of an architect,
particularly where new construction or additions are involved.
(c) Applicants are encouraged to speak with the Planning and
Development Department prior to preparing an application
package to get a preliminary sense of which of the items below
might not be needed.
(2) Application requirements.
(a) The application package may include any or all of the items
listed below as stipulated by the Historic District Commission:
[1] A completed application form as provided by the City shall
include:
[a] The purpose of the proposed project.
[b] The nature and scope of the work to be performed.
[2] Site plans drawn to scale clearly depicting existing
conditions and proposed work.
[3] Elevation drawings to scale of each affected facade of the
building clearly depicting existing conditions and
proposed work.
[4] Detail drawings of appropriate elements (such as the
balustrade for a handicapped ramp).
[5] Photographs of each impacted side of the building.
§ 275-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.10
1:445
[6] Sample, swatch, and/or manufacturer's cut sheet of
materials to be used (such as a brick), as appropriate.
[7] A written description of how the project meets the
applicable design guidelines.
[8] Any other items which the Commission may reasonably
need to conduct its review.
(b) No fees of any kind shall be charged for applications to the
Commission or to cover any of the costs of reviewing the
application.
(3) Procedures for review of the application. Recognizing that a
lengthy approval process can be costly to landowners, developers,
and business owners, the Commission shall seek to take final action
at its earliest reasonable opportunity, which in many cases will be
at the first regular meeting of the Commission at which the
application is presented.
(a) The Planning and Development Director or designee shall
review the application materials submitted for certificate of
appropriateness approval and request additional information
as necessary.
(b) Staff shall review the submittal material and prepare a report
that analyzes the project's conformance with the design
guidelines and other applicable Land Use Code sections. This
report will be transmitted to the HDC with relevant
information on the proposed project and a recommendation to
continue, approve, disapprove or approve with conditions and
the reasons for the recommendation. The HDC will review the
application, the staff analysis report and the evidence
presented at the hearing to determine the project's
conformance with the design guidelines.
(c) Action by Historic District Commission.
[1] The Historic District Commission shall take action, i.e., to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny, on all
applications within 65 days of the meeting at which the
Commission accepts the application as complete. This time
frame may be extended either by consent or request of the
applicant or upon formal request from the Commission to,
and written authorization from, the City Manager for an
additional period not to exceed 65 days.
[2] Failure by the Commission to act within the period of time
specified above (with or without extensions) shall be
deemed to constitute approval of the application as
submitted. A certificate of approval shall be effective for
two years after the date of approval. If an applicant has not
§ 275-14.10 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.10
1:446
secured a building permit within that time frame, or has
not substantially commenced work in cases where no
building permit is required, the certificate shall lapse. The
Commission may grant extensions as it reasonably
determines appropriate.
(d) Meetings of the Historic District Commission are public
meetings and may require notice to the public as specified in
New Hampshire State Statute and the City of Rochester
Municipal Code. The public is encouraged to attend. When
notice is required, the Planning and Development Department
shall process notices for public hearings.
(e) The Commission may seek advice from such professional,
educational, cultural, or other resources as is deemed
necessary.
(f) The HDC may approve, disapprove, approve with conditions or
continue the application to obtain additional information
necessary to make a decision to approve or deny. The
Commission may make nonbinding recommendations to the
applicant on elements outside of its purview, such as on paint,
color of wood, parking lot layout, or planting materials. The
Commission shall notify the applicant of its decision. When an
application is rejected as being incomplete or denied, the
reason(s) for the decision shall be conveyed to the applicant
and clearly stated in the record of proceedings of the
Commission. Any steps recommended to remedy deficiencies
or flaws in the proposal shall also be conveyed to the applicant.
(g) A monitoring committee comprised of two representatives
from the Commission shall be assigned to the approved project
to oversee and approve amendments that may arise during
construction.
D. Amendments. There are two processes for amending plans approved
pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness. All requests for
amendments must be in writing and accompanied by drawing(s) and
elevations as specified below.
(1) Insubstantial amendments.
(a) Insubstantial amendments are minor modifications to HDC
approved plans that:
[1] Address circumstances discovered in the course of
construction that could not have been reasonably
anticipated during the approval process; or
[2] Are necessary for conformance with building safety or
accessibility codes and do not materially change the
approved plans; or
§ 275-14.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.10
1:447
§ 275-14.11. Historic District demolition permit.
It is the intent of this article to preserve the historic and architectural
resources that contribute to the history of Rochester. Consequently no
demolition of any properties within the Historic Overlay District shall be
permitted unless approved by the HDC in accordance with the standards
set forth in this section.
[3] Approve specific building materials, finishes, design of
ornamental trim and other such detail not provided in the
HDC approved plans: or
[4] Change the shape, location or material of a building
element or feature but maintain the same quality and
approximate appearance of that found in the approved
plans.
(b) The Planning and Development Director or designee and the
monitoring committee may authorize amendments to approved
plans. Decisions of the Planning and Development Director or
designee or monitoring committee are binding.
(2) Other amendments. The Planning and Development Director or
designee or monitoring committee may determine that the
proposed changes do not meet the design guidelines and remand
the matter to the HDC for a decision by the Commission. Approval
of amendments by the Planning and Development Director or
designee and the monitoring committee shall be reported to the
HDC at their regularly scheduled meetings.
A. Exempt activity.
(1) Demolition of a single-family or duplex building within the Historic
Overlay District.
(2) Demolition of structures which are not buildings as defined in this
article (such as light poles, street furniture, and fences).
(3) Demolition work performed on the interior of buildings that does
not effect the exterior appearance.
(4) Demolition of elements which are appurtenant to a building but
which are not integral to the building, including antennas, satellite
dishes, flagpoles, mailboxes, window air-conditioning units, and
similar nonhistoric elements.
B. Procedures for demolition of properties within the Historic Overlay
District.
(1) Application.
(a) An application for an historic district demolition permit for
properties within an Historic District will be filed with or
§ 275-14.10 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.11
1:448
referred to the Planning and Development Director or designee
by the Director of Building, Zoning and Licensing Services.
The applicant will be provided a written response within 14
days of the request for a demolition permit describing the
submittal materials needed for consideration. An application
for demolition approval shall include:
[1] Written documentation that the Director of Building,
Zoning and Licensing Services has determined the
building an imminent hazard that cannot be repaired; or
[2] Narrative text, graphic illustrations or other exhibits that
provide evidence that the building, structure or object is of
no historic or architectural value or importance.
(b) The staff shall review the submittal material and prepare a
staff report that analyzes the request relative to the criteria for
approval.
(2) Review procedures.
(a) Criteria to be met.
[1] The HDC shall review the application, the staff report and
hear evidence presented by the property owners and
parties of interest to determine if the standards for
demolition approval have been met. Demolition shall be
approved if it is demonstrated that the application meets
any one of the following criteria:
[a] The property has been determined by the City to be an
imminent hazard to public safety and the owner/
applicant is unable to make the needed repairs in a
timely manner; or
[b] The structure is not structurally sound despite
evidence of the owner's efforts to properly maintain
the structure; or
[c] The structure cannot practically be moved to another
appropriate location in Rochester; or
[d] No documentation exists to support or demonstrate
that the property has historic, architectural,
archaeological, engineering or cultural significance.
[2] Additionally, for approval to demolish and to grant a
historic district demolition permit, all of the following
criteria must be met:
[a] The structure does not contribute to the significance
of the Historic Overlay District; and
§ 275-14.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.11
1:449
§ 275-14.12. Historic District relocation permit.
The intent of this article is to preserve historic properties in their original
locations within the Historic Overlay District. However, it is recognized that
occasionally the relocation of a property may be appropriate as it provides
an alternative to demolition or because it only has a limited impact on the
attributes that make it significant. All properties within the Historic Overlay
District are subject to this section.
[b] The loss of the building, structure or object would not
adversely affect the integrity of the Historic Overlay
District or its historic, architectural or aesthetic
relationship to adjacent historic properties; and
[c] Demolition of the structure will be inconsequential to
the historic preservation needs of the area.
(b) The HDC shall approve, disapprove, approve with conditions or
continue the application to obtain additional information
necessary to consider the demolition request.
(c) If the demolition request is denied because it does not meet the
aforementioned standards, the applicant may request
demolition approval based upon approval of a determination of
hardship as set forth below.
(d) Before a demolition permit will be issued, a certificate of
approval for the redevelopment as described above, must be
approved. When a demolition permit must be issued because
the building is an imminent hazard or because of the issuance
of a determination of hardship, the permit may be received
prior to the receipt of a certificate of approval.
A. Exempt activity.
(1) Relocation of a single-family or duplex building.
(2) Relocation of structures which are not buildings as defined in this
section (such as light poles, street furniture, and fences).
(3) Relocation of elements which are appurtenant to a building but
which are not integral to the building, including antennas, satellite
dishes, flagpoles, mailboxes, window air-conditioning units, and
similar nonhistoric elements.
B. Application. An application for relocation shall include:
(1) A written description and/or graphic illustrations of the building,
structure or object proposed for relocation.
(2) A written explanation of the type of relocation requested
(temporary, on-site or off-site) and justification for the need for
relocation.
§ 275-14.11 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.12
1:450
(3) A written report from a licensed engineer or architect regarding
the soundness of the building, structure or object, its ability to
withstand the physical move and its rehabilitation needs, once
relocated.
(4) A conceptual plan for the receiving site providing preliminary
information on the property boundaries, existing improvements
and site characteristics and the associated planned improvements.
(5) If the applicant does not own the receiving site, proof from the
site's property owner of the willingness to accept the relocated
building, structure or object.
(6) Evidence that the applicant has or is seeking the necessary
approvals to place the building on the identified receiving site.
(7) Evidence of the financial ability to undertake the safe relocation,
preservation and repair of the building, structure or object; site
preparation and construction of necessary infrastructure through
the posting of bonds or other financial measures deemed
appropriate.
(8) Supplementary materials to provide an understanding of the larger
context for the relocated property and its impact on adjacent
properties, the neighborhood or streetscape.
(9) Additional information may be requested by the Historic District
Commission as needed to complete the review.
C. Procedures for the review of historic district relocation permit.
(1) The Planning and Development Director or designee shall review
the application materials submitted for relocation approval. Upon
determination of a complete application, the project shall be
scheduled before the HDC.
(2) Staff shall review the submittal material and prepare a report that
analyzes the project's conformance with the standards for
relocation approval set forth below, the City Historic Preservation
Design Guidelines and other applicable Land Use Code sections.
This report will be transmitted to the HDC with relevant
information on the proposed project and a recommendation to
continue, approve, disapprove or approve with conditions and the
reasons for the recommendation. The HDC will review the
application, the report and the evidence presented at the hearing
to determine if the standards for relocation have been met.
(3) The HDC shall approve, disapprove, approve with conditions or
continue the application to obtain additional information necessary
to make a decision to approve or deny.
D. Standards for relocation.
§ 275-14.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.12
1:451
§ 275-14.13. Determination of hardship.
It is the policy of the City to respect private property rights. The City
recognizes, therefore, that there may be some circumstances in which
the operation of this article could create an undue economic hardship.
This provision is created to provide property owners with a means of
demonstrating that such a hardship may exist and that they should be
allowed to demolish a property within the Historic Overlay District because
of that hardship. It is the intent of this provision to ensure that no private
property is taken without just compensation.
(1) Relocation for a building will be approved if it is determined that it
meets any one of the following standards:
(a) It does not contribute to the overall character of the historic
district or parcel on which it is located and its relocation will
not have an adverse impact on the Historic District or
property; or
(b) The owner has obtained a determination of hardship; or
(c) The relocation activity is demonstrated to be an acceptable
preservation method given the character and integrity of the
building and its move will not adversely affect the integrity of
the Historic District in which it was originally located or
diminish the historic, architectural or aesthetic relationships of
adjacent designated properties; and
(2) Additionally, for approval to relocate and to grant a historic district
relocation permit all of the following criteria must be met:
(a) It has been determined that the building, structure or object is
capable of withstanding the physical impacts of relocation:
(b) An appropriate receiving site has been identified; and
(c) An acceptable plan has been submitted providing for the safe
relocation, repair and preservation of the building, structure or
object, including the provision of the necessary financial
security.
A. Standard of review. The standard of review for a determination of
economic hardship will be whether refusing to allow the property
owner to demolish the property would result in a violation of the
prohibitions of the United States and New Hampshire Constitutions
against taking of private property for public use without just
compensation as those prohibitions are interpreted by the courts of
New Hampshire and the United States. In applying the standards, the
economic benefits of financial, developmental and technical assistance
from the City and the utilization of any federal and state rehabilitation
tax credit programs may be considered.
§ 275-14.12 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.13
1:452
§ 275-14.14. Demolition by neglect.
It is the intent of this article to address the range of circumstances that
affect the preservation of the community's significant historic and
architectural resources. It is further recognized that many historic buildings
and structures are lost because of deterioration from lack of maintenance.
B. Application requirements.
(1) Upon receiving a request for a certificate of economic hardship, the
Planning and Development Director or designee shall provide a
written response within 14 days as to the submittal materials
required.
(2) Within five days after receipt of an application for a certificate of
economic hardship, the Planning and Development Director or
designee shall determine whether the application is complete. If
he/she determines that the application is not complete, the Director
shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies. The Director
shall take no further steps to process the application until the
deficiencies have been remedied.
(3) The application fee shall be set to defray all costs of the review
process, including the fees of an independent hearing officer.
C. Review process.
(1) When the application is complete, the Planning and Development
Director or designee will refer the application to the Historic
District staff member and the City Attorney for review. The Historic
District staff member and City Attorney shall jointly prepare a
report setting forth the City's response.
(2) In the event the City response concludes that the application does
not demonstrate a case of economic hardship, the application can
apply for an administrative appeal before Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(3) The Zoning Board of Adjustment will be contracted by the City to
conduct an impartial quasi-judicial hearing on the question of
economic hardship. If deemed necessary, the ZBA may hire, at the
applicant's expense, a consulting professional(s) with sufficient
legal and technical experience to conduct a fair hearing on the
matter. The application, all support materials and the consultants/
City's report shall be provided to the ZBA in advance of the
hearing. At the hearing the applicant will be provided with an
opportunity to present his/her application and may be represented
by counsel. The City position will be presented by the City Attorney/
consultant.
D. Appeal. An applicant may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to
District Court.
§ 275-14.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.14
1:453
Whether this occurs unintentionally or through deliberate decisions, the
result is the same: the loss of community assets that cannot be replaced.
Consequently, it is declared that the exterior features of any designated
building or structure shall be preserved against decay and deterioration and
kept free from structural defects. The designated structures shall receive
reasonable care, maintenance and upkeep appropriate for their
preservation, protection, perpetuation and use.
A. Standards for reasonable care and upkeep. The owner or such other
person who may have legal possession, custody and control thereof of a
designated property shall, upon written request by the City, repair the
following exterior features if they are found to be deteriorating or if
their condition is contributing to deterioration such that it is likely to
compromise the building's structural integrity or as to create or permit
the creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition to life, health or other
property. These features include, but are not limited to:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations or other vertical
supports that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling.
(2) Deterioration of flooring or floor supports or other horizontal
members that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or
buckling.
(3) Deterioration of external chimneys that cause leaning, sagging,
splitting, listing or buckling.
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars.
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations,
including broken windows or doors.
(6) Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall
and roof coverings, including lack of paint or weathering due to
lack of paint or other protective covering.
(7) Rotting, holes and other forms of decay.
(8) Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and
door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, ornamental trim
and other architectural details that cause delamination, instability,
loss of shape and form or crumbling.
B. Enforcement procedures.
(1) The HDC or Planning and Development Director or designee may
file a petition listing specific defects, in accordance with
Subsection A above, with the Director of Building, Zoning and
Licensing Services, requesting that the official act under the
following procedures to require the correction of the defects or
repairs to designated properties.
§ 275-14.14 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.14
1:454
(2) Whenever a petition is filed, the Director of Building, Zoning and
Licensing and Services shall attempt to make direct personal
contact with the owner or other such persons having legal
possession or custody and/or his/her representative. If personal
contact cannot reasonably be accomplished, then written
notification of the specific defects purported by the HDC and a
request to inspect the property within 10 days will be mailed to the
owner and other such persons having legal possession, custody and
control and will be posted at a conspicuous location appropriate to
the identified defects. In the written notification the Chief Building
Official shall document the nature of the specific defects and the
corrective action ordered.
(3) After receiving agreement from the owner, his/her representatives
or other such persons having legal possession, custody and control
of the property for an inspection, the Chief Building Official and the
HDC Officer shall, within 10 working days, conduct an
investigation and prepare a written report determining whether
the property requires work to address conditions set forth in
Subsection A above.
(4) If the property is found to contain conditions needing correction,
the owner, his/her representative or other such persons having
legal possession, custody and control of the property will be served
within 14 days with a complaint identifying the property
deficiencies and providing notice that a hearing will be held by the
City Council within 45 days. The purpose of the hearing is to:
(a) Receive evidence concerning the charge of deterioration; and
(b) Develop a plan and schedule for making the needed repairs in
a timely fashion, such that the building is stabilized and the
deterioration is arrested; and
(c) Ascertain whether the owner or other parties intend to make
application for financial assistance from the City to correct the
building defects.
(5) Following such notice and hearing, City Council will make a
determination if there are any corrections required pursuant to
Subsection A above and shall state in writing the findings of fact in
support of that determination. If it is determined that the building
or structure is undergoing deterioration or if its condition is
contributing to deterioration, the owner or other parties of interest
will be served an order to repair those defective elements of the
structure within a reasonable specified time frame.
(6) If the owner fails to make the necessary repairs within the
identified time frame, the City may undertake the work to correct
the deficiencies that create any hazardous and unsafe conditions to
life, health and property. The expense of this work will be recorded
as a lien on the property.
§ 275-14.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14.15
1:455
§ 275-14.15. Appeals.
Any applicant, person, or organization aggrieved by a decision of the
Historic District Commission may appeal the decision to the Rochester
Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with RSA 674:33 and any appeal
procedures specified in the City ordinances. In its review of any appeals
the Zoning Board shall be guided by the provisions of this article and other
applicable law.
§ 275-14.16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced as provided for in the Rochester Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 275-14.15 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-14.16
1:456
ARTICLE 15
Special Downtown Overlay District (SDOD)
§ 275-15.1. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the Special Downtown District coincide with the fire
limits established in § 40-13 of the Code of the City of Rochester. The district
includes those areas classified on the Rochester Zoning Map as Downtown
Commercial (DC) and Neighborhood Mixed-Use (NMU) adjacent to North
Main Street up to Washington Avenue and South Main Street in Rochester
proper and Main Street in the NMU in Gonic and East Rochester.
§ 275-15.2. Regulations and restrictions.
The following regulations and restrictions shall apply in the Special
Downtown District:
A. Development within the Special Downtown District shall be exempt
from the site plan review process; provided, however, that any
construction of new structures within the Special Downtown District
and/or any change to an existing structure or use within the Special
Downtown District shall be subject to the site plan review process
unless the Planning and Development Director, after consultation with
the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, the
Commissioner of Public Works, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, the
Economic Development Director, and one representative from the
Planning Board appointed by the Board Chair, certifies in writing to the
Planning Board that such proposed construction or change will have no
significant adverse impact on the Special Downtown District.
B. Existing structures and uses are exempt from the parking and loading
requirements contained in Article 26 of this chapter.
C. New structures and uses, including changes to existing structures and
uses, shall be subject to the parking and loading requirements
contained in Article 26 of this chapter; provided, however, that where a
public parking facility is available within 400 feet of a structure or use,
the specific parking requirements may be determined by the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services (or the Planning Board in the
case of projects that are referred to the Board) on an individual basis.
For the purposes of this subsection, the term "public parking facility"
means a publicly owned off-street parking facility for 10 or more
vehicles.
D. The Planning Board shall be notified within 10 days of all projects being
reviewed pursuant to this article. At the request of any Planning Board
member, any project that has been reviewed, or is being reviewed,
under this article may be referred to the full Planning Board for regular
site plan review. In the event that a Planning Board member requests in
writing that a project be referred to the Planning Board for regular site
plan review, the Planning Board shall, within 30 days of the date of the
§ 275-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15.2
1:457
notification provided for in this subsection, vote as to whether or not
regular site plan review of such project shall be required.
E. There are no planning application fees or monumentation fees charged
for any projects located in the Special Downtown District (whether
reviewed administratively or referred to the Planning Board).
§ 275-15.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-15.2
1:458
ARTICLE 16
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15.2
1:459

ARTICLE 17
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15.2
1:461

ARTICLE 18
Use Regulations
§ 275-18.1. Applicability of use regulations.
No building, structure, or land shall be used except for the purposes
permitted in the zoning district as described in Article 18. All uses are
subject to all other applicable sections of this chapter and other local, state,
and federal laws, rules and regulations.
§ 275-18.2. Use tables.
Use regulations by zoning district are provided in the following tables which
are located at the end of this chapter:39
§ 275-18.3. Permitted uses.
A use denoted in the use tables by the letter "P" is permitted in that zoning
district "by right." For some particular uses within particular districts there
are special criteria/conditions that apply, as articulated in Article 20,
Standards for Specific Permitted Uses. Where these special criteria/
conditions apply there is a reference in the right column of the table. Always
check these special criteria/conditions to see if they are applicable.
§ 275-18.4. Conditional uses.
A use denoted in the use tables by the letter "C" is permitted in that zoning
district by conditional use. Authorization of conditional uses is subject to
review and approval by the Planning Board as articulated in Article 21,
Conditional Uses. For some conditional uses within specific districts there
are additional standards and/or criteria that apply, beyond the base criteria
applicable to all conditional uses. Where these additional standards and/or
criteria apply there is a reference in the right column of the table. Always
check these criteria/conditions to see if they are applicable.
§ 275-18.5. Special exceptions.
A use denoted in the tables by the letter "E" is permitted in that zoning
district by special exception. Authorization of special exceptions is subject
to review and approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as articulated in
A. Table 18-A, Residential Uses.
B. Table 18-B, Sales-Service-Office-Institutional Uses.
C. Table 18-C, Food-Lodging-Public Recreation Uses.
D. Table 18-D, Industrial-Storage-Transport-Utility Uses.
E. Table 18-E, Agriculture-Animal Care-Land Oriented Uses.
39.Editor's Note: The tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 275-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18.5
1:463
Article 22, Special Exceptions. For some special exceptions within specific
districts there are additional standards and/or criteria that apply, beyond
the base criteria applicable to all special exceptions. Where these additional
standards and/or criteria apply there is a reference in the right column of
the table. Always check these special criteria/conditions to see if they are
applicable.
§ 275-18.6. Uses not permitted/prohibited uses.
A use denoted in the tables by a dashed line "–" is not permitted in that
zoning district.
§ 275-18.7. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses are generally not listed in the attached tables. Permitted
uses, conditional uses, and special exceptions are referenced to zoning
districts whereas accessory uses are related to other uses (i.e., principal
uses). They are defined in Article 2, Definitions, and discussed in Article 23,
Accessory Uses. Nonetheless, some accessory uses which are also keyed to
certain zoning districts (such as home occupations) are listed in the table;
all accessory uses included in the table are labeled as such.
§ 275-18.8. Uses not listed.
§ 275-18.9. Most specific description to apply.
A proposed use shall be classified as the narrowest, most specific listed use
that matches the proposed use. (Example: a proposed antique shop would
be classified as an "antique shop" rather than as "retail sales.")
A. In the event that a proposed use is not specifically identified in the
tables, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to select the listed use
which most closely resembles the proposed use in impact and intensity.
(A useful guide for examining nonresidential uses is the North
American Industry Classification System.)
B. In cases where no listed use is reasonably construed to closely
resemble the proposed use, the Zoning Administrator may determine
that there is no listing for the proposed use and that therefore it is not
permitted in any zoning district.
§ 275-18.5 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-18.9
1:464
ARTICLE 19
Dimensional Regulations
§ 275-19.1. Overview.
§ 275-19.2. Dimensional provisions.
General dimensional regulations and regulations (as well as clarifications,
notes, and references) specifically referenced to the tables follow:
A. Dimensional requirements by zoning district are provided in the
following tables which are located at the end of this chapter:40
(1) Table 19-A, Dimensional Standards - Residential Districts.
(2) Table 19-B, Dimensional Standards - Commercial Districts.
(3) Table 19-C, Dimensional Standards - Industrial Districts.
(4) Table 19-D, Dimensional Standards - Special Districts.
B. Additional dimensional standards are provided throughout this chapter.
A. Building height.
(1) Adjacent to residences. In any zone, required setbacks shall be
increased by one foot for each foot buildings exceed 35 feet in
height.
(2) Barns. In the AG District barns may exceed the height limit.
(3) Exceptions. Unless subject to FAA requirements, the height limits
specified in the tables shall not apply to the following: chimneys,
flares, stacks, storage silos, satellite dishes, antennas, elevator
shafts, rooftop mechanical equipment, ventilators, skylights,
church towers, cupolas, domes, pinnacles, spires, silos, water
tanks, and similar elements, provided the combination of the
building and element does not exceed 100 feet in height (unless
otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter).
B. Building separation. Except within the DC Zone, all buildings or open
covered structures situated on the same lot must be separated from one
another by a minimum of 10 feet or as regulated by the New Hampshire
State Building or Fire Code.
C. Building stories.
(1) Floors below grade. Floors with any portion below grade do not
count toward meeting requirements for a minimum number of
stories. Any floor with at least 1/3 of the floor to ceiling space
situated at or above grade shall count toward the maximum
number of stories permitted.
40.Editor's Note: The tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 275-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-19.2
1:465
(2) Upper floors. Upper story/attic spaces count toward the minimum
required number of stories specified in the dimensional tables if a
portion of the floor area of those upper story/attic spaces equal to
at least 1/2 the floor plate of the building has a ceiling height of at
least seven feet.
D. Corner lots. On corner lots, for the purpose of setbacks, there shall be
established a front, a street-side side, a (regular) side, and a rear. The
ordinary front setback shall apply to that section of the lot which is
deemed the front, as determined by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services (based upon the locations of the front entrance,
street address, path to the front, and driveway; E911 standards; the
prevailing pattern of the other buildings on both blocks; impact upon
the streetscapes; and other appropriate factors). The street-side
setback shall apply to that side of the lot facing the other street. The
street-side setback shall be the ordinary side setback in that district.
E. Density rings. The density rings are shown on the Official City of
Rochester Zoning Map that is adopted as part of this chapter and only
apply to multifamily dwellings/developments. The rings are defined as
follows: [Amended 2-6-2018; 5-7-2019]
(1) There is no minimum lot area per dwelling unit applicable within
the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zone District. For areas outside of
the DC Zone District, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit within
a one-mile radius of the center of Rochester shall be 5,000 square
feet. The minimum lot are per dwelling unit outside of the one-mile
radius of the center of Rochester shall be 7,500 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot area per dwelling unit within a one-half-mile
radius of the center of Gonic and East Rochester shall be 5,000
square feet. The minimum lot are per dwelling unit outside of the
one-half-mile radius of the center of Gonic and East Rochester, shall
be 7,500 square feet.
(3) Any lot that is partially within the radius of a density ring shall be
treated as if it were entirely within the radius of the density ring.
F. Double frontage lots. On double frontage lots, for the purpose of
setbacks, there shall be established a front, two sides, and a rear. The
ordinary front setback shall apply to that section of the lot which is
deemed the front, as determined by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services (based upon the locations of the front entrance,
street address, path to the front, and driveway; E911 standards; the
prevailing pattern of the other buildings on both blocks; impact upon
the streetscapes; and other appropriate factors). The regular rear
setback shall apply to that section of the lot opposite the front.
G. Exempt structures. Nonhabitable utilities and utility-type structures
erected by a governmental, public utility or nonprofit agency which
customarily are built within the road right-of-way, on undersized lots, or
§ 275-19.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-19.2
1:466
close to property lines, and which cannot reasonably be made to
conform to the requirements of the dimensional tables, are exempt from
those requirements.
H. Frontage and access. Access to lots shall be taken from the same road
where the lot frontage is located unless waived by conditional use.
I. Frontage. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Continuous. An area used to meet frontage requirements must be
continuous and unbroken. Two or more discrete areas may not be
added together to meet frontage requirements.
(2) Culs-de-sac. The Planning Board may reduce the required frontage
on the curved end portion of a cul-de-sac by up to 20% by
conditional use (due to the narrower frontage relative to lot width
that naturally occurs along a cul-de-sac).
(3) Depth. The front portion of every lot must be at least the width of
the required frontage from the front property line extending back
at least the depth of the setback from the front property line.
J. Lot area; usable area. No lot shall be approved unless a rectangle
measuring at least 3,000 square feet can be fit inside the lot beyond any
required setbacks, wetlands, wetland buffers, or slopes greater than
25%. The rectangle must be located in an accessible part of the lot and
its width must measure at least 30 feet.
K. Lot coverage. All of the following elements are considered part of lot
coverage: buildings, roofed structures, or impervious surfaces.
L. Multiple principal uses. Where there are multiple principal uses on one
lot or parcel, minimum required lot sizes are not aggregated except
where there are multiple residential uses; i.e., it is necessary only that
the lot size meet the minimum requirement for any use proposed for the
lot. (Example: A certain zoning district stipulates a minimum lot size of
40,000 square feet for all permitted uses, including single-family and
commercial both of which are allowed. To accommodate a single-family
house and a commercial use on the same lot, a lot 40,000 square feet
would be required, rather than a lot 80,000 square feet. However, to
establish duplexes, townhouses, and apartments on the same lot, the
minimum lot size would be based on the total number of dwelling units.)
Nonetheless, as part of site plan review, the Planning Board may
stipulate appropriate conditions to ensure compatibility of the multiple
uses.
M. Nonconformities, creation of. Except for open space lots and
conservation land, lots and sites may not be created or modified in any
manner that would make them nonconforming in terms of any
dimensional requirements of this chapter.
§ 275-19.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-19.2
1:467
N. Open space lots; frontage. It is not necessary for open space lots and
conservation land to be in compliance with any requirements of the
dimensional tables. Minimum frontage of 12 feet is required in order to
ensure access.
O. Right-of-way encroachments. Within commercial districts where there
is no minimum front setback, encroachments may occur within the
public right-of-way as follows:
(1) Footings below grade may encroach as needed subject to approval
of the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services and
Public Works Department.
(2) Awnings over the sidewalk provided there is a vertical clearance of
at least seven feet.
(3) Architectural elements, such as balconies, bay windows, and
cornices, on upper floors provided the encroachment does not
exceed two feet and provided there is a vertical clearance of at
least 10 feet.
P. Rounding off. In any calculation, where the final number results in a
fraction of a unit, the number of units shall be rounded up to the next
whole number where the fraction is 1/2 or greater. It shall be rounded
down to the next whole number where the fraction is less than 1/2.
Q. Setbacks for accessory uses. Setback requirements apply to buildings
and roofed structures accommodating accessory uses in similar fashion
as those accommodating principal uses except where otherwise
specified.
R. Setback application.
(1) Required setbacks apply to buildings, roofed structures, open air
decks, porches, ground-mounted mechanical equipment, groundmounted
satellite dishes, fuel tanks, and bulkheads. The setback
requirement applies whether the element is a principal or an
accessory use. [See extensions beyond setbacks (i.e., into setback
areas) below; special exception provisions for porches; and several
other specific exceptions and special provisions regarding setbacks
in this chapter.]
(2) Setbacks are measured to the building foundation, except where a
portion of the building containing usable floor area extends beyond
the foundation (such as on the upper floors in a garrison-style
house). Where a building foundation is not present or not
applicable, setbacks are measured to the most appropriate vertical
fascia, eave board, or header joist for that part of the structure. For
ground-mounted mechanical equipment, ground-mounted satellite
dishes, fuel tanks, and bulkheads, setbacks are measured to the
nearest part of the structure.
§ 275-19.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-19.2
1:468
S. Extensions beyond setbacks (i.e., into setback areas).
(1) Appurtenant elements to buildings or structures which do not
contribute to usable floor area and do not have a foundation and
which are not specifically included in Subsection R above may
extend into the setback areas but may not extend beyond any
property line. This includes, but is not limited to, architectural trim,
awnings, bay windows, chimneys, decorative architectural
elements, downspouts, window air-conditioning units, exterior
steps, fire escapes, gutters, place of refuge decks, buildingmounted
satellite dishes, roof eaves, siding materials, and vents.
(2) In cases where any landing serving exterior steps exceeds 24
square feet in area, that landing (but not the steps) must meet all
required setbacks.
T. Triangular lots. Triangular lots shall contain one front lot line and two
side lot lines.
U. Triple frontage lots. On triple frontage lots, for the purpose of setbacks,
there shall be established a front, two sides, and a rear. The ordinary
front setback shall apply to that section of the lot which is deemed the
front, as determined by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services (based upon the locations of the front entrance, street address,
path to the front, and driveway; E911 standards; the prevailing pattern
of the other buildings on both blocks; impact upon the streetscapes;
and other appropriate factors). For any side which faces a street the
setback shall be the ordinary side setback in that district. The ordinary
rear setback shall apply.
§ 275-19.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-19.2
1:469

ARTICLE 20
Standards for Specific Permitted Uses
[Amended 2-3-2015; 7-7-2015]
§ 275-20.1. General provisions.
For certain permitted uses that could impact surrounding neighborhoods,
conflict with adjacent uses, or have other significant impacts, specific
standards are provided below. These standards apply only to those uses
which are permitted by right shown as "P" in Tables 18-A through 18-E
except where specifically noted otherwise. Other particular standards
applicable to conditional uses, special exceptions, and accessory uses are
articulated in separate articles.
§ 275-20.2. Conditions for particular uses.
For each individual use listed below, all of the specific conditions attached
to that use must be met along with any other requirements of this chapter.
A. Contractor's storage yard. Minimum setbacks from all property lines
shall be 25 feet or as specified in the dimensional regulations table,
whichever is greater. No structures or stockpiled materials related to
the storage yard operation shall be situated within these setbacks.
Heavy vehicles or equipment in working order may be parked within
the setbacks provided that none is parked within 15 feet of a property
line. A contractor's storage yard shall not be established in a floodplain.
B. Day care-2 (day care - family). This use is not considered a home
occupation. However, the review process for this use, where it is
permitted by right, shall be the same as for home occupations where no
special exception is involved. See § 275-24.5.
C. Earth excavation.
(1) Regulations. No person shall perform earth excavation except in
compliance with the provisions of RSA 155-E, as amended, this
chapter, and the Site Plan Regulations applicable to earth
excavation.
(2) Existing operation. Any existing excavation activity operating
under a permit issued prior to the date of adoption of this chapter
may continue until the expiration of the permit, except that any
expansion or change in operation not covered by that permit shall
be in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(3) Buffers. Buffers/setbacks are established as set forth in RSA 155-E
and in Article 12, Conservation Overlay District. No excavation,
processing, or removal of vegetation may occur within the buffers/
setbacks specified. Where the buffer/setback has been removed or
is not adequate, the Planning Board may stipulate reestablishment
of the buffer/setback, as appropriate.
§ 275-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:471
(4) Water table. For excavation of sand, gravel, or other subsurface
materials (also see RSA 155-E), the seasonal high water table must
be determined prior to Planning Board approval and it must be
demonstrated that no ground disturbance or excavation will occur
within four feet of that seasonal high water table except as
provided below.
(a) Applicants shall submit the following as part of any review:
[1] Information about any types of fill material that may be
deposited on the site.
[2] Recognizing that sand and gravel pits sometimes become
unlawful dumps (due to no fault of the property owner or
operator) posing potential harm to the underlying
groundwater, the applicant shall submit a plan to
discourage use of the site as a dump during and after
excavation.
(b) The excavation of gravel materials below four feet above the
stated seasonal high water table may be allowed by special
exception if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that such
excavation will not adversely affect groundwater quality (in
addition to other general conditions listed in Article 22, Special
Exceptions). The Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning
Board shall be required to review the reports provided and
may require additional information, experts or studies to assist
it in its review and approval of its issuance of any special
exception and permit allowing such excavation.
(c) See Article 10, Aquifer Protection Overlay District, for other
provisions within that district.
(5) Abandoned sites. In the event the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services determines that any abandoned excavation
presents a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, the owner
may be required, following a public hearing before the Planning
Board, to comply with any timetable and bonding requirements to
be established by the Planning Board to complete reclamation.
Should reclamation not be completed, the Board may request the
City to authorize reclamation at the City's expense. The City's costs
shall then constitute an assessment against the owner and shall
create a lien against the property on which the excavation is
located. Such assessment and lien may be enforced and collected in
the same manner as provided for real estate taxes.
D. Farm; farm, crop.
(1) Lot size. The minimum lot size is five gross acres for a farm and five
gross acres for a crop farm.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:472
(2) Housing. The Planning Board is empowered to consider and
approve special on-site housing arrangements to accommodate
farm workers, such as cluster housing or temporary/seasonal
housing, under site plan review.
(3) Retail sales. Any farm goods produced on site along with limited
related products, such as baked goods, non-alcoholic cider, etc.,
may be sold on site.
(4) Livestock. Housing for any livestock for a farm shall be set back at
least 100 feet from any side or rear lot lines. Housing for fowl, furbearing
animals, and swine shall be set back at least 150 feet from
any side or rear lot lines. The ZBA may reduce or waive this
requirement by special exception. There is no setback for open
pens and fencing provided animals are not left in such pens
overnight.
(5) Manure. Any significant storage areas for manure shall be set back
at least 200 feet from any lot lines. Best management practices
shall be followed in the handling of manure.
(6) Performance standards. The general provisions of Article 28 of this
chapter and RSA 432:33 shall apply.
E. Gas station.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage shall be at least 150 feet.
(3) Pumps, lubricating and other outdoor service devices shall be
located at least 30 feet from any lot lines.
(4) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be stored
within a building, and no repair work is to be performed outside a
building.
(5) The minimum setback for all portions of canopies shall be 20 feet
from all lot lines or the required district setbacks, whichever is
greater.
(6) Limited light maintenance activity is an accessory use and includes
engine tune-ups, lubrication, brake repairs, tire changing, battery
charging, car washing, detailing, polishing, and carburetor
cleaning. Such activities as engine overhaul, vehicle painting,
welding, and body or fender work would not be an accessory use.
F. Junkyard. All materials shall be fully screened from the road and from
all abutting property by a solid wall or fence at least eight feet in height.
The Planning Board may stipulate a taller wall or fence, as appropriate.
G. Lodging facility. For a lodging facility, the minimum lot size shall be
30,000 square feet plus 1,000 square feet per unit. Minimum lot size for
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:473
a bed-and-breakfast shall be the minimum lot size for a single-family
home according to the applicable zone district. The minimum lot size
for a hotel in the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zone District shall be
7,500 square feet. [Amended 5-7-2019]
H. Mini-warehouse. The front setback for all storage structures shall be
100 feet. Side and rear setbacks from any residential property shall be
75 feet.
I. Manufactured housing subdivision, not part of an existing mobile home
park. See Chapter 135 of the City Code for existing mobile home parks.
(1) Overall development. [Amended 9-6-2016]
(a) All requirements otherwise applicable to subdivision of lots for
conventional houses within a conservation subdivision shall
apply.
(b) Additions to manufactured housing units (or "homes"). There
shall be no additions constructed onto manufactured homes
with the exception of garages, skirting, carports, cabanas,
awnings, canopies, porches, decks, and steps. All must be
approved by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.
J. Manufactured housing unit, not part of an existing mobile home park.
See Chapter 135 of the City Code for existing mobile home parks.
[Amended 9-6-2016]
(1) Manufactured homes are allowed only:
(a) On individual lots in the AG District;
(b) Within manufactured housing subdivisions located in the AG
District; and
(c) Within established mobile home parks on approved pads/lots.
(2) Additions to manufactured homes. There shall be no additions
constructed onto manufactured homes with the exception of
garages, skirting, carports, cabanas, awnings, canopies, porches,
decks, and steps. All must be approved by the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services.
K. Multifamily dwellings/development. The following requirements shall
apply to multifamily dwellings/developments of three or more dwelling
units: [Amended 5-7-2019]
(1) Buffers from roads. Except for parcels within the Downtown
Commercial (DC) Zone District, a fifty-foot buffer shall be
established from all neighboring roads, including roads from which
access is taken. The Planning Board shall determine treatment of
the buffer area, whether it is to be left undisturbed, to have
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:474
supplemental plantings installed, to be designated part of the
overall open space plan for the development, and/or to be part
of an individual lot but protected from construction. No roofed
structures may be erected in the buffer area. This buffer shall not
be required for parcels in the DC Zone District.
(2) Access. Any new multifamily development must take access from
an existing collector or arterial road rather than an existing local
road. The Planning Board may waive this requirement by
conditional use upon a finding that it is preferable to take access
from a local rather than a collector road and that taking access
from the local road will have no significant adverse impact upon
residents or property owners located on the local road.
(3) Commercial districts. Within any commercial districts, multifamily
is allowed only as a secondary use.
(a) It must be situated on the second floor or on higher floors of a
commercial building or in a separate building behind the
commercial building; and
(b) At no time may the area of the multifamily dwellings exceed
80% of the square footage of the on-site commercial space.
(4) Downtown Commercial District. Within the Downtown Commercial
(DC) District, multifamily is allowed with the following restrictions:
(a) Multifamily units are prohibited on the ground floor and only
permitted nonresidential uses within the Downtown
Commercial District shall be located on the ground floor.
However, parking shall be allowed on the ground floor except
for parcels fronting any of the following streets:
[1] Union Street.
[2] North Main Street south of the North Main Street Bridge.
[3] South Main Street.
[4] Wakefield Street south of Columbus Avenue.
[5] Hanson Street.
[6] Museum Way.
(b) Ancillary ground floor multifamily use, such as entryways,
lobbies, utility areas and similar functional spaces shall be
minimized to the extent practical. Remaining ground floor
space within the first 50 feet of building depth shall be
reserved for nonresidential uses, as permitted in the DC Zone
District, unless otherwise required to comply with the state
building code and/or fire codes.
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:475
(c) DC Zone District parcels not fronting on the above-listed
streets may contain multifamily use and units on all floors
without restriction.
(5) Sewer and water. Any new multifamily dwellings/developments
must connect to the City of Rochester's public sewer and water
systems.
L. Nursing home. The minimum lot size for the zone shall be increased by
1,000 square feet for each patient bed. The permitted density shall be 1
1/4 times that otherwise permitted for residential uses in the district.
M. Outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater or outdoor wood boiler.
(1) "Outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater" or "outdoor wood boiler"
means a fuel-burning device as defined by RSA 125-R.
(2) The installation and/or operation of outdoor wood-fired hydronic
heaters is permitted in the Agricultural District only. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
(3) The outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater shall be set back 25 feet
from the nearest structure it serves.
(4) The outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater shall be set back 100 feet
from any lot line.
N. Parking facility, public. For a public parking facility, the following
standards shall apply: [Added 5-7-201941]
(1) Sizing and capacity of the facility shall be based on current and
forecasted use patterns and demand for publicly accessible
parking.
(2) Frontages along a primary commercial street shall, to the extent
practicable, incorporate commercial business as a means of
minimizing extended expanses of blank walls.
(3) An operations plan shall define the basic functions of the facility
including signage, offsite wayfinding, hours of operation, access
and control points, payment systems, and lighting and landscape
installation.
(4) Rate schedules shall be subject to establishment and change by the
City of Rochester and shall not be required for approval or
conditioned by the Notice of Decision.
O. Small wind energy systems.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections N through U as
Subsections O through V.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:476
(1) Authority and purpose. This Subsection N is enacted in accordance
with RSA 672:1, III-a, and 674:62 to 674:66. The purpose of this
subsection is to accommodate the installation of small wind energy
systems in the City of Rochester, while protecting the public's
health, safety and welfare.
(2) Accessory use. A small wind energy system and meteorological
tower are allowed as accessory uses to on-site principal residential
or nonresidential uses that are legally established, including
grandfathered nonconforming uses.
(3) Building permit. No small wind energy system or meteorological
tower may be erected, constructed, or installed without a building
permit issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services. A building permit shall also be required for any physical
modification to an existing small wind energy system.
(4) Meteorological towers. Meteorological towers shall be permitted
on a temporary basis and must be removed within three years from
the date the building permit for the tower is issued.
(5) Total capacity. The total capacity for one or more small wind energy
systems situated on one site or lot may not exceed a rated capacity
of 100 kilowatts.
(6) Application. An application for a building permit shall be submitted
to the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services and
shall include a site plan and documentation providing all of the
following:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant's
property. A survey may be required at the reasonable
discretion of the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services if necessary to confirm compliance with the setback
and other requirements of this subsection.
(b) Locations, dimensions, and types of buildings on the property
and on adjacent properties within 50 feet of the property lines.
(c) Locations of the proposed small wind energy system(s),
foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment.
(d) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
(e) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(f) Height of proposed tower and setback requirements as
outlined in this subsection.
(g) A plan showing the height of the overall prevailing canopy of
trees within 300 feet of the tower.
(h) Any public road that is contiguous with the subject property.
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:477
(i) Any overhead utility lines.
(j) Small wind energy system specifications, including
manufacturer, model, rotor diameter, tower type, and
nameplate generation capacity.
(k) Small wind energy systems that may be connected to the
power grid, including a copy of the application for
interconnection with the electric utility provider.
(l) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator
manufacturer or a qualified engineer.
(m) Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
New Hampshire State Building Code and to any local
amendments adopted by the City of Rochester.
(n) Evidence of compliance with or nonapplicability of Federal
Aviation Administration requirements.
(o) A shadow flicker analysis including:
[1] A plan showing the seasonal shadow patterns of the
proposed facility, the occupied buildings on the abutting
properties, and building setback lines on the abutting
properties; and
[2] An evaluation of the shadow flicker impacts on the
abutting properties, including the extent and length of
shadow flicker impacts.
(p) List of abutters to the applicant's property.
(q) Any other information required for issuance of building and
electrical permits.
(7) Abutter notification and appeals.
(a) The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall
notify all abutters by verified mail, as defined in RSA 451-C:1,
VII, upon application for a building permit to construct a small
wind energy system. The cost of abutter notification shall be
paid by the applicant. Abutters shall be afforded a thirty-day
comment period prior to the issuance of a building permit.
[Amended 3-5-2019]
(b) An appeal may be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to RSA 676:5.
(c) The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall
also notify the City Council of the application.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:478
(d) The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall
determine whether the proposal qualifies as a development of
regional impact pursuant to RSA 36:56. If the Director
determines that it does then he/she shall follow the procedures
set forth in RSA 36:57.
(8) Standards. The following standards apply to small wind energy
systems. The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
shall evaluate the application for compliance with these
requirements.
(a) Tower height. The maximum tower height is the lesser of:
[1] One hundred fifty feet; or
[2] Thirty-five feet above the height of the overall prevailing
canopy of trees within 300 feet of the proposed tower.
(b) Setbacks. The following setback requirements apply to small
wind energy systems:
[1] The tower must be set back (measured from the center of
the tower base) from every property line of the subject
property a distance equal to:
[a] The system height multiplied by 1.1; or
[b] The regular setback otherwise applicable in the
zoning district, whichever is greater.
[2] The tower must be set back (measured from the center of
the tower base) a distance equal to the system height
multiplied by 1.5 from:
[a] Any occupied building on an abutting property;
[b] The buildable area on an abutting property as
determined by the setbacks on that abutting property;
[c] Any existing utility transmission or distribution lines;
and
[d] The edge of pavement of any public roads.
[3] Guy wires used to support the tower must be set back at
least five feet from any property line.
(c) Sound level. The small wind energy system shall not exceed 55
decibels using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site
property line, except during short-term events such as severe
windstorms and utility outages.
(d) Shadow flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a
manner that does not result in significant shadow flicker
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:479
impacts. Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than
30 hours per year of shadow flicker on abutting occupied
buildings. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating
compliance with this requirement. Potential impacts may be
addressed through special siting and/or mitigation measures.
(e) Signs. All signs, including flags, streamers and decorative
items, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on small
wind energy systems. Manufacturer identification or
appropriate warning signs are allowed.
(f) Code compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply
with all applicable sections of the New Hampshire State
Building Code and with any local amendments adopted by the
City of Rochester.
(g) Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply
with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations,
including but not limited to 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B,
regarding installations close to airports, and the New
Hampshire Aviation Regulations, including but not limited to
RSA 422-b and 424.
(h) Visual impacts. Inherently, small wind energy systems can
create some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to
access wind resources. The purpose of this subsection is to
reduce the visual impacts without unduly restricting the
owner's access to the optimal wind resources on the property.
[1] The applicant shall demonstrate through project site
planning and mitigation measures that the visual impacts
of the small wind energy system, including groundmounted
electrical and control equipment, will be
minimized for surrounding neighbors and the greater
community. These measures may include, but are not
limited to, special site selection, wind generator design,
buffering, and screening.
[2] All electrical service leading to the small wind energy
system shall be underground.
[3] The small wind energy system shall be either the stock
color from the manufacturer or painted with a
nonreflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the
surrounding environment. Approved colors for the latter
include, but are not limited to, white, off-white or gray.
[4] A small wind energy system shall not be illuminated unless
such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant
shall provide a copy of the FAA regulations for
determination to establish the required markings and/or
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:480
lights for the small wind energy system. [Amended
3-5-2019]
(i) Approved wind generators. Selection of the manufacturer and
model of the wind generator to be used in the proposed small
wind energy system is limited to those that have been
approved by the California Energy Commission, the New York
State Energy Research and Development Authority, or (if
applicable) the State of New Hampshire.
(j) Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is
to be connected to the power grid through net metering, it
shall be in compliance with RSA 362-A:9.
(k) Unauthorized access. The tower shall be designed and
installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder or other
means readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of
eight feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical and
control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
(l) Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
(9) Discontinuation or abandonment.
(a) If a small wind energy system is going to be discontinued or
abandoned, the owner shall notify the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services by certified U.S. mail of the
proposed date of discontinuation or abandonment.
(b) Upon discontinuation or abandonment, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days
from the date of discontinuation or abandonment. This period
may be extended at the discretion of the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services upon request of the owner.
Physical removal includes, but is not limited to:
[1] Removal of the wind generator and tower and related
above-grade structures.
[2] Restoration of the location of the small wind energy
system to its natural condition, except that any existing
landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may
remain in the same condition.
(c) In the event that an owner fails to notify the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services of discontinuation or
abandonment, the system shall be considered discontinued or
abandoned if it is out of service for a continuous twelve-month
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:481
period. After such a period of time, the Director may issue a
notice of abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy
system.
(d) The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
abandonment within 30 days from when he/she receives the
notice. After review of the information provided by the owner,
the Director shall determine if the small wind energy system
has been discontinued or abandoned. If it is determined that
the small wind energy system has not been discontinued or
abandoned, the Director shall withdraw the notice of
abandonment and notify the owner accordingly.
(e) If the owner of the small wind energy system does not respond
to the notice of abandonment, the owner shall remove the wind
generator and tower at the owner's sole expense within 90
days of receipt of the notice of abandonment. If the owner fails
to physically remove the small wind energy system as called for
herein, then the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services may pursue any appropriate legal action to have the
small wind energy system removed at the owner's expense.
(10) Systems exceeding 100 kilowatts in capacity. Wind energy systems
exceeding a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts, either singly or in
combination, are considered public utilities and are allowed by
special exception only as specified in Table 18-D.
(11) Definitions. The following definitions apply specifically to small
wind energy systems, as presented in this subsection:
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER — A temporary structure erected to
collect environmental information for the purpose of assessing the
potential for a small wind energy system. The meteorological tower
includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware,
anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms
to hold equipment for anemometers and vanes, data loggers,
instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to
monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over
a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to
characterize the wind resource at a given location.
MODIFICATION — Any change to the small wind energy system
that materially alters the size, type or location of the small wind
energy system. Nonstructural maintenance and repair is not
considered to be a modification.
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied
to a customer over the electric distribution system and the
electricity generated by the customer's small wind energy system
that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing
period.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:482
POWER GRID — The transmission system, managed by ISO New
England, created to balance the supply and demand of electricity
for consumers in New England.
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating
blades of the wind generator cast shadows on the ground and on
nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion
system consisting of a wind generator, tower, and associated
control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
100 kilowatts or less and which is used primarily for on-site
consumption.
SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground level to the
tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point.
TOWER — The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that
supports a wind generator.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the fixed portion of
the tower, excluding the wind generator.
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower
whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into
rotational energy used to generate electricity.
P. Solid waste facility. Solid waste facilities shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Lot size. The minimum lot size for solid waste facility uses shall be
five acres.
(2) Coverage. Solid waste facility uses shall not occupy more than 75%
of the land area of the lot on which they are located or occur.
(3) Zoning lines. Solid waste facilities shall be set back at least 100 feet
from adjoining zoning boundary lines except where the adjoining
district is an industrial district.
(4) Setbacks from rivers. Solid waste facilities shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from the landward extent of the five-hundredyear
floodplain and shall be screened from the river with a
vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize visual impact unless
otherwise specified in RSA 483:9. The following accessory
structures or uses associated with a solid waste facility may also be
located in the aforementioned setback areas if approved by NHDES
and the Rochester Planning Board, with a recommendation from
the Conservation Commission, as part of the site review process:
(a) Access roads;
(b) Drainage ditches and stormwater structures;
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:483
(c) Fencing, screening and earthen berms;
(d) Groundwater monitoring wells, piezometers, and other
environmental monitoring devices;
(e) Piping and tanks and appurtenant systems;
(f) Sedimentation basins; and
(g) Utility lines.
(5) Other setbacks. Solid waste facilities shall be set back at least 50
feet from City-owned rights-of-way, provided that the setback for
certain solid waste facilities shall be as specified below:
(a) Recycling and materials recovery facility. Setback for the front
foundation face of any buildings and/or permanent vehicle
storage or materials storage facilities at recycling and material
recovery facilities shall be 100 feet from City-owned rights-ofway.
Normal parking entrances and accesses are permitted
within this setback, but permanent overnight truck or
equipment parking is prohibited. In the event an alternative
screen or buffer is approved by the Planning Board, this
setback may be reduced.
(b) Transfer station or composting facility. Setback for the face of
buildings or other physical structures used as transfer station
or composting facilities shall be 50 feet or composting facilities
shall be 100 feet from City-owned rights-of-way. Permanent
parking of trucks or equipment within the setback is
prohibited. Normal customer access and parking is permitted
within the setback. In the event an alternative screen or buffer
is approved by the Planning Board, this setback may be
reduced.
(6) Entering property. The City shall have the right to enter the solid
waste facility during all operating hours and at other reasonable
times to administer and enforce the provisions of this subsection.
(7) Operational standards. Operational standards for and the operation
of any solid waste facility shall be governed by and subject to the
New Hampshire laws regarding solid waste management and
regulations promulgated thereunder by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services and other state or federal
agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of such facilities.
Q. Stable, commercial.
(1) The minimum lot size required shall be five acres.
(2) The side and rear setbacks for structures housing horses shall be
100 feet from any property line.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:484
(3) Any storage areas for manure shall be set back at least 200 feet
from any lot lines. Manure must be handled according to best
management practices.
R. Temporary structure. Temporary structures are subject to the following
requirements. However, temporary structures erected for 15 or fewer
days are exempt from this subsection herein.
(1) A permit is required for temporary structures. An application must
be submitted to the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services specifying the proposed location for the structure and its
purpose. A fee will be charged in an amount determined by the City
Council.
(2) Temporary structures are subject to all zoning setbacks.
(3) Temporary structures may not be placed forward of the front
facade of the primary building on the lot (on corner lots, this
applies only to the main entry facade, though other corner lot
setbacks, as specified in this chapter, still apply).
(4) Temporary structures that were in place prior to the adoption of
this subsection must be brought into compliance with this
subsection within six months of its adoption.
S. Vehicle sales. No vehicles or other equipment or materials may be
stored or displayed within the road right-of-way. The City of Rochester
shall take all appropriate steps to enforce this requirement. See
enforcement provisions under Article 3, Administration.
T. Veterinary clinic.
(1) Veterinary clinics shall set back 100 feet from any residential
property, restaurant or lodging establishment.
(2) All animals housed overnight shall be in completely enclosed
buildings.
(3) The Planning Board may stipulate that appropriate sound
mitigation devices be installed and that fences, walls, and/or
vegetation be installed to screen the site where animals will be
maintained out of doors.
U. Warehouse.
(1) All goods must be stored within a completely enclosed building or
located in rear setbacks.
(2) If the warehouse or storage area constitutes less than 50% of the
gross interior floor area of the building it shall be considered an
accessory use.
V. Yard sale, commercial.
§ 275-20.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20.2
1:485
(1) A secondhand dealer license must be obtained from the City
Council.42
(2) Items may be displayed outside on the lawn or driveway or in a
garage or other structure. The items must be displayed neatly and
may not be left outdoors overnight.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Junk and Secondhand Dealers.
§ 275-20.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-20.2
1:486
ARTICLE 21
Conditional Uses
§ 275-21.1. General provisions.
A. Granting authority. Wherever a conditional use is authorized under this
chapter, the authority to administer or grant conditional use approval is
vested in the Planning Board. Conditional use approval may be granted
only for those conditional uses referred to in Subsection C below.
B. Purpose. Certain uses, structures, or conditions possess special
characteristics such that if developed in certain locations or in certain
ways may have significant adverse impacts. In order to safeguard the
public interest and the interest of neighboring property owners, some
uses, structures, and conditions require the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to grant a special exception and others are designated as
conditional uses to provide an opportunity for the Planning Board to
review and evaluate these applications on an individual basis in
contrast to uses which are simply permitted by right.
C. Types of conditional uses.
(1) There are two types of conditional uses covered under this chapter:
(a) Uses. Conditional uses for actual "uses" as listed in the Tables
of Uses in Article 18 (e.g., townhouse or trade shop) and
discussed in § 275-18.4.
(b) Departures from standards. Conditional uses to allow for
certain departures from standards otherwise applicable,
detailed all throughout this chapter (e.g., allowing for parking
in a side setback or for buildings to exceed a certain height).
(2) The process is the same for both types of conditional uses. The term
"conditional uses" is used throughout this chapter for both
situations.
D. Criteria and conditions.
(1) The base criteria in § 275-21.3 below shall apply to all conditional
uses. In addition, certain particular uses have specific criteria and/
or conditions which must also be met in order for those uses to be
approved as listed below in § 275-21.4, Conditions for particular
uses. For those uses which are not specifically discussed below, it is
necessary only that the base criteria be satisfied.
(2) It is not essential that the Planning Board specifically and
outwardly articulate compliance with each criterion and condition.
At its option, the Board may simply state that all of the criteria and
conditions have been met, provided it is duly diligent and thorough
in its consideration.
§ 275-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21.1
1:487
E. Burden of persuasion. The applicant shall bear the burden of
persuasion, through the introduction of sufficient evidence as may be
required by this chapter or by the Planning Board in its reasonable
discretion, that the development, if completed as proposed, will comply
with this article and will satisfy the specific requirements for the use or
standard contained in this chapter.
F. Pertinent information. In reviewing an application for a conditional use
approval, the Planning Board shall consider the following information,
as applicable to the case:
(1) Compliance with the applicable requirements contained in this
chapter;
(2) The results of any special investigative or scientific studies
prepared in association with the proposed development;
(3) Special reports or analysis of the project or its impacts, prepared
by the City or consultants;
(4) The findings, goals and objectives of the City's Master Plan;
(5) The relationship of the development to the timing, location and cost
of public improvements scheduled in the Capital Improvements
Program and improvements necessitated by the development;
(6) Testimony and evidence introduced at the public hearing on the
application; and
(7) Any other appropriate information or documentation.
G. Terms of approval.
(1) The Planning Board may also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this chapter, such additional conditions as it
finds reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise serve the purposes of this chapter, including but not
limited to the following:
(a) Increasing front, side, and rear setbacks in excess of the
minimum requirements of this chapter;
(b) Screening of the premises from the street or adjacent property
in excess of any minimum requirements of this chapter;
(c) Landscaping in excess of any minimum requirements of this
chapter or the Site Plan Regulations;
(d) Modification of the exterior features of buildings or other
structures;
(e) Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures more
stringent than the requirements of this chapter;
§ 275-21.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-21.1
1:488
§ 275-21.2. Procedures.
(f) Footprint or lot coverage less than the allowed maximum of
this chapter;
(g) Limitations on the number of occupants and methods and
times of operation;
(h) Regulation of design of access drives, sidewalks, crosswalks,
and other traffic features;
(i) Off-street parking and loading spaces in excess of, or less than,
the minimum requirements of this chapter or the Site Plan
Regulations; and
(j) Other performance standards as appropriate.
(2) Such conditions shall be imposed in writing, and the applicant may
be required to post bond or other security for compliance with
these conditions in an amount satisfactory to the City. The Planning
Board may require that such conditions be annotated on a site plan
or subdivision plat, or otherwise recorded at the Strafford County
Registry of Deeds.
H. Existing uses and structures. Any use that was lawfully established
prior to the adoption of this chapter and which is allowed as a
conditional use, but for which a conditional use approval was never
issued, is now permitted and may continue in the same manner and to
the same extent as conducted prior to the adoption of this chapter.
However, a conditional use approval shall be secured from the Planning
Board before the use or structure or building in which the use is
conducted may be intensified, enlarged, expanded, moved or
significantly altered.
A. Application. Conditional uses authorized under this article may be
granted only after application to and a public hearing by the Planning
Board and subject to the provisions of RSA 674:16, as amended. The
Planning Board may establish special procedures and fees for
conditional use applications consistent with RSA 674:16, as it sees fit.
B. Site plans and subdivisions. Where a conditional use application is
related to a specific subdivision or site plan application, the application
and review procedure for both shall be conducted concurrently.
C. Appeals. Any persons aggrieved by a Planning Board decision on a
conditional use application may appeal that decision to the Superior
Court, as provided for in RSA 677:15.
D. Expiration of conditional use approvals. Any conditional use approval
shall expire or become null and void upon the expiration, lapse,
nullification, withdrawal, or repeal of any site or subdivision plan to
which the conditional use is attached.
§ 275-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21.3
1:489
§ 275-21.3. Base criteria.
The Planning Board shall grant a conditional use approval if, and only if, it
reasonably determines that all of the following criteria are met (in addition
to those criteria/conditions articulated for particular uses in § 275-21.4
below, or in addition to those articulated elsewhere in this chapter for
departures from standards):
§ 275-21.4. Conditions for particular uses.
For each individual use listed below, all of the specific conditions attached to
that use must be met along with the base criteria articulated in § 275-21.3
above.
A. Allowed use or departure. The use or departure from standards is
specifically authorized under the Tables of Uses in Article 18 as a
conditional use or is otherwise specifically authorized in this chapter;
B. Intent of chapter. The proposal is consistent with the purpose and intent
of this chapter;
C. Intent of Master Plan. The proposal is consistent with the purpose and
intent of the Master Plan;
D. Compatibility. The proposal is compatible with general dimensional,
use, and design characteristics of the neighborhood and surrounding
area;
E. Streetscape. The proposal will not adversely impact the quality of the
streetscape;
F. Resources. The use or departure will not have a significantly adverse
impact upon natural, scenic, historic, or cultural resources and can be
designed with sensitivity to environmental constraints; and
G. Public facilities. The use does not place an undue burden upon the
City's resources, including the effect on the City's water supply and
distribution system, sanitary and storm sewage collection and
treatment systems, fire protection, police protection, streets and
schools.
A. Assisted living facility. The permitted density shall be 1 1/4 times that
otherwise permitted for residential uses in the district.
B. Conservation subdivision. See Article 33, Conservation Subdivisions.
C. Convenience store. The following standards apply in the R2 Zone:
(1) The Planning Board shall determine hours of operation.
(2) Illumination of the store shall be limited to hours of operation,
except for purposes of security.
§ 275-21.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-21.4
1:490
D. Flag lots. As part of any major subdivision (involving a new road) the
Planning Board may approve the creation of one or more flag lots as a
conditional use. Flag lots are allowed subject to the following terms/
findings:
(1) Allowing the flag lot(s) accommodates a superior layout than what
would otherwise be allowed;
(2) A tangible public benefit is gained such as the creation of additional
or higher quality open space, preservation of important resources,
or creating a trail network;
(3) The total number of flag lots shall not exceed 15% of the total
number of lots in the subdivision (being created at that time);
(4) The total number of lots, including the flag lots, shall not exceed
the number otherwise allowable based on frontage and lot size;
(5) The width of the frontage and the entire "flagpole" leading to the
main lot area is at least 25 feet; and
(6) The Planning Board may stipulate shared driveways at its
discretion, including for access to the flag lot, to reduce access
points.
E. Gas station.
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 30,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage shall be at least 150 feet.
(3) Pumps, lubricating and other outdoor service devices shall be
located at least 30 feet from the front, side and rear lot lines.
(4) All automobile parts and dismantled vehicles are to be stored
within a building, and no repair work is to be performed outside a
building.
(5) The minimum setback for all portions of canopies shall be 20 feet
from the front, side and rear lot lines or those setbacks established
for the district, whichever is greater.
(6) Limited light maintenance activity is an accessory use and includes
engine tune-ups, lubrication, brake repairs, tire changing, battery
charging, car washing, detailing, polishing, and carburetor
cleaning. Such heavy maintenance activities as engine overhaul,
vehicle painting, welding, and body or fender work is not an
accessory use.
F. House of worship. Within residential zones all parking shall be located
beyond the rear facade; provided, however, that the Planning Board
may approve parking to the side of the building, but situated no further
forward than the front facade by conditional use subject to adequate
screening from the road.
§ 275-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21.4
1:491
G. Lodging facility. For a lodging facility, the minimum lot size shall be
30,000 square feet plus 1,000 square feet per unit. Minimum lot size for
a bed-and-breakfast shall be the minimum lot size for a single-family
home according to the applicable zone district. The minimum lot size
for a hotel in the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zone District shall be
7,500 square feet. [Amended 5-7-2019]
H. Mini-warehouse. The front setback for all storage structures shall be
100 feet. Side and rear setbacks from any residential property shall be
75 feet.
I. Nursing home. The minimum lot size for the zone shall be increased by
1,000 square feet for each patient bed. The permitted density shall be 1
1/4 times that otherwise permitted for residential uses in the district.
J. Parking lot. For properties within the Downtown Commercial (DC) Zone
District, Parking lots shall be limited to 20 parking spaces for any single
tenant unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board pursuant to
the standards below: [Added 5-7-201943]
(1) The applicant demonstrates a unique commercial or market-based
need for additional parking.
(2) There is a lack of publicly accessible parking in the immediate
vicinity.
(3) Sharing parking with an adjacent use or property is impractical or
not possible.
(4) Negative visual effects of a large parking lot are minimized to the
extent practicable through site design, breaking up large expanses
of paving, shielding parking from direct public view, or placing
parking to the side or behind buildings. Where possible, buildings
in the DC District should front a primary street with parking placed
to the side or rear.
(5) The Planning Board may impose operational parameters regarding
signage, limiting access points, and may require specific lighting
and landscaping installation.
K. Parking facility, commercial. The Planning Board may approve a
commercial parking facility based on the following standards: [Added
5-7-2019]
(1) Sizing and capacity of the facility is based on current and
forecasted use patterns and demand for publicly accessible
parking.
(2) Frontages along a primary commercial street, to the extent
practicable, incorporate commercial business on the ground floor
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections J through N as
Subsections L through P.
§ 275-21.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-21.4
1:492
as a means of providing pedestrian interest and minimizing
extended expanses of blank walls.
(3) An acceptable operations plan defines the basic functions of the
facility including signage, offsite wayfinding, hours of operation,
access and control points, payment systems, and lighting and
landscape installation.
(4) Rate schedules and changes thereto shall remain the prerogative of
the owner and shall not be required for approval or conditioned by
the notice of decision.
L. Porkchop subdivision. The purpose of a porkchop subdivision (see
definition in Article 2) is to help preserve the scenic character of
neighborhoods by encouraging owners of parcels along existing roads
and streets to concentrate subdivision to one side of the parcel and
retain the remainder as open space and allowing some minimal level of
development on parcels with significant acreage in the rear in order to
avoid inducing property owners to develop culs-de-sac at a higher level
of development. Porkchop subdivisions are allowed subject to the
following requirements:
(1) Quality of project. A finding by the Planning Board that the
proposed development is superior to development that would likely
occur otherwise.
(2) Parcel size. The development parcel shall have a minimum size of
six gross acres and minimum frontage of 150 feet on an existing
public way.
(3) Three lots. There shall be a maximum of three lots created from any
one lot.
(4) Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size for each new lot shall be
40,000 square feet or the minimum lot size for the district,
whichever is greater.
(5) Average lot size. The average lot size for new lots in the porkchop
subdivision shall be at least 120,000 square feet or 1.5 times the
minimum lot size for the district, whichever is greater.
(6) Frontage. The minimum frontage for each new porkchop lot shall
be 50 feet.
(7) Common access. All lots shall be entered from a common access
point.
(8) Separate driveway. Each porkchop subdivision shall have a
common driveway independent from any other subdivision.
(9) No further subdivision. There shall be no further subdivision of any
of the porkchop lots other than lot line adjustments.
§ 275-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21.4
1:493
(10) Single-family. The porkchop lots shall be used for single-family use
only.
(11)Width. The all-season passable width of any shared driveway shall
be 20 feet when serving two or more lots.
(12) Easement width. The width of the common driveway access
easement shall be 30 feet. Additional width may be required to
accommodate slope and drainage easements.
(13) Turnaround. An acceptable turnaround for the fire trucks may be
required.
(14) Recording. A document satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be
recorded establishing the conditions of use of any common
driveway, providing for indemnification for the City for emergency
services, and including suitable language to ensure that the private
way will not become a City road or street.
M. School, K-12; school, other. Within residential zones all parking shall be
located beyond the rear facade; provided, however, that the Planning
Board may approve parking to the side of the building, but situated no
further forward than the front facade, by conditional use subject to
adequate screening from the road.
N. Senior housing.
(1) The minimum development parcel shall be five gross acres.
(2) The project must provide special facilities and/or programs
oriented toward seniors.
(3) The applicant must explain how he/she will meet the definition for
senior housing in this chapter (see Article 2, Definitions).
(4) The developer/manager must provide documentation to the
Planning Board demonstrating that the development meets the
definition for senior housing in this chapter.
O. Vehicle sales. No vehicles or other equipment or materials may be
stored or displayed within the road right-of-way. The City of Rochester
shall take all appropriate steps to enforce this requirement. See
enforcement provisions under Article 3, Administration.
P. Warehouse.
(1) All goods must be stored within a completely enclosed building or
located in a fenced-in area.
(2) If the warehouse or storage area constitutes less than 50% of the
gross interior floor area of the building it shall be considered an
accessory use.
§ 275-21.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-21.4
1:494
ARTICLE 22
Special Exceptions
§ 275-22.1. General provisions.
A. Granting authority. Wherever a special exception is authorized under
this chapter, the authority to administer or grant special exception
approval is vested in the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Purpose. Certain uses, structures, or conditions possess special
characteristics such that if developed in certain locations or in certain
ways may have significant adverse impacts. In order to safeguard the
public interest and the interest of neighboring property owners, these
uses, structures, and conditions are designated as uses allowed by
special exception.
C. Types of special exceptions.
(1) There are two types of special exceptions included in this chapter:
(a) Uses. Special exceptions for actual "uses" as defined in this
chapter and as listed in the Uses Tables (e.g., contractor's
storage yard).
(b) Departures from standards. Special exceptions to allow for
certain departures from standards otherwise applicable,
articulated throughout this chapter (e.g., allowing for reduced
setbacks for garages).
(2) The process is the same for both types of special exceptions. The
term "special exception" is used throughout this chapter for both
situations.
D. Criteria and conditions. The base criteria in § 275-22.2 apply to all
special exceptions. In addition, certain particular uses have specific
criteria and/or conditions which must also be met in order for those
uses to be approved as listed below in § 275-22.3, Conditions for
particular uses. For those uses which are not specifically discussed
below, it is necessary only that the base criteria be satisfied.
E. Burden of persuasion. The applicant shall bear the burden of
persuasion, through the introduction of sufficient evidence as may be
required by this chapter or by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in its
reasonable discretion, that the proposal will comply with this chapter.
F. Pertinent information. In reviewing an application for a special
exception, the ZBA shall consider the following information, as
applicable to the case:
(1) Compliance with the applicable requirements contained in this
chapter;
§ 275-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22.1
1:495
(2) The results of any special investigative or scientific studies
prepared in association with the proposed development;
(3) Special reports or analysis of the project or its impacts, prepared
by the City or consultants;
(4) The findings, goals and objectives of the City's Master Plan;
(5) The relationship of the development to the timing, location and cost
of public improvements scheduled in the Capital Improvements
Program;
(6) Testimony and evidence introduced at the public hearing on the
application; and
(7) Any other appropriate information or documentation.
G. Terms of approval. The ZBA may also impose, in addition to any
applicable conditions specified in this chapter, such additional
conditions as it finds reasonably appropriate to safeguard the
neighborhood or otherwise serve the purposes of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Increasing front, side, and rear setbacks in excess of the minimum
requirements of this chapter;
(2) Screening of the premises from the street or adjacent property in
excess of any minimum requirements of this chapter;
(3) Landscaping in excess of any minimum requirements of this
chapter or the Site Plan Regulations;
(4) Modification of the exterior features of buildings or other
structures;
(5) Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures more
stringent than the requirements of this chapter;
(6) Footprint or lot coverage less than the allowed maximum of this
chapter;
(7) Limitations on the number of occupants and methods and times of
operation;
(8) Regulation of design of access drives, sidewalks, crosswalks, and
other traffic features;
(9) Off-street parking and loading spaces in excess of, or less than, the
minimum requirements of this chapter or the Site Plan Regulations;
and
(10) Other performance standards as appropriate.
H. Existing uses and structures. Any use that was lawfully established
prior to the adoption of this chapter and which now may require a
§ 275-22.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-22.1
1:496
§ 275-22.2. Base criteria.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall approve a special exception if, and
only if, it reasonably determines that all of the following criteria are met
(in addition to those criteria/conditions articulated for specific uses in
§ 275-22.3 below, or in addition to those articulated elsewhere in this
chapter for departures from standards):
§ 275-22.3. Conditions for particular uses.
For each individual use or departure from standards listed below, all of the
specific conditions attached to that use must be met along with the base
criteria articulated in § 275-22.2 above.
special exception is now permitted and may continue in the same
manner and to the same extent as conducted prior to the adoption
of this chapter. However, special exception approval shall be secured
from the ZBA before the use or structure or building in which the
use is conducted may be intensified, enlarged, expanded, moved, or
significantly altered.
I. Expiration. A special exception shall become null and void after three
years from the date of approval unless a building permit is issued, a plat
is recorded, or other appropriate action is taken pursuant to the special
exception within that time frame.
J. Procedures. See Article 4, Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building
Code Board of Appeals.
A. Location. The specific site is an appropriate location for the proposed
use or structure;
B. Neighborhood. The proposed use would not be detrimental, injurious,
obnoxious, or offensive to the neighborhood;
C. Traffic. The proposed use would not create an undue hazard or
nuisance to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
D. Public facilities. Adequate and appropriate facilities and utilities would
be provided to ensure the proper operation of the proposed use or
structure; and
E. Master Plan. The proposed use or structure is consistent with the spirit
of this chapter and the intent of the Master Plan.
A. Adult-oriented establishments. Adult-oriented uses shall exist and be
operated in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Purpose. In the development and execution of this subsection, it is
recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated
under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect
§ 275-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22.3
1:497
upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation
of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will
not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding
neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this
subsection. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose
of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. Uses
subject to these controls are as follows:
(a) Adult bookstore.
(b) Adult cabaret.
(c) Adult motion-picture theater.
(d) Adult mini-motion-picture theater.
(e) Massage parlor.
(2) Location restrictions. No adult-oriented establishment shall be
operated or maintained within 500 feet of a residentially zoned
district, or within 500 feet of a church, a state-licensed day-care
facility, a public library, a public park or playground, public or
private educational facilities which serve persons age 17 or
younger, an elementary school, or a high school. Only one of the
above-regulated uses shall be allowed per block frontage on any
street. No adult-oriented establishment shall be operated or
maintained within 1,000 feet of another such establishment.
(3) Measurement. The distance limitations in Subsection A(2) shall be
measured in a straight line from the main public entrances of said
premises, or from the closest portion of any lot line of properties in
residentially zoned districts.
(4) Sign requirements for adult-oriented establishments.
Notwithstanding the sign provisions of this chapter, all adultoriented
establishments shall comply with the following sign
requirements:
(a) All signs shall be flat wall signs.
(b) The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of
sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street; provided,
however, that in no event shall such sign exceed 32 square feet
in total area.
(c) No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area
where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the
building.
(d) Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
No signs shall be placed in any window. A one-square-foot sign
§ 275-22.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-22.3
1:498
may be placed on the door to state hours of operation and
admittance to adults only.
B. Agricultural building, reuse of existing. An agricultural building that is
more than 50 years old, no longer proposed for agricultural use, and not
situated in an R1 or R2 District may be converted to a nonresidential
use subject to the following standards:
(1) The nonresidential activity shall occur completely within the
agricultural building and there shall be no outside storage of
material, equipment, or products.
(2) The essential exterior architectural character of the building shall
be maintained.
C. Contractor's storage yard. Minimum setbacks from all property lines
shall be 25 feet or as specified in Table 19-C, Dimensional Standards -
Industrial Districts, whichever is greater. No structures or stockpiled
materials related to the storage yard operation shall be situated within
these setbacks. Heavy vehicles or equipment in working order may be
parked within the setbacks provided that none is parked within 15 feet
of a property line (see the corresponding section on contractor's
storage yards in the Site Plan Regulations). A contractor's storage yard
shall not be established in a floodplain as defined in Article 13, Flood
Hazard Overlay District (FHOD).
D. Earth excavation. New earth excavation projects shall be permitted
only subject to meeting the following criteria/conditions, insofar as
these additional standards are not superseded by RSA 155-E:
(1) Additional criteria to be met, beyond those stated in RSA 155-E:
(a) It will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the
capacity of land to hold water during the operation.
(b) It will not adversely impact the quality of the groundwater or of
any underlying aquifer.
(c) It will not cause unsafe conditions on or excessive use of
nearby roads.
(d) It will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural
beauty of the area, other aesthetic values, historic sites, or rare
and irreplaceable natural areas.
(e) Appropriate bonding for the reclamation of an excavation site
shall be required prior to the start of any permitted earth
excavation operation.
(2) Regulations. No person shall perform earth excavation except in
compliance with the provisions of RSA 155-E as amended, this
chapter, and the Site Plan Regulations applicable to earth
excavation.
§ 275-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22.3
1:499
(3) Existing operation. Any existing excavation activity operating
under a permit issued prior to the date of adoption of this chapter
may continue until the expiration of the permit, except that any
expansion or change in operation not covered by that permit shall
be in compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
(4) Buffers. The following buffers/setbacks are established. No
excavation, processing, or removal of vegetation may occur within
the buffer. Where the buffer has been removed or is not adequate,
the Planning Board may stipulate reestablishment of the buffer, as
appropriate.
(a) A fifty-foot buffer along every lot line.
(b) A seventy-five-foot buffer from any perennial stream or
wetland.
(c) Buffers specified in Article 12, Conservation Overlay District.
(d) A one-hundred-foot setback shall be established for excavation
and processing from any existing dwelling located on an
adjacent lot to the side or rear.
(5) Water table. The seasonal high water table must be determined
prior to Zoning Board of Adjustment approval and, if excavation is
proposed within four feet within the Aquifer Protection Overlay
District or within two feet outside of the Aquifer Protection Overlay
District, the following additional criteria must be met:
(a) The applicant must clearly demonstrate that the excavation
activity will not adversely affect groundwater quality.
(b) The applicant must clearly demonstrate that such excavation
will not create a health or safety hazard or provide a plan
outlining measures to mitigate those hazards.
(c) The applicant must clearly demonstrate that such excavation
will not create a groundwater pollution hazard or provide a
plan outlining measures to mitigate that hazard.
(d) The applicant must include a section in the reclamation plan
that adequately addresses health, safety, and pollution
concerns in this area after the excavation activities are
complete.
(e) See Article 10, Aquifer Protection Overlay District, for other
provisions within that district.
(6) Abandoned sites. In the event the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services/Zoning Administrator determines that any
abandoned excavation presents a hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare, the owner may be required, following a public
hearing before the Planning Board, to comply with any timetable
§ 275-22.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-22.3
1:500
and bonding requirements to be established by the Planning Board
to complete reclamation. Should reclamation not be completed,
the Board may request the City to authorize reclamation at the
City's expense. The City's costs shall then constitute an assessment
against the owner and shall create a lien against the property on
which the excavation is located. Such assessment and lien may be
enforced and collected in the same manner as provided for real
estate taxes.
E. Farm; farm, crop.
(1) Lot size. The minimum lot size is five gross acres for a farm and five
gross acres for a crop farm.
(2) Housing. The Planning Board is empowered to consider and
approve special on-site housing arrangements to accommodate
farm workers, such as cluster housing or temporary/seasonal
housing, under site plan review.
(3) Retail sales. Any farm goods produced on site along with limited
related products may be sold on site.
(4) Livestock. Housing for any livestock for a farm shall be set back at
least 100 feet from any side or rear lot lines. Housing for fowl, furbearing
animals, and swine shall be set back at least 150 feet from
any side or rear lot lines. The ZBA may reduce or waive this
requirement by special exception. There is no setback for open
pens and fencing provided animals are not left in such pens
overnight.
(5) Manure. Any storage areas for manure shall be set back at least
200 feet from any lot lines. Best management practices shall be
followed in the handling of manure.
(6) Performance standards. The general provisions of Article 28 of this
chapter and RSA 432:33 and 21:34-a shall apply.
F. Garage setbacks. A special exception may be granted to reduce side
and/or rear setback requirements for garages (only applicable for
residential use) in the residential districts subject to all of the following
conditions/findings:
(1) The lot must not have been created by a subdivision that occurred
after January 1, 2006;
(2) A finding by the Zoning Board of Adjustment that there is some
existing pattern in the area for garage setbacks smaller than those
required;
(3) Locating the garage in conformance with the side and/or rear
setback requirements would significantly impact existing
vegetation, views from the residence, use of the setback, or site
§ 275-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22.3
1:501
circulation, or is impractical due to lot dimensions or other
constraints;
(4) If a new driveway serves the garage, it must be endorsed by the
City Engineer, prior to the public hearing;
(5) Any reduction in setback shall not be greater than 50% of the
required setback;
(6) The proposed garage must be set back at least 10 feet from any
existing building located on an adjacent lot;
(7) The proposed garage must be designed to blend with the
architectural character of the neighborhood (siding, the
arrangement of windows in a building, roof pitch, etc.); elevation
drawings must be submitted to and approved by the ZBA;
(8) The garage does not exceed 24 feet in either length or width; and
(9) The garage walls do not exceed 10 feet in height (the roof may
exceed this ten-foot limit).
G. Junkyard. All materials shall be fully screened from the street and from
all abutting property by a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height.
The Planning Board may stipulate a taller wall or fence, as appropriate.
H. Kennel (commercial).
(1) The minimum lot size shall be three acres.
(2) Minimum setbacks for structures and pens housing dogs shall be:
(a) Front: 150.
(b) Side and rear: 100.
(3) The Planning Board may stipulate that appropriate sound
mitigation devices be installed and that fences, walls, and/or
vegetation be installed to screen the site.
I. Residential facility. The minimum lot size shall be increased by 2,000
square feet per resident.
J. Roadside farm stand.
(1) The roadside structure shall be set back from the front lot line at
least 20 feet.
(2) There shall be adequate off-street parking which shall have safe
access to and from the road. A driveway permit shall be required in
all cases.
K. Solid waste facility. Subject to the same provisions stated in Article 20.
L. Stable, commercial.
§ 275-22.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-22.3
1:502
(1) The minimum lot size required shall be three acres.
(2) The side and rear setbacks for structures housing horses shall be
100 feet from any lot lines.
(3) Any storage areas for manure shall be set back at least 200 feet
from any lot lines. Manure must be handled according to best
management practices.
M. Veterinary clinic.
(1) Veterinary clinics shall set back 100 feet from any residential
property, restaurant or lodging establishment.
(2) All animals must be housed overnight in completely enclosed
buildings.
(3) The Planning Board may stipulate that appropriate sound
mitigation devices be installed and that fences, walls, and/or
vegetation be installed to screen the site where animals will be
maintained out of doors.
N. Wireless communications facility. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Co-location/zoning district. Subject to a determination by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment that the telecommunications
equipment planned for the proposed site cannot be accommodated:
(a) Within a zoning district where these facilities are permitted by
right; nor
(b) On any existing or approved antenna support structure in the
City of Rochester; nor
(c) On any prospective alternative tower structure in the City of
Rochester for one of the following reasons:
[1] Structural capacity. The planned equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing or approved antenna
support structures, as documented by a qualified
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower
cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a
reasonable cost.
[2] Interference. The planned equipment would cause
interference materially impacting the usability of other
existing or planned equipment at the antenna support
structure as documented by a qualified professional
engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
§ 275-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22.3
1:503
[3] Height constraints. Existing or approved antenna support
structure within the required radius cannot accommodate
the planned equipment at the necessary height as
documented by a qualified professional engineer.
[4] Other reasons. Any other substantial reason that
precludes the co-location. The burden of proof is upon the
applicant to demonstrate that all reasonable alternatives
to the erection of a new structure have been fully explored.
(2) Buffers.
(a) In addition, for the purpose of buffering the proposed structure
from neighboring properties and roads, the site proposed for
the facility shall be surrounded by an area of dense tree
growth, including a sufficient percentage of evergreen trees to
partially screen the site in the winter, that extends
continuously for a minimum distance equal to 1/2 the height of
the proposed support structure.
(b) In locations where this dense tree growth is not presently in
place the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, at its option, where
it determines that the intent of this requirement can otherwise
be met, waive or reduce this requirement due to other
mitigating conditions on or off the site and/or approve a tree
planting and landscaping plan for the site (alternatively, the
Board may defer review and approval of this plan to the
Planning Board as part of site plan review). An appropriate
method, such as a deed restriction, shall be employed to
ensure that the buffer remains in place as long as the support
structure is in place.
§ 275-22.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-22.3
1:504
ARTICLE 23
Accessory Uses
[Amended 2-3-2015]
§ 275-23.1. General provisions.
The following provisions apply in evaluating proposed accessory uses,
activities, structures, and situations.
A. List of accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses are included in this Article 23 and are generally not
included in the Tables of Uses 18-A through 18-E. The principal
uses listed in those tables are permitted based upon zoning district.
In contrast, accessory uses are allowed if the principal use to which
they are accessory is allowed. Nonetheless, some accessory uses
(such as home occupations and helipads) also are controlled by
zoning district or are approved by special exception, in which cases
they are included in the tables.
(2) Section 275-23.2 contains standards for specific accessory uses,
activities, structures, and situations. This list is not exhaustive.
Additional conditions articulated elsewhere may also apply.
B. Criteria.
(1) If a proposed use is not listed within Article 23, the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services shall determine on a caseby-
case basis whether it should be deemed an accessory use. This
determination is based upon a judgment whether the proposed use:
(a) Is commonly or customarily observed as, or considered to be,
an accessory use to the principal use;
(b) Is related to the principal use;
(c) Supports the principal use;
(d) Is subordinate to the principal use;
(e) Is in reasonable proportion to the principal use;
(f) Is incidental in its character; and
(g) Has relatively little impact, at least in comparison to the
principal use.
(2) Where appropriate, the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services may stipulate conditions or parameters for a proposed use
which would reasonably render it an accessory use rather than a
second principal use.
C. Accessory uses to residential uses.
§ 275-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.1
1:505
(1) Accessory uses to principal residential uses should be established
for the benefit of the resident, residential development, and guests,
and not for commercial purposes.
(2) In some cases, the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services may determine that a proposed use is not an accessory use
due to the particular scale or nature of the proposed use. (Example:
A garage for passenger vehicles is an accessory use, but it would
cease to be if the property owner stores vehicles for customers for
a fee.)
D. Accessory uses to nonresidential uses. In some cases, the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services may determine that a
proposed use is not an accessory use due to the particular scale or
nature of the proposed use. Examples:
(1) An on-site recreational facility serving employees of a business
would be an accessory use, but if outside people were invited to use
the facility for a fee it would be considered a commercial
recreational facility.
(2) On-site vehicle maintenance for a fleet of vehicles used in an office
complex would not be an accessory use even though it supports the
principal use due to the potentially significant impacts of the
maintenance operation.
(3) A contractor performing simple maintenance on his/her own
vehicles on site would be considered an accessory use to a
contractor's storage yard, but if the contractor performs work on
other vehicles for a fee, the storage yard would be redefined as
commercial vehicle service.
E. Permitted by right. An accessory use is permitted by right if the
principal use to which it is accessory is permitted by right, by
conditional use, or by special exception.
F. Dimension requirements. Detached accessory roofed structures are
subject to the requirements articulated in Article 19, Dimensional
Regulations, except for noted exceptions.
G. Review. A proposed accessory use is subject to site plan or subdivision
review if that use meets the threshold of review articulated in the Site
Plan Regulations or the Subdivision Regulations.
H. Secondary uses. Secondary uses (which are not deemed accessory uses
since they are not actually supportive of a principal use) which clearly
would have no significant negative impacts may be treated as accessory
uses at the reasonable discretion of the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services. (Example: While gardening is an accessory use
to a residence it is not accessory to a commercial use. However, it
would be reasonable to permit the owner of a business to use vacant
§ 275-23.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.1
1:506
§ 275-23.2. Standards for specific accessory uses.
land at the rear of the business property for his/her own personal
gardening.)
A. The following standards shall apply to these specific accessory uses,
activities, structures, and situations wherever they are allowed:
(1) Accessory apartment. An accessory apartment is permitted subject
to compliance with all of the following standards and procedures:
[Amended 4-4-2017]
(a) It is permitted where and as specified in the Tables of Uses (by
right or by special exception). However, if the accessory
dwelling is detached from the single-family dwelling, it must be
approved by a special exception;
(b) It is accessory to a single-family dwelling only and if detached
from the single-family dwelling it is similar in architectural
style;
(c) It must be two bedrooms or less;
(d) It may not exceed 800 square feet;
(e) It may be either part of the single-family dwelling or in a
separate building, such as above a garage; if it is part of the
single-family dwelling, an interior door shall be provided
between the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling
unit; [Amended 3-5-2019]
(f) There may be only one per lot;
(g) The owner of the property must occupy one of the dwelling
units and the owner must demonstrate that one of the dwelling
units is his/her principal place of residence;
(h) At least one parking space must be provided for the unit;
(i) Where municipal sewer service is not provided, the septic
system shall meet NHDES requirements for the combined
system demand for total occupancy of the property; and
(j) It is exempt from site plan review but a letter of intent must be
submitted to the Building Inspector to ensure that the above
conditions are met.
(k) If it is a security apartment, it shall not exceed 800 square feet
and it shall be attached to or located with an allowed
commercial, office or industrial use. Such unit may be occupied
by the business owner, family member or employee whose
purpose is to provide security and/or protection of the business
premises. This use shall require site plan review.
§ 275-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.2
1:507
(l) If it is a caretaker apartment it shall be attached to or located
with an allowed residential or nonresidential use and it shall be
occupied by the owner, family member or employee of the
principal use and the gross floor area does not exceed 800
square feet. This use shall require site plan review.
(2) Accessory sales and service.
(a) Small-scale retail sales and services may be offered as an
accessory use in nonresidential districts which do not permit
retail sales and service (including Airport, Hospital, Industrial,
and Office Commercial Districts) where the activity is clearly
established to serve on-site employees or customers of the
principal use in an incidental, supportive, or subordinate
manner.
(b) Generally, but not necessarily, such accessory uses are situated
on the interior of the building housing the principal use with no
separate entrance and no exterior evidence of the operation.
(Examples: A newspaper or flower vendor located in the lobby
of an industrial facility; a card shop located inside a hospital; a
cafeteria or exercise facility serving employees.)
(3) Animals and pets, keeping of. The following standards apply to the
keeping of animals in a residence:
(a) Household pets. Keeping typical household animals as pets,
including dogs, cats, birds, small turtles, etc., is an accessory
use provided their presence does not become a nuisance or a
health hazard.
(b) Breeding pets. Breeding numerous animals on a frequent or
regular basis for sale is considered a business and not an
accessory use.
(c) Exotic animals. Keeping exotic animals as pets is an accessory
use provided that one's ownership of the animals:
[1] Does not present a safety hazard to neighbors and the
public;
[2] Does not pose a nuisance to neighbors; and
[3] Is in full compliance with all applicable local, state, and
federal law.
(d) Livestock as pets. Keeping any small animals ordinarily defined
as livestock as pets (such as chickens, but not including
roosters) is an accessory use provided that:
[1] The animal lives in the house and is treated as a household
pet;
§ 275-23.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.2
1:508
[2] Reasonable accommodations are made for the animal in
the house;
[3] The animal does not pose a health hazard; and
[4] The animal does not pose a nuisance to neighbors.
(e) Horses and other large livestock. Keeping fewer than 10
horses or other large animals defined as livestock is an
accessory use to a residence subject to the following
standards:
[1] The activity is not carried out as a business.
[2] The residence is not located in the Residential-1 or -2
District.
[3] A lot in the AG District is at least three gross acres.
[4] A lot in all other districts is at least two gross acres.
[5] There is an additional 1/4 acre of land beyond the
minimum specified in Subsection A(3)(e)[3] and [4] above
for each animal kept beyond the first one.
[6] No area or structure for the housing, stabling, storage of
manure/animal waste, or feeding of animals shall be
located within 100 feet of any property line.
[7] Handling of manure/animal waste must follow best
management practices and not be a nuisance for
neighbors.
[8] No animals shall be pastured within 25 feet of any side or
rear property line except where the abutting property
owner consents to a reduced setback.
(f) Chickens, fowl and other small livestock. Keeping fewer than
10 chickens, ducks, rabbits, bee hives, or other small animals
defined as livestock is an accessory use to a residence subject
to the following standards:
[1] The activity is not carried out as a business;
[2] No roosters are allowed and the number of chickens is
limited to fewer than 10 in the Residential-1 and -2
Districts;
[3] No area or structure for the housing, storage of manure/
animal waste, or feeding of animals shall be located within
20 feet of any abutting property lines; and
§ 275-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.2
1:509
[4] Handling of manure/animal waste must follow best
management practices and not be a nuisance for
neighbors.
(4) Clubhouse, community center, recreation facilities, laundry,
storage areas, and other facilities for a residential development.
(a) The Planning Board shall review these uses for location,
design, size, additional parking, and setback requirements.
(b) These uses and facilities shall only be used by residents of the
development and their guests.
(c) There shall be no outside storage of materials or equipment.
(d) Buffers and screening shall be used to help alleviate any
adverse effects on abutting residential properties.
(e) There shall be no emission of noise, odor, dust, vibrations, or
smoke beyond property lines.
(5) Commercial vehicles, parking of. Parking commercial vehicles
outdoors overnight within residential districts is permitted as an
accessory use as follows:
(a) One small commercial vehicle, a passenger automobile, pickup
truck or van, is allowed. Additional commercial vehicles may
be allowed by special exception.
(b) Other larger types of commercial vehicles, those weighing over
26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, are permitted only by
special exception subject to the property owner being able to
provide adequate buffering and sound mitigation.
(c) Adequate off-street parking must be provided. Parking shall
not be within any public right-of-way.
(6) Construction trailer. A construction trailer is allowed when used in
conjunction with an on-site construction project provided that:
(a) The placement of the trailer, including location, is approved by
the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services;
(b) The trailer is not used for living or sleeping; and
(c) It is removed when the project is completed, terminated, or
suspended for longer than four months.
(7) Drive-through window. A drive-through window is subject to the
following provisions:
(a) It must be located at the side or rear of the building;
(b) It is not permitted in NMU District; and
§ 275-23.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.2
1:510
(c) Where adjacent to a residential property at the side or the rear,
the drive-through window must have a thirty-five-foot buffer
with appropriate planting or screening.
(8) Driveways. See Article 5, Residential Zoning Districts, Article 6,
Commercial Zoning Districts, and Article 26, Roads and Parking.
(9) Dwelling for farm workers. This use is allowed by conditional use.
The Planning Board shall review the location, design, and density of
the dwelling.
(10) Fence. Fences, walls, and similar structures (referred to herein
simply as "fences") must be in compliance with the following
requirements:
(a) A fence permit issued by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services is required prior to the erection of any
fence.
(b) The maximum fence height (from grade) in residential districts
is six feet. Greater heights may be approved by special
exception.
(c) The maximum fence height (from grade) in nonresidential
districts is eight feet. Greater heights may be approved by
special exception.
(d) Razor wire fences are not permitted in any district.
(e) Fences are exempt from setbacks provided they are fully
contained on the subject property and do not encroach on any
adjacent property or road right-of-way.
(f) The finished side of a fence shall face outward from the
property on which the fence is located.
(g) Fences must conform to sight triangle requirements at corner
lots. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
(h) No fence shall be erected that blocks or limits the existing
sight distance of an abutting driveway or right-of-way. A clear
vision area extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines shall be maintained 10 feet from the
edge of road pavement or sidewalk at three feet six inches
above the driveway surface (the height of a typical driver's
eyes) to points three feet six inches above the road surface in
both directions.
(i) With regard to existing fences on the effective date of this
provision, which fence fails to comply with the requirements of
Subsection A(10)(g) and (h), in the event that the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, in a written
§ 275-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.2
1:511
administrative decision, determines that an existing fence, by
virtue of its height, location or otherwise, constitutes a hazard
to public health and/or safety, then such fence shall be required
to comply with the requirements of said Subsection A(10((g)
and (h) hereof within six months of the owner's official
notification by the Director of such administrative decision,
failing which, the fence in question shall be removed.
(11) Flagpole. The maximum height for flagpoles is 30 feet in residential
districts and 50 feet in nonresidential districts.
(12) Fuel tank. Aboveground fuel tanks must be in compliance with
setbacks. Fuel tanks situated in front yards must be fully screened.
(13)Home occupation (see Table of Uses 18-A and Article 24, Home
Occupations).
(14) Mobile units. Mobile units are allowed as accessory uses with a
permit issued from the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services as follows:
(a) As temporary residences for farm laborers or supervisory
personnel employed on a seasonal basis provided the units are
in place only during the season when used.
(b) As temporary living quarters for employees of itinerant
businesses such as carnivals during the period when such
businesses are actually being conducted but in no case for
longer than 30 days.
(c) As temporary classroom space at an existing school facility.
(d) As temporary housing for a maximum period of 12 months
while a new house is being built in the aftermath of destruction
to the original house by fire or other causes.
(15) On-site factory sales. In industrial districts where retail sales are
not permitted, products manufactured on the premises may be sold
on site as an accessory use by special exception. In addition,
products manufactured by the same company or one of its
subsidiaries at an off-site location may be sold on site provided a
significant amount of the inventory is produced on site. The sales
showroom must be subordinate to the on-site manufacturing
component.
(16) Outside display of merchandise. Goods for sale may be displayed
outside subject to the following provisions:
(a) The outside display shall be in place only for the time during
the day that the business is open. All portions of the display,
including racks and other appurtenances, shall be stored
inside except during hours of operation. However, this
foregoing requirement shall not apply to the display of large
§ 275-23.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.2
1:512
equipment, vehicles, landscaping materials, and other items
which are customarily maintained out of doors at all times.
(b) Goods must be displayed on the same property where the
primary business is situated (unless otherwise approved as a
flea market, farmers' market, temporary sales area, etc.).
(c) The outside display shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
(d) Goods shall be displayed in an orderly fashion and shall not
present any public hazard.
(e) The outside display shall not be located in any area designated
for other purposes such as handicap ramps, fire lanes, or fire
exits. Displays may be set up in parking lots with the approval
of the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
upon a judgment that sufficient parking capacity is still
available.
(f) Vehicles for sale (and other goods and materials) shall not be
displayed, parked, or stored within any City or state road rightof-
way at any time.
(17) Outside storage of materials. Materials, goods, and equipment (or
"materials" below) may be stored outside for nonresidential uses
(this restriction does not apply to residential uses or temporary
construction activities) subject to the following requirements:
(a) Stored materials are subject to all setbacks.
(b) Materials must be stored in rear yards. However, materials
may be stored in front or side setbacks in the General
Industrial District by conditional use. Materials stored in front
or side setbacks must be fully screened if deemed appropriate
by the Planning Board.
(c) Materials must be screened with a six-foot-high solid fence or
wall from any residential properties at the side or rear.
(18) Parking areas/lots. See Article 5, Residential Zoning Districts,
Article 6, Commercial Zoning Districts, and Article 26, Roads and
Parking.
(19) Sawmill, temporary. A temporary sawmill used to process wood cut
on the premises shall conform to the following standards:
(a) A permit issued from the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services is required. The Director may stipulate the
location for the sawmill, hours of operation, and other
conditions and may require surety to ensure the reclamation of
the sawmill area.
§ 275-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.2
1:513
(b) The sawmill shall be located at least 200 feet from any
neighboring residences and at least 100 feet from any road.
(c) Processed materials shall not be stored on the site for more
than two weeks.
(d) Upon the cessation of activity the impacted area shall be
regraded and landscaped using best stormwater management
practices to ensure reclamation that creates a post-impact
runoff rate and quantity not exceeding the pre-impact levels.
(20) Shed. In any zoning district, the minimum side and rear setbacks
shall be the lesser of 10 feet or the ordinary setback for a singlestory
outdoor storage shed which is:
(a) Two hundred square feet or less in floor area;
(b) Not situated on a permanent foundation; and
(c) Used in connection with a dwelling of four or fewer dwelling
units.
(21) Signage. See Article 29, Signage.
(22) Storage areas. Storage areas within residential developments are
permitted for recreational vehicles, boats, and overflow parking as
authorized pursuant to site plan or subdivision approval.
(23) Storage trailer. Storage trailers for temporary storage are
permitted only in nonresidential districts and only as follows (this
provision does not preclude use of temporary storage trailers in
residential districts during active construction):
(a) A permit issued from the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services is required.
(b) The trailer must be placed in the most unobtrusive location
practical as stipulated by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services, preferably in the rear.
(c) The trailer shall meet all setbacks.
(d) The trailer may not be placed in the front yard except by
special exception upon a finding that it is not practical to place
it in the rear or side yards.
(e) The trailer must be adequately buffered from any dwellings on
adjacent lots to the side or rear as stipulated by the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services.
(f) The trailer may be placed for only six months at a time. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may extend this time period once
for up to an additional six months maximum by special
exception.
§ 275-23.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.2
1:514
(g) Any unregistered vehicle used for storage shall be treated as a
storage trailer.
(24) Streetside dining. An outdoor dining area or cafe is allowed within
the public right-of-way if approved by the Rochester City Council.
The dining area must not impede safe and efficient pedestrian and
vehicular movement.44
(25) Swimming pool. The minimum rear setback for swimming pools
that are used in connection with any dwelling with four or fewer
units shall be 25 feet in the AG District and 10 feet in all other
districts. Any building used in connection with a pool shall be
subject to the rear setback ordinarily applicable.
(26) Temporary structures. Temporary structures erected for more than
15 days are subject to all requirements listed below. Temporary
structures erected for 15 or fewer days are exempt from
Subsection A(26)(b) and (c).
(a) A permit is required for temporary structures. An application
must be submitted to the Department of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services specifying the proposed location for the
structure, its purpose, and its expected duration.
(b) Temporary structures are subject to all zoning setbacks.
(c) Temporary structures may not be placed forward of the front
facade of the primary building on the lot (on corner lots, this
applies only to the main entry facade, though other corner lot
setbacks, as specified in this chapter, still apply).
(27) Timber harvesting. Timber may be harvested in accordance with
RSA 227-J:9 and best management practices.
(28) Utilities and service areas. All outside storage areas, machinery,
fuel storage tanks, service areas, and utility structures shall be
placed in rear yards or screened with opaque fencing or vegetation
such that they are not visible from the road.
(29)Warehouse. A warehouse or storage area shall generally be
considered an accessory use if it covers an area less than the area
of the principal on-site use (such as a store or factory) that it
serves.
(30) Yard sales, personal. Personal yard sales on one's own residential
property are allowed as an accessory use in residential districts
provided that:
(a) The resident sells primarily his/her own personal articles.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Food and Food Service, Art. II, Outdoor Dining Establishments.
§ 275-23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-23.2
1:515
(b) The articles offered for sale were acquired largely for personal
use rather than for commercial resale.
(c) The sales are conducted no more than twice in any calendar
year.
(d) The sale does not last for more than three days, consecutively
or in any two-week period.
§ 275-23.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-23.2
1:516
ARTICLE 24
Home Occupations
§ 275-24.1. Requirements for all home occupations.
The following standards apply to all home occupations-1, -2, and -3:
A. On resident's property. Home occupations shall be conducted by the
individual on the property in which he/she resides.
B. Inside the dwelling. All activity related to the home occupation shall be
conducted inside the dwelling or inside a garage or barn-type
outbuilding.
C. Character. Home occupations must be subordinate to the residential
use and must have little or no impact upon the neighborhood. There
must be minimal indication of the home occupation evident from the
road or from neighboring properties.
D. Retail sales. There shall be no retail sales of goods or products on the
premises, except:
(1) As may be incidental to the primary office or personal services
occupation (such as sales of hair products to a salon customer);
(2) For goods shipped pursuant to mail/email/telecommunication
order;
(3) To customers who visit by prearranged appointment only; or
(4) For barn sales as specified under home occupation-3.
E. Delivery of goods. The regular receipt or delivery of merchandise,
goods or supplies to or from the business shall be limited to U.S. mail
service, a standard parcel delivery service utilizing a two-axle vehicle,
or a private passenger automobile.
F. Outside storage/parking. There shall be no outside storage or parking
of materials, equipment, or vehicles (except for one ordinary passenger
vehicle, pickup truck, or van related to the business). Box trucks are
permitted by special exception subject to a determination that adequate
buffering can be provided.
G. Performance standards. There shall be no emission of noise, odor, dust,
fumes, vibration, or smoke beyond the property or, in the case of
multifamily dwellings, beyond the dwelling unit.
H. Septic system. Septic system design/capacity for home occupations that
utilize significant additional water or wastewater volumes, such as hair
salons and catering services, shall be verified in writing by a licensed
New Hampshire septic designer or a professional engineer.
I. Multifamily dwellings. Home occupations are allowed in all residential
property. Any proposal for a home occupation-2 or home occupation-3
§ 275-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24.1
1:517
in a dwelling other than a single-family dwelling shall be reviewed as
a special exception (see § 275-24.6 below). In addition, the owner and
residents of all units in the dwelling shall be notified of the hearing by
certified mail.
J. Parking.
(1) Adequate parking must be provided either on street or on site as
determined by the Planning and Development Department (or the
ZBA where a special exception is required).
(2) All parking design requirements stipulated in Article 5, Residential
Zoning Districts, shall be met.
(3) Parking shall be located in a regular residential driveway, in the
side yard, or in the rear yard. Parking can occur in the front yard if
the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services has found
that no other alternative exists. Back-to-back parking is permitted.
If the amount of parking is noticeably greater than that for a typical
single-family dwelling then it shall be fully screened or buffered. It
is emphasized that if parking cannot be handled properly and
unobtrusively then the home occupation shall not be permitted.
K. Hours of operation. Hours for customers to visit the home occupation
are restricted to the following unless otherwise specifically approved:
8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Saturday.
L. Nontransferability. Home occupation approvals are not transferable;
they are issued to a specific individual applicant for a specific home
occupation at a specific site.
M. Certificate of occupancy. Prior to the commencement of any home
occupation, a certificate of occupancy must be obtained from the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services when deemed
necessary by the Director or requested by the applicant.
N. Expansion. No expansion of the scope, or significant change in the
nature, of any home occupation for which an approval has been granted
shall occur without subsequent review and approval.
O. Revocation. An approval for a home occupation may be revoked by the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services for violation of any
provisions of this chapter or of any conditions of the approval. Appeals
of any such revocation shall be made to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
P. Commercial districts. Within commercial districts, where the use is
allowed, it need not be pursued as a home occupation even if the
business owner operates from his/her house. However, site review
approval is still required and the applicant is responsible for obtaining
all other applicable permits.
§ 275-24.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-24.2
1:518
§ 275-24.2. Home occupation-1.
A home occupation-1 is an office-type home occupation. All of the following
standards apply:
§ 275-24.3. Home occupation-2.
A home occupation-2 is an office or personal services type home occupation
which may be more intensive than a home occupation-1. All of the following
standards apply:
§ 275-24.4. Home occupation-3.
A home occupation-3 is an office, personal services, processing, or smallscale
craft-production type home occupation which is more intensive than
home occupations-1 and -2. All of the following standards apply:
A. Employees. There shall be no more than one employee working on site
other than household members who reside with the operator;
B. No customers. There shall be no customers who come to the residence;
C. Deliveries. Minimal deliveries may be made to the residence;
D. No signage. There shall be no signs visible from the road;
E. No external indication. There shall be no external indication of the
enterprise; and
F. No review. No review or approval process is required except that a
letter of intent must be submitted to the Planning and Development
Department.
A. Employees. There shall be no more than one employee working on site
other than household members who reside with the operator.
B. Five hundred square feet. There shall be no more than 500 square feet
of area used for the business.
C. Signage. There may be only one sign for the business visible from the
street. The sign shall be nonilluminated and shall not exceed three
square feet in area per side.
D. Classes. Instruction in classes shall be limited to four pupils at one time.
A. Employees. There shall be no more than two employees working on site
other than family or household members who reside with the operator.
B. Area. There shall be no more than 1,000 square feet of area used for the
business.
C. Signage. There may be only one sign for the business visible from the
street. The sign shall be nonilluminated and shall not exceed four
square feet in area per side.
§ 275-24.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24.4
1:519
§ 275-24.5. Review process without special exception.
A home occupation-2 or a home occupation-3 where no special exception is
required shall be subject to the minor site plan review process as set forth
in the Rochester Site Plan Regulations.
§ 275-24.6. Review process with special exception.
The review process for a home occupation-2 or a home occupation-3 where
a special exception is involved requires the submission of a special
exception application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, ZBA approval, and
then minor site plan review approval as set forth in the Rochester Site Plan
Regulations.
§ 275-24.7. Prohibited home occupations.
The following occupations/activities shall not be considered home
occupations:
D. Barn sales. If there is a barn on the property which was built prior to
1960 it may be used for retail sales (but not for the sales of any
vehicles). The ZBA shall approve the type of items offered for sale as
part of a special exception review to ensure there is no adverse impact
upon the neighborhood.
E. Classes. Instruction in classes shall be limited to eight pupils at one
time.
A. Bed-and-breakfast.
B. Contractor's storage yard.
C. Funeral home.
D. Kennels or stables, commercial.
E. Nursing home.
F. Any vehicle or other heavy equipment repair.
G. Restaurant.
H. Retail sales operation (except as noted above).
I. Veterinary clinic.
J. Commercial yard sales (except for barn sales as noted above).
§ 275-24.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-24.7
1:520
ARTICLE 25
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24.7
1:521

ARTICLE 26
Roads and Parking
§ 275-26.1. Minimum parking requirements.
§ 275-26.2. Driveways, curb cuts and parking design.
Note: Numerous additional requirements for parking and driveway design
are contained in Article 5, Residential Zoning Districts, and in Article 6,
Commercial Zoning Districts.
A. Single-family. Minimum off-street parking requirements for singlefamily
dwellings are two spaces.
B. Two-family. Minimum off-street parking requirements for two-family
dwellings are four spaces (two per dwelling unit).
C. Size. Each parking space for single- and two-family uses shall be at
least nine by 18 feet.
D. Other uses. Minimum parking requirements for most uses are
contained in the City of Rochester Site Plan Regulations. For any uses
or changes of use which are not subject to site plan review the parking
requirements contained in the Site Plan Regulations shall apply.
However, in such cases, the Planning Board may adjust requirements by
waiver.
A. Permit. A written permit from the Public Works Department is required
prior to the construction or alteration of any driveway, curb cut, or
access point into or out of the City of Rochester road system.
B. Adequate surface. All parking areas and driveways shall have a
smoothly graded, stabilized dust-free gravel surface or a paved/hard
surface (asphalt, concrete, interlocking brick, etc.).
C. Adequate drainage. Drainage for parking areas and driveways shall be
designed to prevent stormwater from flowing onto adjacent property,
sidewalks and public roads (unless adequate structures are present
within the road right-of-way) as determined by Public Works.
D. Setbacks. All driveways and parking areas shall be set back from side
property lines at least five feet (the Site Plan Regulations may contain
greater requirements). This requirement shall not apply to shared
driveways and may be waived in situations where an abutting property
owner consents to a reduced setback, or for driveways on lots in the R1,
R2, NMU, or OC District where the setback would push the driveway
into a space directly in front of the building (as determined by the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, Zoning
Administrator, Public Works Department, or Planning Board, as
appropriate).
§ 275-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-26.3
1:523
§ 275-26.3. Commercial vehicles.
Parking commercial vehicles outdoors overnight within residential districts
is permitted as follows:
§ 275-26.4. Private roads.
Private roads are prohibited unless they are part of a plan approved by the
Planning Board and noted as a private road on said plan. Building permits
shall only be issued pursuant to the provisions of RSA 674:41.
§ 275-26.5. Shared driveways.
Shared driveways providing access to new, separately platted lots are only
permitted where those lots will have adequate frontage on an approved
public road.
§ 275-26.6. Class VI roads.
Development on Class VI roads is regulated as follows:
A. No more than one commercial vehicle, a passenger automobile, pickup
truck or van, is allowed.
B. Other types of vehicles, such as truck tractors, box trucks or vehicles
with more than two axles, are permitted on private property only by
special exception subject to the property owner being able to provide
adequate visual buffering, exhaust odor control, and sound mitigation.
C. No commercial vehicle other than a passenger automobile, pickup truck
or van may be parked overnight on a public road in a residential district
(except when accommodating a residential relocation or by short-term
permit/approval from the Police Department).
A. General terms.
(1) State law. This section is adopted pursuant to RSA 674:41. In case
of conflict between this section and RSA 674:41, RSA 674:41 shall
be determining.
(2) Uses. Single-family use, farming, and forestry are the only
permitted uses on lots accessed from Class VI roads.
(3) Accessory uses. Any uses customarily accessory to a single-family
residence may be established on the property. However, only home
occupations-1 and -2 (for which there is only one employee other
than household members) are permitted.
(4) Subdivision. Any new lots to be subdivided out of existing lots on
Class VI roads shall have a minimum frontage on the Class VI road
of 300 feet and a minimum lot size of three acres.
B. Approval process. Shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 674:41.
§ 275-26.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-26.6
1:524
C. Other provisions.
(1) The applicant is not specifically required to maintain the road as
part of any authorization for a building permit but he/she is urged
to do so, on his/her own or in coordination with other property
owners.
(2) It is recognized that any applicant who chooses to build on a Class
VI road does so at his/her own risk. If in the future abutting
landowners seek to upgrade a Class VI road to a Class V road then
the landowners, rather than the City of Rochester, shall be entirely
responsible for the costs of upgrading that road (i.e., to be paid for
by an individual developer, abutting landowners jointly through a
private agreement, or through a betterment tax on abutting
landowners if approved by City Council).
(3) Any modifications to the road in the future must be approved by the
City of Rochester Public Works Department.
(4) If any Class VI road is brought up to City standards the
reclassification to a Class V road must be approved by the
Rochester City Council.
(5) The Planning and Development Department shall maintain a record
of Class VI roads or portions of Class VI roads upon which the City
Council has authorized issuance of building permits.
(6) See the Transportation Master Plan for a partial list of Class VI
roads in the City.
§ 275-26.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-26.6
1:525

ARTICLE 27
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Amended 7-7-2015]
§ 275-27.1. Buffers for residential property.
§ 275-27.2. Cemeteries.
Pursuant to RSA 289:3, III, there shall be no construction, excavation,
or development, nor placement of any buildings, structures, signage, or
parking, inside or within 25 feet of a known burial site or within 25 feet
of the boundaries of an established burial ground or cemetery. For the
purposes of this section, the term "excavation" shall include the disturbance
to a depth of 12 inches or more of soil for activities such as landscaping,
utility trenching, tree planting, etc. No healthy tree with a diameter at
breast height of eight inches or more may be cut or removed within 25 feet
of any established burial ground or cemetery except by special exception for
good cause and with appropriate mitigation. No new chain-link fence shall
be installed in or around any cemetery.
§ 275-27.3. Impact fees.
A. All nonresidential development, including any parking and storage
areas, shall be screened/buffered from any adjacent residential
property situated to the side or rear as stipulated by the Planning Board
under site review. The Board may stipulate plantings and/or fencing, as
reasonably appropriate. See Figure 27-A, Screening Between
Commercial and Residential Uses, as an example.
B. All multifamily development, consisting of three units of more,
including parking areas, shall be screened/buffered from any adjacent
single-family dwellings situated to the side or rear as required by the
Planning Board under site review. The Board may stipulate plantings
and/or fencing, as reasonably appropriate. This requirement does not
apply in situations where multifamily development is specifically
designed to integrate with single-family dwellings in mixed-use
developments.
Figure 27-A, Screening Between Commercial and Residential
Uses
§ 275-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-27.3
1:527
A. Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:16 and 674:21 in
order to:
(1) Promote public health, safety, convenience, and welfare;
(2) Ensure that adequate and appropriate public facilities are
available;
(3) Provide for the managed development of the municipality and its
environs;
(4) Mitigate the impact of development of land that would involve
danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the
lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire
protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive
expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services; and
(5) Ensure the proper arrangement and coordination of streets.
B. Authority.
(1) Impact fees may be assessed to new development to compensate
the City of Rochester and the School District for the proportional
share of capital facilities generated by new development in the City
of Rochester. Any person who seeks a building permit for new
development may be required to pay an impact fee in the manner
set forth herein.
(2) The Planning Board may, as a condition of approval of any
subdivision or site plan, and when consistent with applicable Board
regulations, require an applicant to pay an impact fee for the
applicant's proportional share of off-site improvements to public
facilities affected by the development.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the existing
authority of the Planning Board to disapprove proposed
development which would require an excessive expenditure of
public funds, or which would otherwise violate applicable
ordinances and regulations. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the Planning Board's authority to require off-site
work to be performed by the applicant, in lieu of paying an impact
fee, or the Board's authority to impose other types of conditions of
approval. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect types
of fees governed by other statutes, ordinances or regulations.
C. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
IMPACT FEE — A fee or assessment imposed upon development,
including subdivision or building construction, in order to help meet
the needs occasioned by that development for the construction or
improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the City of
Rochester, including and limited to water treatment and distribution
§ 275-27.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-27.3
1:528
facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers;
stormwater, drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems
and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities;
public safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling,
processing and disposal facilities; public library facilities; and public
recreational facilities not including public open space.
NEW DEVELOPMENT —
An activity that results in any one of the following:
(a) The creation of a new dwelling unit or units;
The conversion of a legally existing use, or additions thereto,
which would result in a net increase in the number of dwelling
units;
(b)
Construction resulting in a new nonresidential building or a
net increase in the floor area of any nonresidential building; or
(c)
The conversion of an existing use to another use if such change
results in a net increase in floor area and such change creates
a net increase in the demand on public capital facilities that
are the subject of impact fee assessments unless waived by the
Planning Board.
(d)
(1)
New development shall not include the replacement of an existing
manufactured home or the reconstruction of a structure that has
been destroyed by fire or natural disaster where there is no change
in its size, density or type of use, and where there is no net increase
in demand on public capital facilities.
(2)
D. Assessment methodology.
(1) Proportionality. The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated by
the Planning Board to be a proportional share of municipal capital
improvement costs which is reasonably related to the capital needs
created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the
development from the capital improvements financed by the fee.
The Planning Board may prepare, adopt, or amend studies or
reports that are consistent with the above standards, and which
define a methodology for impact fee assessment for public capital
facilities, and impact fee assessment schedules therefor.
(2) Existing deficiencies. Upgrading of existing facilities and
infrastructure, the need for which is not created by new
development, shall not be paid for by impact fees.
E. Administration.
(1) Accounting. In accord with RSA 673:16, II, and 674:21, V(c), impact
fees shall be accounted for separately, shall be segregated from the
City's general fund, may be spent upon order of the City Council,
§ 275-27.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-27.3
1:529
and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for which
they were collected, or to recoup the cost of capital improvements
made in anticipation of the needs which the fees were collected
to meet. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have
been or will be issued by the City of Rochester or the Rochester
School District for the funding of capital improvements that are the
subject of impact fee assessment, impact fees from the appropriate
related capital facility impact fee accounts may be applied to pay
debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments.
(2) Assessment. All impact fees imposed pursuant to this section shall
be assessed at the time of Planning Board approval of a subdivision
plan or site plan. When Planning Board approval is not required, or
has been made prior to the adoption or amendment of the impact
fee ordinance, impact fees shall be assessed prior to, or as a
condition for, the issuance of a building permit or other appropriate
permission to proceed with development, as determined by the
Building Inspector. Impact fees shall be intended to reflect the
effect of development upon municipal and/or school facilities at the
time of the issuance of the building permit. In determining the
amount of the impact fee, when the net increase in floor area has
triggered the fee, the calculations shall use only the net increase in
floor area.
(3) Security. In the interim between assessment and collection, the
Building Inspector may require developers to post bonds, issue
letters of credit, accept liens, or otherwise provide suitable
measures of security so as to guarantee future payment of assessed
impact fees.
(4) Collection. Impact fees shall be collected as a condition for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy; provided, however, that in
projects where off-site improvements are to be constructed
simultaneously with a project's development, and where the City
has appropriated the necessary funds to cover such portions of the
work for which it will be responsible, the City may advance the time
of collection of the impact fee to the issuance of a building permit.
If no certificate of occupancy is required, impact fees shall be
collected when the development is ready for its intended use.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the Building Inspector, with
the approval of the Planning Board, and the assessed party from
establishing an alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of
payment.
(5) Refund of fees paid. The current owner of record of property for
which an impact fee has been paid shall be entitled to a refund of
that fee, plus accrued interest, under the following circumstances:
(a) When either the full or partial portion of the impact fee,
whichever is applicable, has not been encumbered or legally
bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected
§ 275-27.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-27.3
1:530
within a period of six years from the date of the full and final
payment of the fee; or
(b) When the City of Rochester or, in the case of school impact
fees, the Rochester School District has failed, within the period
of six years from the date of the full and final payment of such
fee, to appropriate its proportionate non-impact fee share of
related capital improvement costs.
F. Appeals.
(1) A party aggrieved by a decision made by the Building Inspector
regarding the assessment or collection of impact fees authorized by
this section may appeal such decision to the Planning Board.
(2) In accord with RSA 676:5, III, appeals of the decision of the
Planning Board in administering this section may be made to
Superior Court, as provided in RSA 676:5, III, and 677:15.
G. Waivers. The Planning Board may grant full or partial waivers of impact
fees where the Board finds that one or more of the following criteria are
met with respect to the particular public capital facilities for which
impact fees are normally assessed:
(1) An applicant may request a full or partial waiver of school impact
fees for those residential units that are lawfully restricted to
occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over in a development that
is also maintained in compliance with the provisions of RSA
354-A:15, Housing for Older Persons. The Planning Board may
waive school impact fee assessments on such age-restricted units
where it finds that the property will be bound by lawful deeded
restrictions on occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over for a
period of at least 20 years.
(2) A person may request a full or partial waiver of impact fees for
construction within a subdivision or site plan approved by the
Planning Board prior to the effective date of this section. Prior to
granting such a waiver, the Planning Board must find that the
proposed construction is entitled to the five-year exemption
provided by RSA 674:39, pursuant to that statute. This waiver shall
not be applicable to phases of a phased development project where
active and substantial development, building and construction has
not yet occurred in the phase in which construction is proposed.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(3) The Planning Board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee
assessment and accept in lieu of a cash payment a proposed
contribution of real property or facility improvements of equivalent
value and utility to the public. Prior to acting on a request for a
waiver of impact fees under this provision that would involve a
contribution of real property or the construction of capital
§ 275-27.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-27.3
1:531
§ 275-27.4. Lots split by municipal boundaries.
For lots split by municipal boundaries the provisions of RSA 674:53 shall
apply. In applying dimensional controls to that portion of the lot within
Rochester, the dimensions of the entire lot shall be considered without
reference to the City line.
§ 275-27.5. Rivers and shoreland protection.
(Note that listed rivers are subject to change.)
§ 275-27.6. Lots split by zoning district boundaries.
Where the boundary line of a zoning district divides a lot in single or joint
ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance establishing the boundary
line, the following provisions shall apply:
facilities, the Planning Board shall submit a copy of the waiver
request to the City Council for its review and consent prior to
its acceptance of the proposed contribution. The value of
contributions or improvements shall be credited only toward
facilities of like kind and may not be credited to other categories of
impact fee assessment. The applicant shall pay all costs incurred by
the City for the review of such proposal, including consultant and
counsel fees.
(4) The Planning Board is responsible, when there is a change in use,
for determining the net increase on public capital facilities and may
agree to waive the entire fee if it determines that its collection and
administration will exceed its value to the City.
A. Shoreland protection. Provisions of the New Hampshire
Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, RSA 483-B, apply to bodies of
water included under that Act.
B. Rivers management. The Isinglass River and the Cocheco River are
protected under the New Hampshire Rivers Management and
Protection Program, RSA 483.
A. The uses and other standards for either district may, at the option of the
owner, extend beyond the zoning boundary line up to a maximum
distance of 100 feet from that zoning boundary line. For any area in
which this allowance is used, for any period of time in which this
allowance is used, that area shall be treated as if its zoning designation
were the zone that is being extended.
B. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to a lot
divided by the Recycling Industrial Zoning District boundary line. In the
case of a lot divided by the Recycling Industrial Zoning District
boundary line, the uses and regulations permitted and/or applicable to
the Recycling Industrial Zoning District shall not be extended into the
adjoining zoning district.
§ 275-27.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-27.6
1:532
§ 275-27.7. Temporary noncompliance.
The Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services is authorized
to approve a temporary permit/approval for a noncomplying structure or
a noncomplying use incidental to a development where it is reasonably
required for that development on a temporary basis. The permit/approval
may be issued where the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services reasonably determines that:
§ 275-27.8. Planned unit developments.
Four planned unit developments (PUDs) were approved by the City of
Rochester under a City ordinance which is no longer in effect, Section
42.32, Planned Unit Developments, adopted December 5, 2001, and
amended December 7, 2004. The creation of new planned unit
developments is not permitted under this chapter. The four approved PUDs,
including Secretariat Estates, Highfield Commons, the Homemakers, and
the Villages at Clark Brook (the original names), may be built in accordance
with the provisions of Section 42.32 of the former Zoning Ordinance and the
approved master plans for each of those PUDs.
C. Overlay districts. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
overlay districts.
A. The temporary structure or use will not be counter to the public
interest.
B. The temporary structure or use will not harm any abutter.
C. The temporary structure or use will not be counter to the spirit of this
chapter.
D. Proper safeguards are taken.
E. A reasonable time frame has been established.
F. No reasonable alternative is available.
G. Appropriate surety has been provided to ensure compliance with the
conditions above.
§ 275-27.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-27.8
1:533

ARTICLE 28
Performance Standards
§ 275-28.1. Purpose.
The purpose of these performance standards (or "impact mitigation
standards") is to protect the community from hazards and nuisances, to
set measurable standards and thresholds where practical, to recognize that
certain valuable and responsible entities will inevitably produce certain
impacts, and to provide accommodations for those operations subject to
reasonable limitations.
§ 275-28.2. General provisions.
§ 275-28.3. Noise.
A. Applicability. The performance standards contained herein shall apply
to all property in the City of Rochester, whether developed or not, and
whether subject to site plan or subdivision review or not.
B. Mitigation. All uses, activities, and development in the City of Rochester
shall be conducted in a manner that will most effectively prevent,
eliminate, minimize, and/or mitigate the creation of any dangerous,
noxious, injurious, or otherwise objectionable impacts from noise,
glare, light, heat, dust, smoke, vibration, water pollution, air pollution,
use of flammable materials, radiation, radioactivity, electrical
disturbance, waste generation, sewage generation, vermin, or invasive
or destructive plant species, as reasonably determined by the Director
of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services.
C. Confinement to property. Property owners, residents, tenants,
businesses, and developers shall take measures to confine such impacts
within buildings or, at a minimum, to prevent their being perceptible or
extending beyond lot lines.
D. Nuisance or hazard. Any use, activity, or development which regularly,
persistently, or significantly violates these provisions by creating a
nuisance or hazard beyond the lot lines shall be prohibited.
E. Safety data sheets. Any applicant, business, or property owner shall
provide to the Fire Department, Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services, Planning Board, Planning and Development
Department, or other local authorities copies of Safety Data Sheets
(MSDS) for all pertinent materials and processes upon request.
F. Applicable law. All uses, activities, and development shall be carried on
in conformance with all applicable local, state, and federal law.
A. General terms.
(1) No persistently loud or disruptive noise shall be permitted.
§ 275-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28.3
1:535
(2) All noise that could be objectionable due to intermittence, beat
frequency, or shrillness shall be appropriately muffled, mitigated,
or terminated.
(3) No external loudspeakers shall be permitted except for special
events for which approval is granted by the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services or the Police Department, as
appropriate.
B. Maximum decibels. The following standards apply to any steady noise,
measured at the lot line:
Maximum Permitted Decibels*
Zoning District Day Night
Residential 60 50
Commercial 65 55
Industrial 70 60
*Notes to table:
A. The Commercial District includes the Hospital Special District.
The Industrial District includes the Airport Special District.
B. Day includes the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Saturday and
Sunday.
C. Night includes the remaining hours.
C. Measurement. The preferred method for measuring noise is with a
sound-level meter meeting the standards of the American National
Standards Institute [ANSI S1.4-1983 (R 2006)], American National
Standard Specification for Sound-Level Meters, or as amended. The
instrument should be set to the A-weighted response scale and the
meter to the slow response. Measurements should be conducted in
accordance with current ANSI guidelines for the measurements of
sound.
D. Reference information. The following table is provided for reference
only.
Sample Sound Levels in Decibels
Decibels Activity
30 Whisper
40 Quiet room
50 Rain
60 Conversation, dishwasher
70 Busy traffic, vacuum
§ 275-28.3 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-28.3
1:536
§ 275-28.4. Other specific standards.
Sample Sound Levels in Decibels
Decibels Activity
80 Alarm clock
90 Lawn mower
100 Snowmobile, chain saw
Source: New Hampshire Sunday News, July 7, 1996, from the
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
E. Exemptions; special exceptions. The following uses and activities shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section:
(1) Safety signals, warning devices, emergency relief valves,
emergency generators, and other equipment when in operation due
to an emergency, or testing or other planned operation.
(2) Unamplified human voices and crowd noises generated at
gatherings open to the public.
(3) Power tools, including lawn mowers, snowblowers and chain saws,
when used for the construction or maintenance of property (subject
to any specific restrictions under this chapter or other applicable
law or regulation).
(4) Music and entertainment uses for which the ZBA has granted a
special exception to exceed the limits herein subject to appropriate
conditions.
A. Glare or light.
(1) All exterior lights shall be designed, located, installed, and directed
in such a manner so as to prevent glare and objectionable light
trespass onto neighborhood properties or roads.
(2) Any new light installations shall be in compliance with the lighting
requirements under the Site Plan Regulations, whether site plan
review is required or not.
(3) Lights pointed in the direction toward any adjoining property or
any road shall not be used. Floodlights may only be used in
accordance with the lighting requirements under the Site Plan
Regulations.
B. Heat. There shall be no emission or transmission of heat so as to be
discernible at the lot line.
C. Odors. No use or operation shall create objectionable odors detectable
beyond the lot line except agricultural uses within the Agricultural
Zone. Objectionable odors are those that are offensive, foul, unpleasant,
§ 275-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28.4
1:537
or repulsive and, due to their nature, concentration and duration,
preclude abutting or neighboring property owners the reasonable
enjoyment of their property.
D. Dust or smoke. No observable dust or smoke from any commercial or
industrial operation shall be exhausted into the air except as may be
specifically approved by NHDES Division of Air Resources.
E. Vibration.
(1) No vibration which is transmitted through the ground shall be
discernible without the aid of instruments at any point beyond the
lot line.
(2) No vibration which is transmitted through the ground shall exceed
a maximum displacement of "G peak" measured at any point
beyond the property line using either seismic or electronic
vibration measuring equipment (subject to appropriate
instrumentation being available to the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services).
F. Water pollution. No hazardous or toxic material may be discharged into
any stream, river, pond, or private septic system or into the ground such
that any deterioration in the quality of the groundwater or surface
water could result.
G. Air pollution. Any emissions of fumes or gases into the atmosphere shall
be in compliance with the standards set by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, Division of Air Resources.
H. Regulated hazardous materials. All use or storage of regulated
hazardous materials shall be carried out with adequate safety, fire
suppression, and firefighting devices. All reasonable measures shall be
taken to reduce any potential fire hazards.
I. Radiation/radioactivity.
(1) Any emission of radioactivity shall be in compliance with the
standards of the Atomic Energy Commission.
(2) Any emission of radiation shall be in compliance with the standards
of the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
J. Electrical disturbance. No electrical disturbance adversely affecting
the operation of any equipment located beyond the boundaries of the
operation shall be permitted.
K. Waste disposal.
(1) No waste material shall be placed upon or left to remain upon any
open area outside of any building except in appropriate waste
§ 275-28.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-28.4
1:538
containers. This provision shall not apply to properly licensed
junkyards.
(2) Dumpsters. All dumpsters associated with new applications,
including changes in use, shall be fully screened so they are not
visible from a public way (road, sidewalk, footpath, trail, park, or
navigable waterway owned by the City of Rochester or another
governmental agency and intended to be accessible to the public).
(3) The treatment and disposal of any waste materials, liquid and solid,
including hazardous materials, shall be in compliance with all
standards of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services, Divisions of Waste Management and Water, and of the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
(4) Those generating, transporting, or receiving regulated waste must
meet the licensing and registration requirements of state and
federal law.
L. Sewage disposal. All sewage disposal shall be in compliance with the
standards of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
M. Vermin. No use or activity shall cause, or result in a condition conducive
to, the propagation of rodents, insects, or other vermin.
N. Plant species. No person shall install any plants clearly determined to
be invasive or destructive. Refer to the New Hampshire Department of
Agriculture, Markets, and Food prohibited invasive species list.
O. Site restoration.
(1) No site which has been abandoned; on which construction or
development had been occurring but which has been indefinitely
suspended; or on which any building or structure has been
destroyed, demolished, burned, or abandoned shall be left to
remain in a disorderly, unsightly, or hazardous state or in a
condition that causes undue erosion, sedimentation, environmental
degradation, or impairment of neighboring properties. Some
reasonable allowance may be made for such sites for a temporary
period not to exceed 90 days upon notification from the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services to allow property owners
to restore or stabilize the sites.
(2) The property owner, business owner, and contractor shall take all
reasonable measures to clean, clear, restore, stabilize, regrade,
and plant the site as appropriate in order to remove, correct, or
mitigate any disorderly, unsightly, or hazardous conditions. The
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services may take any
§ 275-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-28.4
1:539
§ 275-28.5. Administration.
appropriate measures to effect compliance with this provision,
including correcting conditions and then placing a lien on the
property for which the owner would be responsible for financial
restitution to the City. Any aggrieved party may request a hearing
before the Building Code Board of Appeals for actions taken by the
City under this provision.
A. At the request of the Planning Board or Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services, an applicant shall submit appropriate
information and materials to demonstrate that the performance
standards herein will not be violated when the proposed use is put into
operation.
B. In implementing these standards, the Planning Board (in the case of site
plan review) or the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services
may call upon specified standards, technical specifications, and the
technical expertise of appropriate local, state, and federal agencies.
C. Where there is an alleged violation, if determinations can reasonably be
made by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services using
equipment and personnel normally available to the City, such
determinations shall be made before notice of violation is issued.
D. Where technical complexity or expense make it unreasonable for the
City to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for making
difficult or unusual determinations, the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services may take any action to secure appropriate
equipment, obtain support from other agencies, or otherwise
investigate the violation as permitted by the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated.
E. Where it is determined that there is a violation of the performance
standards, the costs of special investigations or use of special
equipment may be imposed upon the entity responsible for the
violation, as reasonably determined by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services.
§ 275-28.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-28.5
1:540
ARTICLE 29
Signage
[Amended 6-16-2015]
§ 275-29.1. Applicable regulations.
All signs shall comply with the regulations for the erection and construction
of signs contained in the Building Code of the City of Rochester and other
applicable City regulations, except as shall be under the jurisdiction of RSA
236:69 to 236:89. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following
regulations.
§ 275-29.2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to create a legal framework to regulate the
type, number, location, size, and illumination of signs on private property
in order to maintain and enhance the character of the City's commercial
district and residential neighborhood and to protect the public from
hazardous and distracting displays.
§ 275-29.3. Nonconforming signs. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
A sign which was lawfully established prior to the adoption or amendment
of this article but which does not meet the requirements of this article is
considered a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs and sign structures
may remain or must be removed as follows:
A. Applicable provisions of Article 30, Nonconforming Property, of this
chapter shall apply unless superseded herein.
B. No changes in the sign or sign structure are permitted except for basic
maintenance and repairs necessary to keep the sign in good working
order or other changes which bring the sign into compliance. No
nonconforming sign shall be reconstructed, modified, or relocated
except for changes to the sign face itself within the same size and shape
to accommodate a change of copy. A nonconforming sign which is
damaged beyond repair due to a cause beyond the control of the owner
may be replaced within one year of when damage occurs.
C. Nonconforming signs may not be altered in any way.
D. Existing temporary signs which are not in compliance with this article
are not considered to be "grandfathered" under this article. If any
notification of noncompliance is given from the Director of Building,
Zoning, and Licensing Services or his/her designee, these signs or
conditions must be brought into compliance within 60 days from that
notification.
§ 275-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.4
1:541
§ 275-29.4. Permit required. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
All signs, regardless of size, shall require the issuance of a sign permit
before public display unless otherwise specifically exempt by this article.
§ 275-29.5. Application process.
Application for a sign permit shall be to the Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services Department.
§ 275-29.6. Construction documents. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign structure
requiring such permit, construction documents shall be filed with the
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services Department showing the
dimensions, materials and required details of construction, including loads,
stresses, anchorage and any other pertinent data. The permit application
shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or lessee of
the premises upon which the sign is to be erected and by engineering
calculations signed and sealed by a registered design professional where
required by the International Building Code.
§ 275-29.7. Changes to signs.
No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged or relocated, except in
conformity with the provisions herein, until a proper permit, if required,
has been secured. The changing or maintenance of movable parts or
components of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or
the changing of copy, business names, lettering, sign faces, colors, display
and/or graphic matter, or the content of any sign, shall not be deemed a
structural alteration.
§ 275-29.8. Permit fees.
Permit fees to erect, alter or relocate a sign shall be in accordance with the
fee schedule adopted within this jurisdiction.
A. The application should contain the following:
(1) Name, signature, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Owner's authorization for the application if not the applicant.
(3) Location of the building, structure or lot on which the sign will be
located.
(4) The district where the sign will be located.
B. Historic District. Signs in the Historic District, except for portable
easel, placard, and sandwich board signs, are subject to review by the
Historic District Commission (see Article 14, Historic Overlay District).
§ 275-29.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.9
1:542
§ 275-29.9. Prohibited signs.
The following devices and locations shall be specifically prohibited:
§ 275-29.10. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere
with an official traffic sign, signal or device, or obstruct or interfere
with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
B. Except as provided for elsewhere in this article, signs encroaching upon
or overhanging public rights-of-way. No sign shall be attached to any
utility pole, light standard, street tree or any other public facility
located within the public right-of-way.
C. Signs which blink, flash or are animated by lighting in any fashion that
would cause such signs to have the appearance of traffic safety signs
and lights, or to have the appearance of municipal vehicle warnings
from a distance.
D. Any sign attached to, or placed on, a vehicle or trailer parked on public
or private property, except for signs meeting the following conditions:
(1) The primary purpose of such a vehicle or trailer is not the display of
signs.
(2) The signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an integral part of
the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the
manufacturer, and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle.
(3) The vehicle or trailer is in operating condition, currently registered
and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and
actively used or available for use in the daily function of the
business to which such signs relate.
E. Vehicles and trailers used primarily as static displays, advertising a
product or service, or utilized as storage, shelter or distribution points
for commercial products or services for the general public. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
F. Snipe signs.
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety
official.
B. Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal, state,
or municipal governments.
C. Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made
§ 275-29.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.10
1:543
§ 275-29.11. Definitions.
For the purpose set forth in this article the following definitions apply:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign structure that has ceased to be used and the
owner intends no longer to have used.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as
defined and regulated by this article, include the following types:
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building, but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also
"awning," "backlit awning" and "canopy, attached and freestanding."
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building
or structure.
D. The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, such as a
school.
E. Works of fine art displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise
where the enterprise does not receive direct commercial gain.
F. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address
signs that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed six
square feet (0.56m2) in area.
G. Signs required, or deemed necessary for the public welfare and safety,
by a municipal, state, or federal agency such as traffic control and
directional signs.
H. Interior signs.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs producing the illusion
of movement by means of electronic, electrical or electromechanical
input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through
employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below.
A.
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period
of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of
nonillumination. For the purposes of this article, "flashing" will not be
defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of
illumination exceeds eight seconds.
B.
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system
powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
C.
§ 275-29.10 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.11
1:544
of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that
may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures that are
internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also "wall or fascia sign."
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning with a translucent covering material and a
source of illumination contained within its framework.
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign" and "outdoor advertising sign."
BUILDING — A structure which has a roof supported by walls for shelter,
support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides
and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns
at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may
be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See also
"marquee."[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A multisided overhead structure supported
by columns but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external
sources of light.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input, including signs which are:
COMBINATION SIGN — A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly
by a building structure.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized
on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic
components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral
to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other lightemitting
devices, or it may be from an external light source designed
to reflect off the changeable component display. See also "electronic
message sign or center."
A.
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed manually.
B.
§ 275-29.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.11
1:545
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address only.
DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN — A freestanding sign identifying a
multiple-occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned
industrial park, which is controlled by a single owner or landlord, approved
in accordance with § 275-29.12G.[Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER — An electrically activated
changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically
programmed.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FLAG — A sign constructed of cloth and attached to a staff or pole.
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign, electrically activated."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed
to the ground and not supported by a building, including signs supported by
one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
FRONTAGE (BUILDING) — The length of an exterior building wall or
structure of a single premises orientated to the public way or other
properties that it faces.
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY) — The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated) or reflecting
off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
window signs as defined by this article. Interior signs, with the exception of
window signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like structure, including the structural
support system, projecting beyond a building wall at the entrance to a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the building
wall.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
MENU BOARD — A freestanding sign orientated to the drive-through lane
for a restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drive-
§ 275-29.11 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.11
1:546
through window, and which has no more than 20% of the total area of such
a sign utilized for business identification.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that existed lawfully prior to the
adoption or amendment of this article which now does not conform to the
provisions of this article.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which pertains to a business, industry, or
other activity which is not located on the premises upon which the sign is
located.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign on private property whose
only purpose is to direct vehicular traffic for delivers and visitation and is
not intended to be used as a form of advertisement.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the
use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent sign erected, maintained
or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of
commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign that is displayed for more than a total of 90
days in any one year.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political
statement, cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor
advertising sign shall not be considered to be a political sign.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to
a building or building surface.45
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to
or projects more than 18 inches (457 millimeters) from a building face or
wall or from a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support
of a sign.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental
of the property or premises upon which it is located.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A portable sign shaped like an A-frame with a
sign pane on one or both sides.
45.Editor's Note: The definition of "premises sign" which immediately followed this definition
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 275-29.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.11
1:547
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place that displays either
commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation
of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags
or any flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be
signs.
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest geometric figure or the sum of the
combination of regular geometric figures which comprise the sign face. The
area of any double- sided or V-shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a
circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50%
of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
SIGN FACE — The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy
is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the
sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure supporting a sign.
SNIPE SIGN — Any sign of any size, made of any material, including
paper, cardboard, wood and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted,
pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences or other objects,
and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the
premises upon which said sign is located.
SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary sign that is either on site or off site
that provides identification or information pertaining to a special event or
occurrence sponsored by a nonprofit or civic organization.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not constructed for or intended for permanent
use. Temporary signs may not be displayed for more than a total of 30 days
in any one year.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is attached to a vertical wall of
a building that projects not more than 18 inches from the building or
structure wall.[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
WINDOW SIGN — A sign within one foot of a window intended to be visible
to and readable from the public way or from adjacent property.[Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 275-29.12. General provisions.
A. Conformance to codes. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the
provisions of this article or regulation within this jurisdiction.
B. Signs in rights-of-way. No sign other than an official traffic sign or
similar sign shall be erected within two feet of the lines of any street, or
within any public way, unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances or regulations of this jurisdiction or by specific
§ 275-29.11 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.12
1:548
authorization of the City Council after a recommendation is made by
the Licensing Board.
C. Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public walkways
shall be permitted to do so only subject to the projection and clearance
limits either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a minimum height of
eight feet from grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs,
architectural projections or sign structures projecting over vehicular
access areas must conform to the minimum height clearance limitations
imposed by the jurisdiction for such structures.
D. Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape or color it may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
E. Computation of frontage. If a premises contains walls facing more than
one property line or encompasses property frontage bounded by more
than one street or other property usages, the sign area(s) for each
building wall or property frontage will be computed separately for each
building wall or property line facing a different frontage. The sign
area(s) thus calculated shall be permitted to then be applied to
permitted signs placed on each separate wall or property line frontage.
F. Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this article
shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes
insecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the
Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services, or if any sign shall
be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, the owner thereof or the person or firm using
the same shall, upon written notice by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services, forthwith in the case of immediate danger, and
in any case within not more than 10 days, make such sign conform to
the provisions of this article, or shall remove it. If within 10 days the
order is not complied with, the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services shall be permitted to remove or cause such sign to
be removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
G. Master sign plan required. All landlord or single-owner controlled
multiple-occupancy development complexes, such as shopping centers
or planned industrial parks, shall submit to the Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services Department a master sign plan prior to issuance of
new sign permits. The master sign plan shall establish standards and
criteria for all signs in the complex that require permits and shall
address, at a minimum, the following: [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Proposed sign locations.
§ 275-29.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.12
1:549
(2) Materials.
(3) Type of illumination.
(4) Design of freestanding sign structures.
(5) Size.
(6) Quantity.
(7) Uniform standards for non-business signage, including directional
and informational signs.
H. Illumination.
(1) No internally illuminated sign shall be used within 100 feet of any
residential zone.
(2) On externally illuminated signs, the light source shall be steady,
stationary, shielded, downcast, and directed solely at the sign. The
sign surface shall be nonreflective.
(3) Illuminated signs shall send no glare onto the road or onto any
neighboring residential properties.
I. Removal of portable and other movable and temporary signs.
(1) The Zoning Administrator, or other City personnel designated by
the City Manager, shall cause to be removed any sign placed on or
over any public right-of-way or public property that is without a
valid permit or is not in compliance with the terms of a valid permit,
or where such a sign is exempt from permit requirements, the sign
is not in compliance with the standards and provisions of this
article.
(2) Signs related to an adjacent principal use. Where a sign that is
placed on or over any public right-of-way or public property in
violation of this article is related to a principal use of adjacent
private property, the Zoning Administrator, or other City personnel
designated by the City Manager, shall notify the owner of the
principal use or the property that a violation exists and shall specify
a time limit for removal of the sign. If the owner fails to comply with
the order for removal, the Zoning Administrator, or other City
personnel designated by the City Manager, shall remove the sign
and the owner shall be liable for the cost of said removal and
subsequent storage. If the owner does not redeem the sign within
30 calendar days from the date that the sign is removed, the sign
shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of by the
City as abandoned property.
(3) Other signs. Where a sign that is placed on or over any public rightof-
way or public property in violation of this article is not erected in
connection with elections or political campaigns, and is unrelated
§ 275-29.12 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.12
1:550
§ 275-29.13. Specific sign requirements.
to a principal use of adjacent private property, the Zoning
Administrator, or other City personnel designated by the City
Manager, shall remove the sign and it shall be deemed to be
abandoned and may be disposed of by the City as abandoned
property.
A. Animated signs. Animated signs, except as prohibited in § 275-29.9C,
are permitted in Granite Ridge Development, commercial and industrial
zones only. Changeable signs, manually activated, are permitted for
nonresidential uses in all zones. Changeable signs, electrically
activated, are permitted in all nonresidential zones.
B. Awning signs.
(1) The copy area of awning signs shall not exceed an area equal to
25% of the background area of the awning or awning surface to
which such a sign is affixed or applied, or the permitted area for
wall or fascia signs, whichever is less.
(2) Neither the background color of an awning nor any graphic
treatment or embellishment thereto, such as striping, patterns or
valances, shall be included in the computation of sign copy area.
C. Canopy signs.
(1) The permanently affixed copy area of canopy or marquee signs
shall not exceed an area equal to 25% of the face area of the
canopy, marquee or architectural projection upon which such sign
is affixed or applied.
(2) Graphic striping, patterns or color bands on the face of a building,
canopy, marquee or architectural projection shall not be included in
the computation of sign copy area.
D. Directory signs. For businesses located on secondary streets within the
Downtown Commercial District. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(1) Not to exceed four square feet in area.
(2) Permission must be obtained in writing from the property owner on
whose premises the sign is to be placed.
(3) These signs shall not obscure any portion of road, intersection, or
sidewalk.
E. Directional signs. No more than two directional signs shall be permitted
per street entrance to any lot. There shall be none in residential zones.
For all other zones, the maximum area for any directional sign visible
from adjacent property or rights-of-way shall be 10 square feet. Not
more than 25% of the area of any directional sign shall be permitted to
§ 275-29.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.13
1:551
be devoted to business identification or logo, which area shall not be
assessed as identification sign area.
F. Development and construction signs; planned unit development signs.
[Amended 9-4-2018]
(1) Development and construction signs. Signs temporarily erected
during construction to inform the public of the developer,
contractors, architects, engineers, the nature of the project or
anticipated completion dates shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
(a) Such signs on a single residential lot, residential subdivision or
multiple residential lots, and nonresidential uses shall be
limited to one sign, not greater than 10 feet in height and 32
square feet in area.
(b) Such signs for commercial or industrial projects shall be
limited to one sign per street front.
(c) Development and construction signs may not be displayed until
after the issuance of building permits by the Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services Department and must be removed not
later than 24 hours following issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any or all portions of the project. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(2) Planned unit development signs. These signs shall be used to
identify a project and/or inform the public of the name of a
development.
(a) Such signs shall only be used for planned unit developments.
(b) Such signs shall be no greater than 16 square feet.
(c) Such signs may not be lit.
(d) Such signs are allowed in open space.
(e) Such signs shall require approval from the Planning Board.
The Board may require specific materials, landscaping, or
other features.
(f) This subsection shall also apply to previously approved
planned unit developments.
G. Electronic message centers. All permitted electronic message centers
(EMCs) shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that
automatically determines the ambient illumination and be programmed
to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions at all times
of the day or night. Electronic changing signs may be freestanding or
building mounted, one- or two-sided, may be a component of a larger
§ 275-29.13 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.13
1:552
sign or billboard, and shall conform to the following minimum
requirements along with all other requirements for signage within this
article:
(1) Electronic message center portion of the sign shall not make up
more than 75% of the actual sign surface. In no case shall an
electronic message center exceed 32 square feet.
(2) Animation on static EMCs shall be limited to the actual changing of
the message. No flashing, blinking, or pulsating of lights shall be
allowed. Electronic message centers must be equipped to freeze in
one position or discontinue the display in the event that a
malfunction occurs.
(3) Minimum display time. All illumination elements on the face of
static electronic changing signs shall remain at a fixed level of
illumination for a period of not less than eight seconds.
(4) Software for operating the EMC must be able to show current and
factory brightness levels upon request. The owner/installer of
electronic message displays shall certify as part of the application
that signs will not exceed the brightness levels specified in this
subsection.
(5) The brightness shall not exceed 0.3 footcandle at night.
(6) Flashing or animated signs (including temporary interior window
displays or banners) of red, amber, or green colored lights shall not
be permitted.
H. Flags. Each store front may be allowed one "open" or "welcome" flag
that is positioned at a height so as not to impede the flow of
pedestrians.
I. Home occupation signs. See Article 24, Home Occupations. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
J. Marquee. No marquee shall be erected unless designed by a registered
structural engineer and approved by the Director of Building, Zoning,
and Licensing Services. It may extend over the sidewalk across the
right-of-way to the curbline provided it has a minimum height above the
sidewalk of 10 feet above the curb level and does not exceed five feet in
height.
K. Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited except for the
following signs if permission is granted from the owner of the offpremises
location. A setback of at least five feet is required for these
signs and they shall not be placed in the road right-of-way (i.e., they
must be placed on private property).
(1) One freestanding sign per business directing people to the site. The
sign may not exceed two square feet per side or four feet in height.
§ 275-29.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.13
1:553
No illumination is allowed. It may include only the name and/
or logo, with simple directions. The sign must be durable and
constructed of solid, finished materials.
(2) A real estate sign, one per premises, shall not exceed six square
feet per side.
(3) Yard sale signs (see Subsection V).
(4) A sign for an office park or industrial park may be erected at the
entrance to the park on an out parcel or within the road right-ofway,
with the approval of the City Manager.
(5) A promotional banner for a special event may be placed anywhere
in the City, including across a public road, if approved by the City
Manager.
(6) Two seasonal agricultural directional signs not to exceed four
square feet each are permitted when intended to direct patrons to a
farm for the purpose of purchasing or picking seasonal agricultural
produce or products during the season within which the produce is
available for sale or harvest.
(7) One portable sign on the sidewalk in front of businesses in the
Downtown Commercial District, Special Downtown Overlay
District, and Neighborhood Mixed-Use District lying in density
rings.
(8) Road signs.
L. Political signs; political advertising. The following provisions are in
addition to the political advertising controls established under RSA
664:14, 664:17, and 664:2, as amended:
(1) Political advertising shall be defined in RSA 664:2, as amended. No
political advertising shall be placed or affixed upon any public
property, including City rights-of-way. No political advertising shall
be placed or affixed upon private property without the owner's
consent.
(2) Signature, identification, and lack of authorization shall be in
accordance with RSA 664:14, as amended.
(3) Political signs shall not be erected in the City Adopt-A-Spots or the
Rochester Common.
(4) Removal of signs shall be in accordance with RSA 664:17, as
amended.
(5) The area and location of signs used in conjunction with uses
allowed by the Board of Adjustment as special exceptions shall also
be approved by the Planning Board and shall conform to the sign
regulations for the district in which they are located. The area and
§ 275-29.13 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.13
1:554
location of such signs shall be in harmony with the character of the
neighborhood in which they are located.
(6) Political signs shall not require a sign permit. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
M. Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted only in the Downtown
Commercial District, Special Downtown Overlay District, and
Neighborhood Mixed-Use District lying in density rings, subject to the
following limitations:
(1) No more than one such sign may be displayed on any property, and
the sign shall not exceed a height of four feet or an area of eight
square feet per side.
(2) Any portable sign that is placed on a sidewalk:
(a) Shall be situated directly in front of the business(es) which is
being advertised.
(b) Shall not block passage along the sidewalk, including passage
for handicapped persons, and shall not present a safety hazard.
(3) May be displayed during business hours only.
(4) Appropriately placed to minimize appearance of clutter as
determined by the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services.
(5) Only one sign per individual business.
N. Projecting signs. Signs are permitted in the following zones:
(1) Multiple projecting signs shall be permitted on buildings having
multiple occupants provided only that one projecting sign per
occupant will be permitted.
(2) Projecting signs shall:
(a) Not overhang any public property or public right-of-way.
(b) Be attached to the side of a building with a decorative support
bracket engineered to and designed to withstand wind loads.
(c) Extend from the side of the building no more than 11 feet.
(d) Be part of the wall sign calculations, which cumulative total,
including both projecting and wall signs, shall not exceed 20%
of the wall area to which the sign is attached.
(e) Maintain a clear vertical distance above any public sidewalk a
minimum of 10 feet.
O. Roadside farm stand signs. No more than two signs with a maximum
combined total of 20 square feet are permitted.
§ 275-29.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.13
1:555
P. Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Real estate signs located on a single residential lot shall be limited
to one sign, not greater than eight square feet in area and six feet
in height.
(2) Real estate signs may not be illuminated in residential districts.
(3) There may be no more than one sign per street frontage, except
that on lots with more than 500 feet of street frontage a second
sign may be placed.
(4) Real estate signs shall be removed not later than 10 days after
execution of a lease agreement in the event of a lease, or the
closing of the sale in the event of a purchase.
Q. Sandwich board signs. See Subsection M, Portable signs.
R. Street banners. Temporary street banners used to inform the public
about community events and activities may be placed within or above
the road right-of-way or in other public locations if approved by the City
Manager and signed off from all departments.
S. Special promotion, event and grand opening signs. Signs temporarily
displayed to advertise special promotions, events and grand openings
shall be permitted for nonresidential uses and for all commercial and
industrial districts subject to the following limitations:
(1) Such signs shall be limited to one sign per street front.
(2) Such signs may be displayed for not more than 30 consecutive days
in any twelve-month period, and not more than 30 days in any
calendar year. The signs shall be erected no more than five days
prior to the event or grand opening and shall be removed not more
than one day after the event or grand opening.
(3) The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet.
T. Special event signs in public ways. Signs advertising a special
community event shall be allowed in or over public rights-of-way,
subject to approval by the City Manager as to the size, location and
method of erection. The City Manager may not approve any special
event signage that would impair the safety and convenience of use of
public rights-of-way or obstruct traffic visibility.
U. Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted for any nonresidential
use in all Downtown Commercial and Industrial Districts, subject to the
following limitations:
(1) The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 25% of the
window area on which such signs are displayed within the Historic
District.
§ 275-29.13 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.13
1:556
§ 275-29.14. Requirements by zoning district.46
The following special requirements shall apply in each respective zoning
district:
V. Yard sale signs.
(1) Yard sale signs may not be placed prior to three days before the
sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the sale. The date
and time of the yard sale must be on the sign.
(2) They may not exceed six square feet and may not be illuminated.
(3) The signs may be placed off premises for noncommercial sales
related to a single residential dwelling unit (or informal joint sales
among neighbors) provided they are not placed on utility poles, are
not a distraction to traffic, and comply with § 275-29.14,
Requirements by zoning district.
A. Residential zoning districts.
(1) For permitted nonresidential uses one freestanding sign with a
maximum area of six square feet per side plus one attached sign
not to exceed 12 square feet is permitted. Signs shall have a
maximum height of six feet.
(2) Internally illuminated signs (including neon signs and signage
placed in a window) are not permitted.
(3) No sign may be illuminated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. with the exception of signage:
(a) Showing property addresses;
(b) For residential communities; and
(c) For businesses and organizations during any specific hours in
that time period that the businesses are open.
B. Nonresidential zoning districts.
(1) Baseline. The following advertising signage is permitted for one
nonresidential use occupying a single building in commercial and
industrial zoning districts (except as otherwise indicated in this
article). Additional allowances beyond these limitations or other
restrictions for various situations are shown in the subsequent
subsections. Dimensional standards are as follows:
46.Editor's Note: See also Table 29-A, Signs, included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 275-29.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.14
1:557
Zoning District
Maximum Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Highway Commercial
General Industrial
Hospital
Granite Ridge
Development
75 30
Airport
Recycling Industrial
50 20
Downtown Commercial 25 15
Neighborhood Mixed-Use
Office Commercial
20 8
Note: All signs that are to be located in the Historic District
are also subject to the provisions of Article 14, Historic Overlay
District.
(2) Freestanding signs. Only one freestanding sign shall be permitted
on a lot even if there is more than one building or use on that lot.
No part of any freestanding sign shall be located within five feet of
any property line.
(3) Wall signs. No wall sign shall exceed 10% of the area of the building
frontage as measured by the width of the wall containing the main
public entrance by the height (measured from the floor level to the
top of the first floor cornice area, or to one foot below secondary
story window) of the building to which it is attached. For buildings
with multiple tenants having store fronts only, the facade rented by
the tenant shall be considered as wall area for a sign. [Amended
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
(a) A maximum of four signs. Buildings located in the Granite
Ridge Development District, between the service road and
Route 11, are allowed one additional wall-mounted sign per
tenant on the rear facade. The same size restrictions as applied
to the front facade shall determine the size of sign.
(4) Temporary signs. One temporary sign is allowed at any one time,
including portable and banner signs. For portable signs (where
they are permitted; see below) the maximum area is eight square
feet and the maximum height is four feet. Banner signs, not
exceeding 60 square feet, are permitted for grand openings of new
§ 275-29.14 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-29.14
1:558
business only, and may be displayed for a maximum of 30
consecutive days. Permits are required for these signs with a fee
set by the City Council. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(5) Directory signs. For each additional independent enterprise on a
site beyond one, an additional 10 square feet may be added to one
freestanding directory sign not to exceed 100 square feet. Property
owners of separate adjoining lots may also elect to have one joint
directory sign.
(6) Attached directory signs. One additional attached directory sign of
the principal uses within a multi-tenant building is permitted on the
exterior wall at each entrance to the building. It shall not exceed
three square feet plus one square foot for each independent
enterprise.
(7) Upper floor units. Each upper floor occupant may use one attached
sign placed at no higher than the second floor level, not to exceed
six square feet per side for each occupant plus window signs.
Window signage shall not exceed 25% of the total window area.
(8) Multiple occupant sites. On multiple occupant sites up to three
portable signs for independent enterprises may be placed at the
same time.
(9) Secondary entrance. By conditional use permit issued by the
Planning Board, any site with at least 300 feet of linear lot frontage
and with a second driveway entrance located at least 200 feet from
the primary entrance may have a second freestanding sign at the
second entrance not to exceed 16 square feet and eight feet in
height.
(10) Corner or multiple frontage lots. By conditional use permit issued
by the Planning Board, any corner lot or a rear frontage lot (or
double frontage) may have one additional freestanding sign with a
maximum area of 24 square feet on the second frontage provided
the property across the street on that second frontage is not zoned
residential.
(11) Specific zoning districts. Internally illuminated signs are permitted
only in the Highway Commercial, Downtown Commercial, Granite
Ridge Development, and Industrial Districts.
§ 275-29.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29.14
1:559

ARTICLE 30
Nonconforming Property
§ 275-30.1. Introduction.
§ 275-30.2. Vested nonconforming property.
A. Nonconforming property refers to a site with a condition which does not
conform to one or more requirements of this chapter, as amended, but
where the condition was lawfully established prior to the adoption of
the chapter provision(s) with which it does not comply.
B. There are four nonconforming conditions:
(1) Nonconforming uses;
(2) Nonconforming lots (such as those with less than required area or
frontage);
(3) Nonconforming structures (such as buildings that do not meet
setbacks, height limits, or size limits); and
(4) Other nonconforming site conditions.
A. Continuation. A nonconforming property/condition may be continued as
it existed at the time of passage of this chapter or as it existed at the
time it was made nonconforming by passage of any amendment to this
chapter, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Permit issued. In any case where a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of any amendment to this chapter, for a
structure or use which would not be permitted under that amendment,
the structure may be built or altered or the use established as a
nonconforming structure or use as permitted under the building permit,
provided that construction or alteration is commenced within six
months after issuance of the permit and is diligently prosecuted to
completion.
C. Vested application. Pursuant to RSA 676:12, VI, proposed changes in
these ordinances or other land use regulations shall not apply to any
plat or application which has been the subject of notice by the Planning
Board pursuant to RSA 676:4, I(d), prior to the first legal notice of a
proposed change in a building code or zoning ordinance or any
amendment thereto. No proposed subdivision or site plan review or
zoning ordinance or amendment thereto shall affect a plat or
application which has been the subject of notice by the Planning Board
pursuant to RSA 676:4, I(d), so long as said plat or application was the
subject of notice prior to the first legal notice of said change or
amendment. The provisions of this subsection shall also apply to
proposals submitted to Planning Board for design review pursuant to
RSA 676:4, II(b), provided that a formal application is filed with the
§ 275-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30.2
1:561
§ 275-30.3. Changes to nonconforming property.
§ 275-30.4. Nonconforming uses.
§ 275-30.5. Nonconforming lots.
Planning Board within 12 months of the end of the design review
process.
A. Nonconforming property or a nonconforming condition may not be
expanded, enlarged, extended, or intensified except as specifically
provided for in this article and not without appropriate approvals from
the Historic District Commission, Conservation Commission, ZBA and
Planning Board.
B. A reduction in the nonconformity of a nonconforming use, structure or
condition must be approved by the Planning and Development
Department and the Director of Building, Zoning, and Licensing
Services and may also be required to obtain Historic District
Commission, ZBA and Planning Board approvals if the Director of
Building, Zoning, and Licensing Services determines that issues
associated with the changes are problematic and fall within the
jurisdiction of these boards or commission.
A. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a
period of at least one year it shall be considered abandoned by the
owner and may not be resumed nor shall any other nonconforming use
be established. Abandonment shall be construed as cessation of
operations during that year where the circumstances around the
cessation of operations are reasonably indicative of:
(1) An intention to cease or relinquish the use; or
(2) An overt act or failure to act which carries the implication that the
owner neither claims nor retains any interest in the use.
B. Conversion to conforming use. If a nonconforming use is converted to a
conforming use, the nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned
and may not be converted back again into a nonconforming use.
C. Special exception/conditional use. Any existing use which is not a
permitted use but which was allowed as a special exception or a
conditional use in a district shall continue to be allowed as long as it
shall comply with all of its original requirements of approval.
D. Single-family homes. Existing single-family homes located in a zoning
district which does not permit single-family use may be expanded or
enlarged without limitation, by right, subject only to the setbacks,
height, and maximum lot coverage within that district and other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 275-30.2 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-30.5
1:562
§ 275-30.6. Nonconforming structures.
§ 275-30.7. Other nonconforming site conditions.
Where there are other nonconforming conditions on a property under this
chapter, those conditions shall be eliminated, reduced, or mitigated at such
time that the owner of the property proposes any further development
or redevelopment of that property. In the course of reviewing a new
application, the Planning Board shall determine what degree or type of
mitigation is appropriate with reasonable consideration given to the extent
of the nonconformity, the scale of the proposed new development, the
impact of the nonconformity, and other appropriate factors.
A. Allowance to use. A nonconforming lot in separate ownership may, by
right, be used in any manner allowed in that zoning district provided
that:
(1) The lot is a legal lot of record and is duly recorded at the Strafford
County Registry of Deeds as such;
(2) All setback requirements are met;
(3) Legitimate access can be provided to the lot;
(4) The lot can accommodate water, sewer, and drainage facilities as
needed; and
(5) The lot meets minimum lot and/or coverage requirements as
provided for in Article 19, Dimensional Regulations.
B. Special exception. A nonconforming lot which does not meet all of the
criteria listed above may be used for a proposed allowed use only by
special exception based upon the standard criteria for special
exceptions and a finding by the ZBA that the proposed use of the
nonconforming lot is reasonable.
C. Existing buildings. An existing building situated on a nonconforming lot
may be expanded by right, subject to other provisions of this chapter
and compliance with setbacks, coverage, etc., since the nonconforming
nature of the undersized lot is not affected by the expansion.
A. Expansion. In accordance with § 275-30.3 above, a nonconforming
structure may be expanded by right where the proposed expansion does
not increase the nonconformity. (Example: If a portion of a building
encroaches into the rear setback, an addition could be placed in the
front of the building but not within the rear setback area.)
B. Any nonconforming structure or part thereof declared unsafe by a
proper governmental authority may be restored to a safe condition
without Historic District Commission, Conservation Commission, ZBA
or Planning Board action provided that no more than 50% of the value
of the structure is being replaced.
§ 275-30.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30.8
1:563
§ 275-30.8. Reconstruction.
A nonconforming structure or use that is damaged or destroyed by fire
or any other hazard may be restored by special exception subject to the
following terms/findings:
§ 275-30.9. Other terms.
A. Restoration must be commenced within 24 months of when the damage
occurred;
B. The damage was not intentionally caused by the property owner;
C. The overall impact of the restored structure or use is determined to be
no more adverse than the original structure or use;
D. In the case of nonconforming structures, reasonable efforts are made to
minimize, mitigate, or eliminate the nonconforming conditions; and
E. Modifications to the original building configuration may be approved
for good cause as determined by the Director of Building, Zoning, and
Licensing Services.
A. Changed to conforming condition. Once any nonconforming condition is
changed to a conforming condition the nonconforming condition may
not be restored. Furthermore, once a nonconforming condition is
reduced it may not afterward be restored to the earlier condition of
greater nonconformity.
B. Lessen nonconforming condition. A property owner may by right seek
to lessen a nonconforming condition. In applying to do so, he/she may
not be compelled to completely eliminate the nonconforming condition,
unless, as part of that application, it is determined that elimination of
the condition is reasonable and not unduly burdensome.
C. Signs. Signs deemed to be nonconforming under this chapter shall be
regulated under Article 29 of this chapter.
D. RSA. The provisions of RSA 674:39, Five-Year Exemption, apply as
appropriate.
§ 275-30.8 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-30.9
1:564
ARTICLE 31
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30.9
1:565

ARTICLE 32
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-30.9
1:567

ARTICLE 33
Conservation Subdivisions
§ 275-33.1. Purpose.
A. Master Plan. Promotion of conservation subdivisions is a core goal of
the City of Rochester Master Plan. This section is adopted pursuant to
RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls, I(f), Cluster development.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Development of choice. Through density bonuses, cost savings,
flexibility in design, and other advantages, it is the City's desire that
conservation subdivisions will be the development pattern of choice in
the R2 and AG Districts.
C. Objectives. Conservation subdivisions provide myriad public benefits.
The various objectives are to:
(1) Maintain the rural character of Rochester.
(2) Create open space that is usable and accessible.
(3) Provide active and passive recreational opportunities.
(4) Prevent disruption of existing topography.
(5) Accommodate natural drainage systems.
(6) Preserve important ecological features, wetlands, streams, ponds,
floodplains, forests, fields, natural vegetation, and tree cover.
(7) Protect aquifers and groundwater quality.
(8) Protect significant archaeological resources.
(9) Discourage fragmentation of undeveloped parcels of land.
(10) Preserve high quality farm soils and provide opportunities for
agriculture.
(11) Minimize site disturbance, erosion, and sedimentation.
(12) Promote innovative site design.
(13) Reduce costs for the developer and maintenance costs for the City
by reducing infrastructure.
(14) Discourage the creation of frontage lots and provide buffers on
scenic collector roads.
(15) Protect scenic views.
(16) Provide a mix of housing types.
§ 275-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33.1
1:569
§ 275-33.2. Applicability.
§ 275-33.3. General provisions.
(17) Encourage bicycle and pedestrian paths.
(18) Promote efficiency in road and utility layout.
(19) Locate houses on parts of the land most conducive to development.
A. Conditional use. A conservation subdivision is a major subdivision
involving the creation of a new road. It is allowed by conditional use in
the R1, R2, AG, OC, and HC Districts when the Planning Board
determines that the proposal meets the intent of a conservation
subdivision as expressed in this article, in the Subdivision Regulations,
and in the City of Rochester Master Plan. While the conservation
subdivision is the preferred form of subdivision it is allowed by
conditional use rather than by right in order to ensure that it does meet
this intent. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. Five acres or five lots. A conservation subdivision may be developed for
any parcel of at least five gross acres or where the total number of
buildable lots is five or more and which involves the creation of a new
road.
A. Subdivision regulations.
(1) Special procedures and additional standards for conservation
subdivisions may be established in the Subdivision Regulations
including the following, as appropriate:
(a) Procedures for submission, review, and approval.
(b) Lot orientation.
(c) Road design.
(d) Determination of appropriate open space areas with due
consideration for natural, scenic, and cultural resources.
(e) Treatment and ownership of open space.
(f) Required improvements to open space.
(g) Dedication of open space to the City or another organization.
(h) Requirements for covenants, easements, and deed restrictions.
(i) Standards for a homeowners' association.
(j) Setting up a stewardship fund for the open space.
(k) Treatment of individual or community wells and leach fields.
§ 275-33.1 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-33.3
1:570
§ 275-33.4. Base density.
The base density for a conservation subdivision shall be determined by one
of the following two approaches, as stipulated by the Planning Board:
(2) Absent such special procedures, the ordinary subdivision
procedures shall apply.
B. Meeting all requirements. Obtaining subdivision approval for the
number of lots "permitted" in this article is subject to meeting all
requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and complying with the
requirements of New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services. This is not guaranteed, particularly where there are
significant density enhancements.
C. Dimensions. See Table 19-A, Dimensional Standards - Residential
Districts, for dimensional regulations for conservation subdivision lots.
D. Open space percentage. The proposed open space areas shall consist of
a minimum of 40% of the buildable area of the property. All parts of the
parcel constitute buildable area except for those lands which are
wetlands, steep slopes over 25%, or aboveground utility easements.
E. Other zoning district. If a portion of a parcel of land is situated in a
zoning district in which conservation subdivisions are not permitted,
that portion of the land shall not be developed as a conservation
subdivision.
F. Frontage lots. If any recently created lot has been subdivided from the
parent tract within two years prior to the date that the application for
the conservation subdivision is submitted (or from the date that a
conventional subdivision is submitted, if it is subsequently modified to
be a conservation subdivision), then the total number of lots permitted
in the conservation subdivision shall be reduced by 1.5 lots for each
such frontage lot formerly created.
G. Frontage on new roads. All new lots shall have frontage only on newly
created local roads on the interior of the subdivision.
H. Buffer. The portion of the tract fronting on existing roads shall be
preserved as a buffer to the maximum extent practical.
I. Merging of frontage lots. Undeveloped existing frontage lots that are
part of the overall tract shall be merged with the remainder of the tract
as part of a resubdivision for the development, to the extent practical.
J. Adjacent development. Where proposed lots will be contiguous to
existing single-family dwellings, the Planning Board may, at its option,
require that the proposed lots conform to the dimensional requirements
for conventional subdivisions or that other buffering methods be used.
A. Yield plan approach. The yield plan is the theoretical layout showing the
lots that would reasonably be approvable and buildable under a
§ 275-33.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33.4
1:571
§ 275-33.5. Base density bonus.
Conservation subdivisions receive a base density bonus of 30% beyond
conventional subdivisions based upon yield plans or assumed in the
adjusted tract acreage approach. Additional density enhancements beyond
the base density bonus may be awarded as specified in § 275-33.6 below.
§ 275-33.6. Density bonus enhancements.
Density enhancements beyond the base density determined above shall
be awarded where the Board determines that the applicant meets the
intent of the requirements below. Each enhancement percentage shall be
based upon the number of dwelling units established in the base density.
Multiple enhancements are cumulative and shall be added to the base
density (except that only one additional open space enhancement shall be
allowed among the three alternatives). Appropriate easements, covenants,
and/or deed restrictions shall be incorporated to protect the enhancements
where deemed necessary by the Board.
conventional subdivision. The Planning Board must vote to endorse the
yield plan as meeting the objective of this subsection. The number of
lots in the endorsed yield plan is then multiplied by 1.3, which is the
base density bonus for a conservation subdivision.
B. Adjusted tract acreage approach. The adjusted tract acreage approach
is used to derive an objective and consistent measure of the total
carrying capacity of the tract. The method is less subjective than the
yield plan approach but it is not as good an indicator of what could be
built conventionally. The steps are to:
(1) Determine gross tract acreage;
(2) Subtract the acreage of any existing road rights-of-way and existing
rights-of-way for overhead utilities;
(3) Subtract the acreage of very poorly drained soils, ponds and
streams to ordinary high-water mark, and slopes of 25% or greater;
(4) Subtract 1/2 the acreage of non-wetland floodplains;
(5) Multiply by 0.75 (allowance for new roads, other infrastructure,
wetland buffers, poorly drained soils, inaccessible upland areas,
and typical loss of density due to platting constraints);
(6) Divide by the minimum permitted lot size for a conventional singlefamily
subdivision in the district; calculate proportionally if the
tract lies in two zoning districts (see Table of Dimensional
Standards in Article 19); and
(7) Multiply by 1.3 (density bonus).
A. Additional open space enhancement.
§ 275-33.4 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-33.6
1:572
(1) A five-percent enhancement shall be awarded where the
percentage of open space as defined in this article exceeds 50%.
(2) A ten-percent enhancement shall be awarded where the
percentage of open space as defined in this article exceeds 60%.
(3) A fifteen-percent enhancement shall be awarded where the
percentage of open space as defined in this article exceeds 70%.
B. Open space access/linkage enhancement. A five-percent enhancement
shall be awarded when at least one of the following three is
incorporated in the plan:
(1) Special trail designs are incorporated in the open space areas.
(2) The general public is granted access to the open space.
(3) The open space/trail network is linked with open spaces/trail
networks on an adjoining parcel(s).
C. Natural resources enhancement. A five-percent enhancement shall be
awarded when recommended by the Conservation Commission where
significant environmental resources are protected, including specimen
trees, other important vegetation, boulders, rock outcrops, and/or
important wildlife habitats.
D. Agriculture enhancement. A five-percent enhancement shall be
awarded where the development protects agriculturally valuable lands
and allows for agricultural use in perpetuity through an appropriate
legal instrument. The affected lands must constitute a significant
proportion of the open space. It is required only that permission be
granted in a way that reasonably provides for agricultural use; whether
the lands are actually placed in agricultural use does not affect the
validity of this enhancement.
E. Viewshed enhancement. A five-percent enhancement shall be awarded
where lands or corridors that contribute significantly to the visual
landscape, such as open fields containing stone walls, are protected.
F. Historic resources enhancement. A five-percent enhancement shall be
awarded when recommended by the Historic District Commission
where historically or architecturally significant buildings or structures
are preserved, restored, and/or protected, as appropriate.
G. Architectural design enhancement. A five-percent enhancement shall
be awarded for establishing architectural standards for single-family
houses to promote excellence in building design. The standards shall be
established either through private covenants or as conditions of
approval. The architectural regulations contained in the Site Plan
Regulations, Article 14, Historic Overlay District, and the Architectural
Jewels series in the Rochester Times Newspaper may be used for
guidance.
§ 275-33.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33.6
1:573
§ 275-33.7. Allowed uses. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
All uses permitted in the zoning district within which the conservation
subdivision is located are permitted in the conservation subdivision under
the same terms. Two-family, three-family, and four-family dwellings are
permitted in conservation subdivisions provided:
§ 275-33.8. Zero lot line subdivision.
A zero lot line subdivision is a special technique where side setbacks are
reduced on the same side of all adjoining lots to accommodate usable side
setbacks. (Example: All of the houses along one block would have no side
setback on the southerly side but an extra large setback on the northerly
side, resulting in usable side setbacks for all properties on the northerly
side.) A zero lot line subdivision is permitted subject to the following:
H. Other enhancement. A five-percent enhancement may be awarded for
any other measure which the Planning Board deems worthy, such as
making a contribution to the school or other department to mitigate
costs of serving the project, contributing to a stewardship fund to
monitor the open space if donated to a nonprofit organization,
instituting innovative methods of protecting resources, or offering
special traffic mitigation approaches.
A. At least half of the proposed units are single-family dwellings;
B. A system of street blocks or a modified grid is used;
C. The units are carefully integrated into the development (such as placing
the units on larger lots at intersections, fronting on greens, or on
alternating or cross streets);
D. The architectural designs provide for a harmonious fit with singlefamily
dwellings.
E. The development standards under Article 5, Residential Zoning
Districts, shall apply;
F. None of these multifamily uses are located within 200 feet of the project
boundary; and
G. Each unit shall be considered equivalent to one house lot for density
purposes.
A. One-foot setback. The minimum side setback for the building and all
appurtenant elements of the building (chimney, porches, windowsills,
etc.) shall be at least one foot (rather than zero feet, to allow for error).
B. Block. The same standards shall apply to all lots along an entire section
or block to ensure adequate spacing between houses.
§ 275-33.6 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-33.8
1:574
§ 275-33.9. Open space.
C. Privacy. Special design standards shall be incorporated to foster
privacy in side setbacks, such as through prohibitions on windows on
the facing side elevation of the adjacent house, and are established in
deeds or through other appropriate mechanisms.
D. Usability. Special standards are incorporated to foster quality design
and usability of side setbacks and are established in deeds or through
other appropriate mechanisms.
E. Clearance zone. A minimum six-foot clearance is established (on one or
both lots) by easement or other method alongside the facade of the
building on the reduced setback side. The purpose is to allow for
firefighting access and maintenance for both lot owners. No fence or
other obstruction may be constructed within this clearance zone.
F. Total side setbacks. The total side setbacks for the subject district must
be maintained. (Example: If the ordinary side setback in the zoning
district is 15, then the total of both side setbacks in the zero lot line
subdivision must total at least 30.)
G. Fire Department. Approval by the Fire Department to ensure all
necessary access for firefighting.
A. Undeveloped. Areas designated as open space shall be set aside as such
in perpetuity, free of any roads, development or subdivision (except for
minor lot line adjustments that do not decrease the amount or quality of
open space).
B. Allowed uses. The following uses and activities are allowed within the
open space by right:
(1) Agriculture;
(2) Forestry;
(3) Gardens;
(4) Paths;
(5) Outdoor recreational activities;
(6) Open-air recreational structures; and
(7) Cemeteries.
C. Discretionary uses. The Planning Board may approve any of the
following uses and activities within the open space at its discretion:
(1) Underground utilities;
(2) Individual or common leach fields and wells;
(3) Small accessory structures; and
§ 275-33.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-33.9
1:575
(4) Drainage structures.
D. Separate lots. The open space shall be established as one or more
separate open space lots, independent from individual house lots.
E. Frontage. The open space lots shall have at least 10 feet of frontage to
allow for reasonable access but wider frontages are preferred.
F. Public access. Allowing for public access to open space is encouraged
but it is not required. However, residents of the subdivision may not be
restricted from access to the open space.
G. Noncontiguous tracts. At its discretion, the Planning Board may
approve a conservation subdivision that incorporates two
noncontiguous tracts, one for development on which the dwelling units
will be developed, and a second that will be preserved as open space.
§ 275-33.9 ROCHESTER CODE § 275-33.9
1:576