Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Town of Salem of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Town Meeting and Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Salem, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 490, inclusive, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town
of Salem," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall
remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken
on this ordinance, and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall
be certified to by the Clerk of the Town of Salem by impressing thereon the
Seal of the Town, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of the Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Meeting
or Board of Selectmen to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town
of Salem" shall be understood and intended to include such additions,
deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions
or amendments to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be
inserted in the Code as supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Salem, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published,
in the manner required by law, notice of the adoption of this ordinance.
A copy of the Code of the Town of Salem shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular
office hours. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with
the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code required
to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of a
fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town
of Salem to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine as
established by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-6 SALEM CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Salem which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect. The following chapters and articles of the 1995 Town Code
are specifically repealed:
A. Chapter 60, Land Acquisition, adopted by the Board of Selectmen April
16, 1979.
B. Chapter 86, Police Department, Article I, Eligibility for Appointment,
adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 7, 1960, and Article II, Outside
Details, adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 21, 1980.
C. Chapter 142, Bicycles, adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 3, 1982.
D. Chapter 152, Open Burning, adopted by the Board of Selectmen
October 12, 1970.
E. Chapter 165, Curfew, adopted by the 1928 Town Meeting.
F. Chapter 175, Electrical Standards, adopted by the 1971 Town Meeting.
G. Chapter 193, Floodplain Development, Administrative Regulations,
adopted by the 1975 Town Meeting.
H. Chapter 238, Plumbing Standards, adopted by the 1972 Town Meeting.
I. Chapter 255, Sewage Treatment Plant, adopted by the Board of
Selectmen April 5, 1971.
J. Chapter 258, Sewerage System Policy, adopted by the Board of
Selectmen October 22, 1973.
K. Chapter 264, Sewers, adopted by the Board of Selectmen February 23,
1976.
L. Chapter 280, Sunday and Holiday Activities, adopted by the 1987 Town
Meeting.
M. Chapter 282, Swimming Pools, adopted by the 1970 Town Meeting.
N. Chapter 287, Taxicabs and Other Vehicles for Hire, adopted by the
Board of Selectmen May 7, 1973.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 1, 2015.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Town's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
K. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
L. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinances adopting or amending a zoning map or otherwise
rezoning property.
§ 1-13 SALEM CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-16. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made part of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Salem, to be titled "General Provisions, Article I,
Adoption of Code."
O. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Town.
P. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending a
fine or penalty.
Q. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing or amending
sewer or water rates or charges.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Salem, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B
and C hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Selectmen that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. The following chapters and articles have been added or amended in
their entirety and are hereby adopted as they appear in the copy of the
Code on file in the Clerk's office: Chapter 210, Building Construction;
Chapter 314, Life Safety; Chapter 398, Sewer Use, Article IV,
Damaging or Tampering with System, and Article V, Enforcement
Agency and Inspectors; Chapter 409, Solid Waste, Article I, Regulations
for Transfer Station; Chapter 420, Streets and Sidewalks, Article I,
Standards for Acceptance; and Chapter 477, Article III, Water Rate
Policy.
C. The amendments and additions as set forth in Schedule A1 attached
hereto and made a part hereof are hereby adopted. (Chapter and
section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or repealed by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, repealed) 11-2-2015.” Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
Chapter 10
BUDGET
§ 1-16 SALEM CODE § 1-16
1:8
ARTICLE I
Budget Committee
[Adopted by the 1962 Town Meeting (Ch. 12 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 10-1. Committee established.2
The Budget Committee shall consist of seven members elected at large,
two ex officio members representing the Selectmen and the School Board,
and two alternates for the ex officio members. The Selectmen and School
Board shall appoint their representatives from the current seated members
of their Boards.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:9

ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Budget Law3
[At the 1962 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions of
the Municipal Budget Law, RSA 32:1 et seq.]
3. Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 1995 Code as Ch. 14.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:11
Chapter 16
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
[At the 1965 Town Meeting it was voted to establish a Town
Conservation Commission as set forth in RSA 36-A.]
Chapter 29
ELECTIONS
§ 10-1 SALEM CODE § 10-1
1:12
ARTICLE I
Hours for State Elections
[Adopted by the 1942 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. III, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-1. Voting hours established.4
The Town hereby adopts the voting hours for state elections of 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-1
1:13

ARTICLE II
Hours for Town Elections
[Adopted by the 1942 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. IV, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-2. Voting hours established.5
The Town hereby adopts the voting hours for Town elections of 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2
1:15

ARTICLE III
Closing Date for Correction of Checklist
[Adopted by the 1946 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. V, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-3. Session date and hours.6
The Supervisors of the Checklist shall be in session for the correction of
the checklist at the Salem Town Offices on the Saturday 10 days prior to
the election and upon which all hearings shall be finally closed, provided
that if the Saturday falls on a holiday weekend, that session shall be held on
Tuesday, seven days prior to the election, between 7:00 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.
and at the discretion of the Supervisors for extended hours as provided in
RSA 654:27.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-3
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Partisan Ballot System
[Adopted by the 1955 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. VI, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-4. Partisan ballot system established.
The Town hereby rescinds the action of the Town in voting to establish the
nonpartisan ballot system in the Town of Salem as accepted under Article
25 of the 1954 Town Warrant and thereby reestablishes the partisan ballot
system as previously in force under the authority granted to rescind such
action in Chapter 34, Paragraph 112, of the Revised Laws of the State of
New Hampshire as amended by Chapter 22 of the Session Laws of 1943.7
7. Editor's Note: See now RSA 669:12.
§ 29-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:19

ARTICLE V
Absentee Ballots
[Adopted by the 1975 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. I, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-5. Adoption of statutory provisions.8
The provisions for absentee ballot for the election of Town officers in RSA
669:26 through 669:29 are hereby adopted by this Town.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-5
1:21

ARTICLE VI
Polling Places
[Adopted by the 1976 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. II, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-6. Selectmen to determine polling places.9
The Town hereby instructs the Selectmen to determine polling places in the
Town of Salem.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 29-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:23

ARTICLE VII
Changes in Party Affiliation
[Adopted by the 1980 Town Meeting (Ch. 35, Art. VII, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 29-7. Applications to be made with Town Clerk.
The provisions of RSA 654:34-a permitting applications for changes in party
affiliation to be made with the Town Clerk are hereby adopted.
§ 29-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-7
1:25
Chapter 33
ETHICS
§ 29-7 SALEM CODE § 29-7
1:26
ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics for Selectmen
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-14-1977, last reaffirmed
4-2-2013 (Ch. 40, Art. I, of the 1995 Code)]
§ 33-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain;
and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for
the Board of Selectmen. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical
standards of conduct for Selectmen by setting forth those acts or actions
that are incompatible with the best interest of the Town and by directing
disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in matters
affecting the Town. The provisions and purpose of this code and such rules
and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best
interests of the Town of Salem.
§ 33-2. General responsibilities.
Public officials are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of
the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of this state and to carry out impartially the laws of the
nation, state and municipality and thus to foster respect for all government.
They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of
morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of
personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their
primary concern.
§ 33-3. Loyalty to the electorate; compliance with law.
§ 33-4. Obligation to provide fair and equal treatment.
A. Board of Selectmen members should be loyal to the political objectives
expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those
objectives.
B. Board of Selectmen members should not exceed their authority or
breach the law. A Selectman shall not attempt to induce an officer or
employee in the service of the Town or a resident of the Town to commit
an unlawful act or to act in violation of any lawful statute, ordinance,
regulation or legal order.
A. Interest in appointments. Canvassing of members of the Board of
Selectmen, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential
consideration in connection with any appointment to the Town service
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-4
1:27
§ 33-5. Conflicts of interest.
No Selectman shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a
financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible
with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or
would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties. Personal, as distinguished from financial,
interest includes an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships
or close business association. Specific conflicts of interest are enumerated
below for the guidance of Selectmen:
shall disqualify the candidate for appointment, except with reference to
positions filled by appointment by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Use of public property. No Selectman shall request or permit the use of
Town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the
public generally or are provided as municipal policy for use in the
conduct of official business.
C. Obligations to citizens. No Selectman shall grant or deny any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen which is not
available to every other citizen. Furthermore, no Selectman should
make, encourage or accept any ex parte or other unilateral application
or communication that excludes the interests of other parties in a
matter under consideration when such application or communication is
designed to influence an official decision or conduct of the official
himself or other Selectmen or agencies in order to obtain favored
treatment or special consideration to advance the personal or private
gain of himself or others.
A. Incompatible employment. No Selectman shall engage in or accept
private employment or render services for private interests when such
employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his
official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his official duties.
B. Disclosure of confidential information. No Selectman shall, without
proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning
the property, government or affairs of the Town, nor shall he use such
information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself
or others.
C. Gifts and favors. No Selectman shall accept any valuable gift, whether
in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm or
corporation which to his knowledge is interested directly or indirectly
in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the Town, nor shall
any such official accept any gift, favor or thing of value that may tend to
influence him in the discharge of his duties or grant in the discharge of
his duties any improper favor, service or thing of value.
§ 33-4 SALEM CODE § 33-5
1:28
§ 33-6. Use of influence.
No Selectman or candidate for the office of Selectman shall promise an
appointment to any municipal position as a reward for any political activity.
A Selectman shall not attempt to use or threaten to use personal or political
influence to secure a promotion, leave of absence, transfer, change in rate of
pay or character of work for any Town employee. "Personal influence" under
D. Representing private interests before Town agencies or courts.
(1) No Selectman shall appear in behalf of private interests before any
agency of the Town.
(2) He shall not represent private interests in any action or proceeding
against the interests of the Town in any litigation to which the Town
is a party.
(3) A Selectman may appear before Town agencies on behalf of
constituents in the course of his duties as a representative of the
electorate or in performance of public or civic obligations.
However, no Selectman shall receive any gift or compensation that
is contingent upon a specific action by a Town agency.
E. Contracts with the Town. Any Selectman who has a substantial or
controlling financial interest in any business entity, transaction or
contract with the Town or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies
or services to the Town shall make known to the proper authority such
interest in any matter on which he may be called to act in his official
capacity. He shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in
the transaction or the making of such contract or sale. A Selectman
shall not be deemed interested in any contract or purchase or sale of
land or other thing of value unless such contract or sale is approved,
awarded, entered into or authorized by him in his official capacity.
F. Disclosure of interest in legislation. A Selectman who has a financial or
other private interest in any legislation shall disclose on the records of
the Board or other appropriate authority the nature and extent of such
interest. This provision shall not apply if the Selectman disqualifies
himself from voting.
G. Administrative relationship. Neither the Board nor any of its members
shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal
from office by the Town Manager or by any of his subordinates or in any
manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and
employees in the administrative service of the Town unless otherwise
provided in law. The Board and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Town Manager, and neither
the Board nor any member thereof, except as authorized by statute or
local ordinance, shall give direct orders to any subordinates of the Town
Manager, either publicly or privately.
§ 33-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-6
1:29
this section shall mean any activity inconsistent with recognized practices
allowed by the laws of the State of New Hampshire and the Town of Salem.
§ 33-7. Applicability and interpretation.
§ 33-8. Sanctions.
Violation of any provisions of this code should raise conscientious questions
for the Selectman concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other
action is indicated to promote the best interests of the Town. Violation may
constitute a cause for such action as implementation of disciplinary action
as prescribed by state statute.
§ 33-9. Creed for Board of Selectmen.
As a Selectmen I believe: that the proper operation of democratic
government requires that public officials be independent and impartial in
their judgment and actions; that government decisions and policy be made
in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not
be used for personal gain; that the public have confidence in the integrity
of its government and public officials; and that the realization of these
ends is impaired whenever there exists or appears to exist an actual or
potential conflict between the private interests of a governmental official
and his public duties. The public interest requires ethical standards with
respect to official conduct. Therefore, as a Selectman of the Town of Salem,
New Hampshire, I assert my solemn belief that the primary responsibility
for maintaining a high level of ethics among the Board of Selectmen falls
upon the Board of Selectmen as the governing body elected by the people.
Consequently, as a Selectman, I believe it is my duty to:
A. When a Selectman has doubt as to the applicability of a provision of this
code to a particular situation, he should apply to the Board of
Selectmen for an advisory opinion and be guided by that opinion when
given.
B. The applicant should not vote in the proceedings of the Board of
Selectmen leading to the advisory opinion.
C. Any member of the Board of Selectmen may question the applicability
of the code regarding another member of the Board of Selectmen. Said
member shall request a meeting of the Board of Selectmen for an
advisory opinion, and all parties shall be guided by that opinion when
given. Action taken under this section should be considered by the
Board of Selectmen as a legal matter and acted on accordingly. The
Selectman shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of
the facts at issue and of the applicable provision(s) of the code before
such advisory decision is made. This code shall be operative in all
instances covered by its provisions except when superseded by an
applicable statutory or charter provision and statutory or charter action
is mandatory or when the application of a statutory or charter provision
is discretionary but determined to be more appropriate or desirable.
§ 33-6 SALEM CODE § 33-9
1:30
A. Respect the importance of American ideals of government, of the rule of
law, of the principles of public administration and of ethical conduct in
the performance of my public duties.
B. Represent and work for the common good of the Town of Salem and not
for private interest, assuring fair and equal treatment of all persons,
claims and transactions coming before me in my official capacity.
C. Refrain from accepting gifts or favors or promises of future benefit
which might compromise or tend to impair my independence of
judgment or action as a Selectman.
D. Learn the background and purposes of major motions before voting.
E. Faithfully perform my duties as a Selectman by attending all sessions of
the Board and of its committees of which I am a member, unless unable
to do so for some compelling reason or disability.
F. Help the Board maintain the highest standards of ethical conduct by
refusing to approve breaches of public trust or improper attempts to
influence legislation and by being willing to vote to censure or
otherwise discipline any Selectman who willfully violates the duly
established rules of conduct for Selectmen.
G. Disclose all sources of income which may represent a substantial
conflict of interest with my duties as a Selectman and to disclose the
nature and extent of my interest as an officer, agent, member or owner
of any business entity or other association which is doing business with
the Town of Salem, such disclosure to be made to the Board of
Selectmen.
H. Refuse to represent private interests before Town agencies or in the
courts, except as may be my duty toward constituents, such service to
be rendered without compensation, and refuse to accept or engage in
any employment incompatible with my public duties.
I. Disclose any private interest I may have in legislation before the Board
or to refrain from voting when such interest is in substantial conflict
with my public duties.
J. Refrain from disclosing confidential information concerning any
employee, resident or the Town of Salem itself.
§ 33-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-9
1:31

ARTICLE II
Outside Employment Policy
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 12-6-1979 (Ch. 40, Art. II, of the
1995 Code)]
§ 33-10. Restrictions on outside employment and business ventures.
Effective January 1, 1980, no employee of the Town of Salem will be allowed
to engage in secondary employment or to hold an interest in any business
venture operating within the limits of the Town of Salem which has, as a
result of federal, state or local legislation, the requirement for inspection
and/or regulation by the department to which the employee is assigned and
will utilize information available to an employee in his/her specific capacity
with the Town which could be considered sensitive, classified, or privileged
information to which the employee would not be otherwise entitled.
§ 33-11. Approval of exceptions required.
Any exceptions to this policy must be approved by the Town Manager in
writing.
§ 33-12. Conditions required for exceptions to be considered.
In order for an exception to be considered, the following conditions must be
met:
A. The employee requesting the exception must have been employed by
the Town of Salem on or prior to December 6, 1979.
B. The employee must substantiate that the secondary employment or
business venture for which the exception is being applied was actively
pursued or operated by the employee prior to and through December 6,
1979.
C. The interest of the Town and the particular department can be met and
the requirement for inspection or regulation accommodated outside of
the department which employs the individual requesting exception at
no additional expense or inconvenience to the Town.
D. Reasonable standards or conditions to eliminate possible conflicts of
interest can be established and agreed upon by the employee and the
Town.
E. No previous agreement related to the secondary employment or
business venture for which the exception is being applied has been
made between the employee and the Town.
§ 33-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-12
1:33
Chapter 40
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance service — See Ch. 185.
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 260.
Life safety — See Ch. 314.
§ 33-12 SALEM CODE § 33-12
1:34
ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid
[Adopted by the 1974 Town Meeting (Ch. 44, Art. I, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 40-1. Authorization to assist other jurisdictions.
The Salem Fire Department is hereby authorized to go to the aid of other
cities, towns, villages or fire districts within or without the state for the
purpose of extinguishing fires and other Fire Department matters.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-1
1:35
Chapter 54
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical district — See Ch. 284.
§ 54-1. Commission established.10
There is hereby established a Historic District Commission, to consist of
five members to be appointed by the Selectmen and one nonvoting
representative from the Board of Selectmen.
Chapter 58
HOUSING AUTHORITY
[At the 1971 Town Meeting it was resolved, pursuant to the Housing
Authorities Law of New Hampshire, RSA 203:4, that there is a need
for a Housing Authority to function in the Town of Salem, to be called
the "Housing Authority of the Town of Salem."]
Chapter 90
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 40-1 SALEM CODE § 54-1
1:36
ARTICLE I
Renting of Town Hall
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-22-1959 (Ch. 67, Art. I, of the
1995 Code)]
§ 90-1. Rental policy.
The Town Hall will not be rented to private parties and will be reserved for
the use of local organizations.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-1
1:37

ARTICLE II
Political Activity
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-5-1974 (Ch. 67, Art. II, of the
1995 Code)]
§ 90-2. Restrictions on use for political activities. [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
In order to provide a guideline for all interested parties and persons on
the use of municipally owned property for political activities, the following
policy is hereby adopted by the Board of Selectmen:
A. Political advertising signs and/or stickers for any party, issue or
candidate shall not be placed on public property, on public buildings,
structures or municipal vehicles.
B. Political parties may rent, at the established rate, public buildings
having meeting room facilities for the purpose of business meetings,
organizational meetings, elections, candidate nights and similar
activities; such public facilities will not be available for campaign
purposes prior to any election for a political party, political committee
or political candidate.
C. The following activities on municipal property are prohibited:
(1) Any activity which disrupts the normal business operation of the
site or facility.
(2) The use of sound trucks, mobile sound systems or loudspeakers,
other than on the public way.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:39
Chapter 104
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 29. Ethics — See Ch. 33.
§ 90-2 SALEM CODE § 90-2
1:40
ARTICLE I
Town Manager11
[At the 1960 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the Town Manager
Plan as provided in Chapter 37 of the Revised Statues Annotated.
The continuation of the Town Manager Plan was voted at the 1981
Town Meeting.]
11.Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 1995 Code as Ch. 101.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:41

ARTICLE II
Deputy Tax Collector
[Adopted by the 1964 Town Meeting (Ch. 74, Art. V, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 104-1. Appointment.12
The Tax Collector shall appoint a Deputy Tax Collector pursuant to RSA
41:38.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-1
1:43

ARTICLE III
Terms of Office
[Adopted by the 1968 Town Meeting (Ch. 74, Arts. II, III and IV, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 104-2. Tax Collector.
The term of office for Tax Collector shall be three years.
§ 104-3. Town Clerk.
The term of office for Town Clerk shall be three years.
§ 104-4. Town Treasurer.
The term of office for Town Treasurer shall be three years.
§ 104-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-4
1:45

ARTICLE IV
Indemnification
[Adopted by the 1974 Town Meeting (Ch. 55 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 104-5. Employees to be indemnified and saved harmless from
certain losses or damages.
The Town shall from this date forward indemnify and save harmless from
loss or damage any person employed by it, including the Town Manager
and any member of its Board of Selectmen, administrative staff or agencies,
from personal financial loss and expense, including reasonable legal fees
and costs, if any, arising out of any claim, demand, suit or judgment by
reason of negligence or other act resulting in accidental injury to a person
or accidental damage to or destruction of property if the indemnified person
at the time of the accident resulting in the injury, damage or destruction
was acting in the scope of his employment or office.
§ 104-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-5
1:47
Chapter 128
RECORDS
§ 104-5 SALEM CODE § 104-5
1:48
ARTICLE I
Disposal of Records13
[At the 1972 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions
of RSA 33-A, whereby the Town would be authorized to dispose of
municipal records in accordance therewith.]
13.Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 1995 Code as Ch. 69.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-5
1:49
Chapter 131
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commons, playgrounds and cemeteries — See
Ch. 226.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 359.
§ 131-1. Objectives and aims.
The objectives and aims of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be to
concentrate efforts to provide the following:
§ 131-2. Membership; appointments.
Chapter 143
A. Recommend and aid in the implementation of a recreation activity
program(s) to meet the broad spectrum of the community for all age
groups and for the total makeup of the community.
B. Survey the community for suggestions relative to playgrounds and
recreation.
C. Promote recreation programs and activities in the community to
encourage support and participation.
D. Propose and encourage the development of new facilities and
encourage maximum utilization of existing facilities.
E. Help to develop ongoing standards for field and facility usage.
F. Recommend planned development of recreational fields and facilities.
A. The recommended membership shall consist of no more than 11 voting
members, to include a Selectman and School Board member.
B. The Recreation Director or designee, as appointed by the Recreation
Director, shall serve as ex officio member with no voting privileges.
C. Appointment.
(1) The Salem Board of Selectmen appoints Recreation Advisory
Committee members in staggered terms of three years. Selectmen
representatives are appointed on an annual basis.
(2) The Board of Selectmen shall be notified in writing to issue a call
for candidates when a position becomes vacant by a member.
(3) The new member who is replacing the resigning member will finish
the remaining term of that individual.
§ 104-5 SALEM CODE § 131-2
1:50
SELECTMEN, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics for Selectmen — See Ch. 33,
Art. I.
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:51

ARTICLE I
Membership
[Adopted by the 1968 Town Meeting (Ch. 74, Art. I, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 143-1. Increase in membership.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby increased to five members.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:53
Chapter 156
TOWN MEETINGS
§ 143-1 SALEM CODE § 143-1
1:54
ARTICLE I
Annual Town Meeting14
[At the 2012 Town Meeting (Art. 12), it was voted to adopt the
provisions of RSA 40:13 (known as SB2), thereby establishing the
official ballot referendum form of government in the Town of Salem.]
14.Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 1995 Code as Ch. 8.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:55
Chapter 178
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 260.
§ 178-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
included the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any combination or assembly of electronic devices
or a single device at a premises or location designed to transmit to the
police, either directly or through an intermediary, a warning signaling
a hazard or intrusion to which police are expected to respond. In this
chapter, the term "alarm system" shall apply to all electronic security
systems, services and alarms defined herein by which police are
notified and expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Any person who owns and/or operates an alarm
system within the Town of Salem, except for alarm systems on motor
vehicles.15
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any alarm system which elicits an audible siren,
bell or other warning device when activated.
DIAL ALARM — Any alarm system which automatically selects a
telephone line connected to police headquarters and reproduces a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of
the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
No person shall have a self-dialing telephone alarm system connected
to his telephone which automatically calls a receiving agency who
fails to conform to the regulations and guidelines set forth under RSA
370-A and the administrative rules adopted by the Commissioner of
the Department of Safety governing the connection of self-dialing
telephone alarms or any part of this chapter where applicable.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, incorporated association
or other legal entity.
RECEIVING AGENCY — A governmental agency as referred to in RSA
370-A:1(I) and specifically the Salem Police Department for purposes of
this chapter.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 143-1 SALEM CODE § 178-1
1:56
§ 178-2. Regulations.
§ 178-3. Permit required; application procedure.
TOWN — The Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
A. Every alarm user shall provide to the Police Department the names and
telephone numbers of at least two persons, in addition to the alarm
user, who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are
authorized to respond to any emergency signal transmitted by an alarm
system.
B. No alarm system directly connected to the Police Department shall be
tested, worked on or demonstrated without first notifying the Police
Department.
C. All alarm systems which use an audible horn, siren or bell shall be
equipped with a device which will terminate such horn, siren or bell
within 10 minutes after activation of the alarm system.
D. As regards dial alarms producing a prerecorded voice message, format
of tape shall be of standard presentation as prescribed by the receiving
agency. The message shall contain the subscriber's permit number and
the address of where the alarm is sounding. A test or sample recordings
shall be made available by the user to the receiving agency for approval
prior to installation.
E. A permit number used to identify the origin of the alarm signal shall be
assigned by the receiving agency and applied to the alarm permit at the
time of issuance.
F. Dial alarms shall be connected so as to ring the telephone number
prescribed by the receiving agency.
A. Permit required. No person shall operate or have installed an alarm
system within the Town of Salem without first acquiring a permit as
issued herein.
B. Permit application requirements. Upon application to him, the Chief of
Police or his designee is hereby authorized to issue a permit to an
applicant to have installed and to operate within the Town of Salem an
alarm system, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Alarm user permit application and installation forms are available
at the receiving agency. Alarm users will complete the application
form and return it, together with the installation form (to be
completed by the installer performing the installation), to the
receiving agency before an alarm permit may be issued.
(2) Alarm users are responsible for notifying the receiving agency of
any anticipated changes in the design, purpose or termination of
any alarm system described in the original application for permit.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-3
1:57
§ 178-4. Issuance of permit.
§ 178-5. Types of permits; fees; exemptions.
§ 178-6. Suspension or revocation of permit; appeals; hearings.
The standard installation form may be used for this purpose and
must be filed with the agency prior to any change taking place.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee shall determine whether permit and
installation applications conform to the requirements of this chapter
and that the facts stated therein are true and accurate.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee, upon receipt of the permit fee
required and upon compliance by the applicant with this chapter, shall
issue a permit to have installed and to operate the proposed alarm
system.
C. Alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep said permit
within the protected premises/location for which the permit was issued.
Any alarm permit issued under this chapter shall be made available for
inspection upon demand of any authorized Salem police officer.
A. A residential permit shall include all private dwellings, summer
(vacation) residences, individual apartments, rental property or
condominium units occupied by the applicant, for which the applicant
shall pay the Town of Salem a permit fee as provided in § 178-11.16
B. A commercial permit shall include all businesses, corporations or
unincorporated associations, for which the applicant will pay to the
Town of Salem a permit fee as provided in § 178-11.17
C. A separate commercial permit shall be required for each alarm system
owned or leased by a business, corporation, unincorporated association
or other legal entity which exists at a separate premises/location.
D. All federal, state, county, local government and other agencies as
approved by the Board of Selectmen shall be exempt from permit fees
and service charges. However, they shall comply with all other requests
of the Chief of Police or his designee as shall concern the operation of
their alarm systems.
E. All persons 65 years of age or older who are the principal occupants of
the private residence listed on the permit application shall be exempt
from permit fees but shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee, upon notification to him that the
Police Department has received 10 false alarms from a permittee in a
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-3 SALEM CODE § 178-6
1:58
§ 178-7. Penalty for operating after loss of permit.19
Any alarm user who, after having a permit suspended or revoked and after
exhausting his right to a hearing, continues to operate his alarm system
shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided
in § 178-12 for each false alarm plus additional charges if applicable.
calendar year, shall send a written notice by certified mail to the alarm
user. The notice shall list the dates and times of the false alarms
recorded. In addition, the notice will call the alarm user's attention to
§ 178-9B of this chapter.
B. An alarm user's failure to pay a false alarm service charge as prescribed
herein shall subject the user to possible suspension or revocation of his
alarm user's permit, pending a hearing upon request. See Subsection
C.
C. Upon receipt of any notice to suspend or revoke an alarm user's permit,
the alarm user may, within five days of said receipt, submit a written
request for a hearing before the Chief of Police or his designee, setting
forth the reasons why his permit should not be suspended or revoked.
D. At the hearing, the holder of the permit shall have the right to present
evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by counsel.
Such a hearing shall be informal and shall not be subject to rules of
evidence or formal courtroom procedure. After the hearing, the Chief of
Police may issue an order of suspension and/or revocation for a given
period of time. He may also withdraw any previous order of suspension,
revocation or service charge.
E. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police made under
the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Selectmen. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of
Police within five days of the date of the Chief's decision. Said appeal
shall fully explain the grounds of appeal.
F. The Board of Selectmen shall set a date of hearing promptly and upon
its conclusion shall decide the matter within a reasonable time and
notify the applicant accordingly.
G. During the period of appeal, the alarm system will remain in operation
with approved service charges applied for recorded false alarms.
H. An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may reapply for a new
permit. The fee to reinstate a permit that has been revoked for
excessive false alarms is as provided in § 178-11. The Chief of Police,
however, is not required to issue a new permit unless he is satisfied that
the user's alarm system deficiencies have been corrected.18
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-8
1:59
§ 178-8. Orders to cease operation.
When emergency alarm signals are received by the Police Department that
indicate a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Chief
of Police is authorized to require that the users of such alarm systems
cease all such signals until the alarm device is made to comply with said
requirements.
§ 178-9. Charges for false alarms.20
§ 178-10. Limitation on liability of Town.
A. Any alarm user having an alarm system on his premises/location who
fails to obtain an alarm user's permit or whose permit has been
suspended, revoked or denied shall be charged as provided in
Subsection D for each alarm that the police respond to and per day for
every day after the first alarm was received until the system is rendered
inoperable.
B. Any alarm user having an alarm system on his premises/location and
any user of alarm services or equipment designed and installed with the
intent of eliciting a police response shall pay to the Town of Salem a
service charge for each and every false alarm to which the police
respond in each calendar year as follows: after three false alarms in a
calendar year, where such false alarms result in a response by the
Police Department, the alarm user shall be assessed a service charge as
provided in Subsection D for the fourth and any subsequent false
intrusion (burglary), holdup or hazard alarms.
C. Failure to pay false alarm service charges within 30 calendar days from
date of receipt may subject the alarm user to suspension or revocation
of his alarm user's permit as prescribed in § 178-6 of this chapter.
D. Charges for false alarms, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on
file with the Police Department and on the Town of Salem website.
A. The Police Department of the Town of Salem shall take every
reasonable precaution to assure that the alarm signals and prerecorded
alarm messages received by the Police Department are given
appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless,
the Police Department or the Town shall not be liable for any defects in
operation of alarm devices, for any failure or neglect to respond
appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a defective system
nor for failure or neglect of any person in connection with the
installation and operation of alarm systems or their components or the
transmission of alarm signals and messages. In the event that the police
find it necessary not to respond or to require users to cease
transmitting signals from alarm systems not conforming to this chapter
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-8 SALEM CODE § 178-10
1:60
§ 178-11. Fees.21
Permit fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with the
Police Department and on the Town of Salem website.
§ 178-12. Violations and penalties.22
Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Police Department and on the Town of
Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established
pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.
Chapter 181
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 359.
§ 181-1. Consumption prohibited in certain locations.
No person shall consume any liquor or any alcoholic beverage, as these
terms are defined in RSA 175:1, in or on:
§ 181-2. Violation and penalties.23
Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Police Department and on the Town of
Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established
pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.
or act to prevent the sounding of false alarms, neither the Police
Department nor the Town shall be held liable for such action.
B. The provisions of Subsection A will be prominently displayed on all
permits.
A. Town-owned land, including but not limited to public roads, streets,
highways and/or buildings.
B. School District-owned land or buildings.
C. A private parking lot which is maintained primarily for the benefit of
customers.
21.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 178-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-3
1:61
§ 181-3. Waivers.
The Selectmen and/or School Board in their or its discretion may grant
waivers from the provisions of this chapter on special occasions and
circumstances so long as adequate safeguards and standards are imposed
by the Selectmen and/or the School Board in the terms and conditions of
such waivers.
Chapter 185
AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 181-3 SALEM CODE § 181-3
1:62
ARTICLE I
Fees
[Adopted by the 1963 Town Meeting; amended by the 1992 Town
Meeting (Ch. 129, Art. I, of the 1995 Code)]
§ 185-1. Selectmen to establish fees.
The Board of Selectmen shall establish reasonable fees for the use of the
Town ambulance services.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:63

ARTICLE II
Billing and Collection
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-27-1995; amended
11-18-1997 (Ch. 129, Art. II, of the 1995 Code)]
§ 185-2. Purpose.24
This policy is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Board of
Selectmen by the Town Meeting on March 14, 1992. This policy applies to
all transported users or responsible parties charged at a consistent rate as
currently in effect per the Ambulance Fee Schedule as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen pursuant to § 185-4A.
§ 185-3. Scope.25
This policy is applicable to all users or responsible parties, regardless of the
existence of third party insurance coverage, except as provided below:
§ 185-4. Policy provisions.
A. Town employees injured while in the performance of their regularly
assigned duties.
B. Mutual aid community Fire Department employees injured in the line of
duty.
C. Mutual aid agreements.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall establish a fee schedule to be charged for
the use of the Fire Department ambulance service. This fee schedule is
incorporated into this policy by reference and shall be reviewed on an
annual basis.26
B. All patients that are transported by the Salem Fire Department
ambulance shall be billed for the service.
C. Whenever possible, the Town's ambulance billing service shall obtain
insurance information from the patient and shall submit a bill directly
to the insurance company.
D. The Town shall accept assignment of all balances due from the
insurance companies.
E. A patient shall be exempt from payment for ambulance service if he/she
certifies to the Town's billing service that his/her family income is equal
to or less than the current Hill-Burton income levels.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-4
1:65
§ 185-5. Multiple transports.
Each multiple transport patient requiring definitive care beyond
observation and monitoring of vital signs shall be billed at the single
transport rate. In cases where additional resources are not required, the
flat fee and mileage charges shall be divided equally by the parties being
transported. Assignment of these charges shall be at the discretion of the
Fire Chief, subject to review by the Board of Selectmen.
F. After receiving payment from third-party insurers, the Town's billing
service shall bill the patient for the patient copayment portion of the
ambulance fee.
G. Initial thirty-, sixty- and ninety-day bills will be issued on outstanding
balances. This will be followed by a fourth and final dunning notice at
90 days. At 120 days, the account will be reported to a credit bureau.
[Amended by the 1997 Town Meeting]
H. Credit bureau reporting may be foregone in lieu of a payment plan that
provides repayment of at least $10 per month, every month, until the
balance is paid in full. [Amended by the 1997 Town Meeting]
I. Requests for write-offs shall be submitted to the Finance Department
and forwarded to the Board of Selectmen for approval. Each request
will detail collection efforts and reasons for the write-off request.
§ 185-4 SALEM CODE § 185-5
1:66
Chapter 189
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 359.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:67

ARTICLE I
Dogs27
[At the 1980 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions of
RSA 466:30-a, which makes it unlawful for an owner of any dog,
licensed or unlicensed, to allow said dog to run at large, except when
accompanied by the owner or custodian and when used for hunting,
herding, supervised competition and exhibition or training for such.]
27.Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 1995 Code as Ch. 170.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:69
Chapter 194
ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
[At the 1935 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions of
an act passed at the 1929 session of the General Court, RSA 285,
for said state, relating to athletic exhibitions, and to take any other
action relating thereto.]
Chapter 210
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 260, Art. II.
Housing standards — See Ch. 288.
Life safety — See Ch. 314.
Multifamily dwellings and
condominiums — See Ch. 340.
Zoning — See Ch. 490.
§ 210-1. Title.
This chapter shall be referred to as the "Town of Salem Building Code."
§ 210-2. Adoption of standards.
In accordance with RSA 674:51, the Town of Salem Board of Selectmen
hereby adopts the New Hampshire State Building Code ("Building Code")
established pursuant to RSA 155-A.
§ 210-3. Building Division; appointment of Building Inspector.
[Amended by the 3-18-2017 Town Meeting]
§ 210-4. Duties of Building Inspector.
A. The Building Division is hereby created and shall be the administrative
division of the Town of Salem charged with enforcing the Building
Code. The executive in charge of the Building Division shall be the Fire
Marshal - Chief Building Official.
B. One or more Building Inspectors shall be appointed by the Town
Manager, each of whom shall be authorized to enforce the Building
Code pursuant to RSA 674:51.
A. The Building Inspector shall devote his whole time to the duties of his
office. He shall receive applications required by this chapter, issue
permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine
premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary
inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of the
§ 185-5 SALEM CODE § 210-4
1:70
§ 210-5. Cooperation of other officials.
The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the municipality.
§ 210-6. Interpretation of terms.
§ 210-7. Fees.
Building Code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when
the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with
matters referred to in the Building Code and render written reports on
the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or
to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall
issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
B. Inspections required under the provisions of the Building Code shall be
made by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may accept
reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after
investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called
for by any provision of the Building Code shall be issued on such reports
unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of
such service.
C. The Building Inspector shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections
made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. He shall
retain on file copes of required plans and all documents relating to
building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which
they relate may be in existence.
D. All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours but shall not be removed
from the office of the Building Inspector without his written consent.
E. The Building Inspector shall make written reports to his immediate
superior once each month, or more often if requested, including
statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
A. Wherever the word "Municipality" is used in the Building Code, it shall
be held to mean the Town of Salem.
B. Wherever the term "Corporation Counsel" is used in the Building Code,
it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the Town of Salem.
C. Wherever the term "Building Official" is used in the Building Code, it
shall be held to mean the Building Inspector(s) for the Town of Salem.
A. The Board of Selectmen, following public hearing, shall prescribe the
fees for permits issued under this chapter. No permit as required by the
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7
1:71
§ 210-8. Designation of agency to hear appeals.
The Salem Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear appeals from
a Building Inspector's decision and to grant variances from this chapter or
code, to the extent authorized by RSA 674:34.
Chapter 219
CABLE TELEVISION
Building Code shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this chapter
shall have been paid, nor shall any amendment to a permit be approved
until the additional fee, if any, due to such amendment, shall have been
paid.
B. In case of abandonment or discontinuance, the amount and/or cost of
the work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of
the fee made and the portion of the fee for uncompleted work returned
to the permit holder, provided that no refund of a prescribed minimum
fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of a
permit, a similar adjustment and return may be made, provided that no
refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or imposed by due
authority have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no
work shall be resumed until a new application has been made and a new
permit has been issued.
C. The most recent fee schedule established by the Board of Selectmen
prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be deemed to apply under
Subsection A until amended in accordance with Subsection A.
§ 210-7 SALEM CODE § 210-8
1:72
ARTICLE I
Franchising Authority
[Adopted by the 1977 Town Meeting (Ch. 19, Art. I, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 219-1. Establishment of franchising authority.
The Town hereby authorizes the Selectmen to act as the Town's franchising
authority for the regulation of cable television systems.
§ 219-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-1
1:73

ARTICLE II
Public Access Television Policies, Procedures and operating rules
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-27-1995 (Ch. 19, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 219-2. Adoption of rules.
The franchising authority has adopted the following to govern public access
broadcasting in the Town.
§ 219-3. Introduction.
§ 219-4. General facility policies.
SCTV is pleased to provide facilities, equipment and channel time for
community television productions. In return, all users should be mindful of
the following rules:
A. Salem Community Television (SCTV)28 is committed to the idea that
community and public access programming should be community
television serving the greater Salem community. The programs
broadcast on SCTV should be for, by, and as needed by the community.
B. SCTV is operated pursuant to Section 14 of the franchise agreement
between the cable company and the Town of Salem. That section
provides that one channel shall be assigned for public access, one for
educational, and one for governmental use. These rules govern public
access. The rules governing governmental access programming shall be
promulgated by the governing body of the Town of Salem.29
C. Every person who either lives, works or is involved in organizations in
the Salem community can produce or work on a public access cable
television program. The fundamental feature of this community
resource is access. Once a community person has been properly
trained, he or she can work on a program for SCTV. Programming on
SCTV blends community volunteer and staff-produced programs, as
well as prerecorded programs, all designed to serve the unique needs of
the Salem community.
D. The public is invited to participate in creating these programs.
A. Obey all rules and regulations adopted by SCTV regarding equipment
and facility use, program planning and any other requirement set forth
in these rules.
B. No smoking, food or beverages are allowed in the control room or
studio area at any time.
28.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, "CTV-38" was amended to "SCTV" at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 219-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-4
1:75
§ 219-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of these operating rules, the following definitions shall
guide staff of SCTV and users:
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMMING — Programming which has been produced
by the Salem School District for inclusion on the educational channel.
This includes but is not limited to School Board meetings, staff-produced
features on school business, including programming created by students
and sporting events, and information the school releases to the public.30
GOVERNMENTAL PROGRAMMING — Programming which has been
produced by the Town government or channel staff. This includes but is not
limited to local public meetings, staff-produced features on Town business,
and information the Town releases to the public.31
LOCAL ORIGINATION — Programming entirely planned or produced by
SCTV staff.
PUBLIC ACCESS PROGRAMMING — Programming which has been
produced by the public. When the program is produced using SCTV
facilities and equipment, it means that the production arrangements are
made by the volunteer public access producers and the crew is primarily
volunteer. In this instance, SCTV staff is largely there in an advisory
capacity, to provide training, program proposal review, assistance in lining
up crews, basic studio setup, and occasional crew assistance. When an
access user brings in a prerecorded tape or cablecast, it is also considered
public access. In both these instances, SCTV, by federal law, may not edit or
control content.
§ 219-6. Program planning and promotion.
C. Users may not transfer channel or studio time or time for equipment
use.
D. No use of phones or other office equipment is permitted unless
otherwise specifically permitted by staff of SCTV.
E. Users should make appointments in advance for program-related
consultation with SCTV staff.
F. Anyone found to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or found to
be carrying a weapon of any kind, will be removed from the premises.
G. Violation of these rules or any of the rules stated in these rules may
result in the loss of privileges.
A. Introduction. Successful programming depends on a combination of
good planning, production and promotion. Each element in this process
is equally important. These rules are designed to guide the user
30.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
31.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 219-4 SALEM CODE § 219-6
1:76
through the process of getting programs on SCTV. The following basic
guidelines should assist the user:
(1) Read these rules. These rules acquaint the user with program
planning and promotion, how to sign out equipment and facilities,
the operating rules governing the facility, and how to schedule
channel time.
(2) Assign an access user's agreement. This document certifies that
you have read, understand, and will abide by the operating rules
and that you agree to be solely responsible for the content of any
programs you produce or schedule for cablecast.
B. Planning and production.
(1) Using SCTV facilities and equipment to produce your program.
(a) Get certified for the appropriate facilities or equipment, either
by taking SCTV sponsored training workshops or by
demonstrating experience.
(2) Follow the procedures for use set forth in these operating rules for
use of facilities or equipment.
(a) Portable or field production. At least 14 days before you plan to
begin taping, fill out a program planning proposal and a
portable equipment request form. After taping is completed,
hand in a facilities request form to schedule editing and
necessary post-production.
(b) Studio production. At least 21 days before you plan to use the
studio, fill out a program planning proposal and a facilities
request form. A crew sign-up sheet is also available. Assemble
a crew, get your script, talent, set, props, etc.
(3) Program planning proposal. This assists both you and the staff in
planning successful productions. The proposal should describe the
program idea, list the target audience, and outline production
needs. If this proposal is carefully crafted, the user will be more
likely to select the appropriate production format, facilities and
equipment needed to complete the program. The program planning
proposal will also determine if the program is public access or
community program, which affects production responsibilities and
copyright ownership, or fill out a channel time request form in
order to schedule cablecast times and dates.
C. Scheduling a prerecorded tape for cablecast.
(1) Fill out a prerecorded channel time request form.
(2) Confirm your cablecast date and time and bring in the tape.
§ 219-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-6
1:77
§ 219-7. Eligibility to use facilities and equipment.
D. Program promotion. Producing a program marks the halfway point
toward concluding your responsibility as a public access producer.
Equally important to planning and producing a show is promoting the
program. All SCTV users are asked to actively promote their program.
What follows are a few examples of how a producer can build an
audience:
(1) Tape a thirty-second promotion for your program.
(2) Schedule a message for the community bulletin board.
(3) Call your friends, relatives and associates who might be interested
in the program.
(4) Work with SCTV staff to develop a press release, particularly when
your program concerns a vital community issue.
(5) Posters and flyers are also a good way to promote a program.
A. Equipment and facilities are available to community members or
organizations on a first come, first served, nondiscriminatory basis,
provided that:
(1) All prospective users have successfully completed applicable SCTV
training and have been certified by SCTV in the use of equipment.
Alternatively, prospective users may be eligible if they can
demonstrate, on a standardized equipment use test, the basic
operation of the requested video equipment. If an access user has
not used the equipment or facilities for more than one year,
recertification may be required.
(2) The prospective user must present appropriate identification,
which shall be either:
(a) Driver's license;
(b) Social security card;
(c) Access user ID card; or
(d) Other identification establishing the identity of the prospective
user.
(3) Prospective users must complete all necessary facility and
equipment request forms and have those completed forms
reviewed and approved by SCTV staff.
B. Any community member who meets the above requirements may
request facility or equipment use. Community members include
residents of the community, representatives or employees of
organizations located within the community, and representatives or
employees of agencies which serve the community.
§ 219-6 SALEM CODE § 219-7
1:78
§ 219-8. Use of facilities and equipment.
C. Nonresidents formally enrolled in a student internship program at
SCTV may use the equipment and facilities.
D. Technical assistance.
(1) Successful public access programming depends on participation by
many active, trained volunteers who use video communication tools
in order to independently reflect their ideas. Because of this, and
limited staff time, SCTV generally cannot provide video production
services for community members or organizations, except in
special circumstances. Staff will assist community members in
assembling production crews from among trained and qualified
community volunteers. Community organizations planning to do
programs on a regular basis are encouraged to form a television
production committee, which SCTV will then train.
(2) Technical assistance and advice for the production of public access
programming will be provided on a first come, first served,
nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with these policies.
E. Scheduled facility and equipment time is not transferable. No
exchanges of time may be made between users.
A. General rules.
(1) Equipment is available on a first come, first served,
nondiscriminatory basis. If a conflict arises over priority of
equipment use, the equipment will be assigned to a public access
producer in the same way used to reconcile program scheduling
conflicts. (See § 219-10, Scheduling priorities.)
(2) Cancellation of equipment or facility reservations should be made
at least 24 hours in advance, except in the case of emergency.
Repeated last minute cancellations may result in loss of privileges.
(3) Confirmation of facility and equipment reservations must be made
48 hours in advance.
(4) Users should only identify themselves as public access producers,
not as employees or staff of SCTV or the Town of Salem.
(5) Additional materials for productions, beyond those supplied by
SCTV (i.e., sets, graphics, videotapes, other materials, etc.), must
be supplied by the user and must be removed after the production.
(6) Eligible users for any equipment or facilities will be loaned a
portable hard drive for files per program. Additional needs will be
considered on a case-by-case basis by the staff of SCTV.32
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 219-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-8
1:79
(7) Working tapes and files.33
(a) SCTV-owned working tapes and files will be held at the studio
for a maximum of 30 working days. After that time, if previous
arrangements have not been made, SCTV will contact the
public access producer and ask that person either to:
[1] Make arrangements to buy the tape or replace it with
approved tape stock;
[2] Dub the tape onto the producer's own videotapes;
[3] Schedule post-production sessions; or
[4] Bulk erase and recycle the work tapes.
(b) If the public access producer does not respond to these
requests after staff makes a reasonable attempt to contact the
producer, work tapes will be subject to recycling at the
discretion of staff.
(8) Individuals using SCTV equipment, or studio and post-production
facilities, will not change wiring, patch bays or components without
staff permission or supervision. No attempts should be made to
work on or repair equipment. Any damage caused in this manner
will be charged to the user. A loss of privileges will result from such
equipment abuse.
(9) Individuals using SCTV equipment should report any defects or
problems to the staff.
(10) Producers found to be misusing or abusing the equipment may be
asked to repeat training or testing and/or be subject to loss of
privileges.
(11)No food or drink shall be brought into the studio, control room, or
mobile van. Smoking is also prohibited in these areas.
(12) SCTV staff may waive certain of the equipment and facility rules at
its discretion.
B. Use of portable equipment.
(1) Reservations for equipment use may be made up to one month in
advance and must be made at least one week in advance.
Reservations can be made with staff either in person or by
telephone.
(2) Equipment may be borrowed for a maximum of 24 hours during the
week and 48 hours over the weekend. Longer loan periods must be
requested at the time the reservation is made and will be honored
at the discretion of staff.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 219-8 SALEM CODE § 219-8
1:80
(3) Equipment must be picked up and returned during staff hours.
Pickups and returns must be made at least 30 minutes before the
facility closes. On weekends, equipment must be picked up by
Friday at 4:30 p.m. and returned before 9:30 a.m. the following
Monday. Failure to return equipment when due may result in
suspension of user privileges.
(4) Persons holding equipment reservations must follow these
checkout and check-in procedures:
(a) Checkout.
[1] Show required identification to staff.
[2] Sign all required forms and equipment checklists.
[3] Assemble and test requested equipment, if directed by
staff.
(b) Check-in.
[1] Equipment must be returned on time.
[2] Any problems with equipment or damage should be noted
on the equipment checklist and brought to the staff's
attention.
[3] Both the user and the staff person checking in equipment
must initial the equipment user form, to confirm both that
the equipment has been returned and the condition in
which the equipment is returned.
(5) Users are responsible for loss or damage due to negligence or
abuse while the equipment is checked out to them.
(6) Users with equipment already checked out will not be allowed to
check out additional equipment unless special arrangements are
made with staff.
(7) Eligible users under the age of 18 who wish to borrow portable
equipment must be accompanied by a parent, guardian, or a
qualified adult access user who signs a release stating that the
adult accepts responsibility for the equipment and its use by the
minor.
(8) Only in special cases and with staff permission can users take
equipment outside of the community being served by this SCTV
facility.
C. Use of studio.
(1) In order to schedule the studio and control room, a community user
(and all crew members) must be certified for studio production.
§ 219-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-8
1:81
(2) A minimum of three weeks' or 21 clear days' notification for
scheduling of a studio production is required.
(3) All required formatting and facility request forms must be filled out
by the user and approved by staff before the studio will be
scheduled.
(4) Producers are entitled to a maximum of three hours per session
with a maximum of six hours per week in the studio, postproduction
or editing facilities. Scheduled studio time includes the
time needed to put up and break down the set.
(5) Users must show up on time for scheduled studio productions and
must have the studio and control room equipment and set put away
before the end of the scheduled time period. SCTV staff
recommends that users allow at least one hour before and after the
time needed to tape the actual production for set up and cleanup of
the studio. Additionally, staff recommends that users schedule time
within the scheduled studio time to brief the crew and talent on the
planned production.
(6) Scheduled studio productions will be cancelled if the production
crew does not show up within 30 minutes after the start of the
scheduled facility time.
(7) Users under the age of 18 who wish to schedule the studio or
participate in a studio production must have written permission
from their parent or guardian.
D. Use of editing and post-production facilities.
(1) In order to schedule and use the editing or post-production
facilities, a community user must be properly certified for such use.
(2) Requests for use of the SCTV post-production or editing equipment
shall be made at least 48 hours in advance, subject to discretion of
staff.
(3) All required forms for facility use must be completed before the
facility is scheduled.
(4) Users under the age of 18 who wish to schedule the editing and
post-production facilities must have written permission from their
parent or guardian.
(5) Producers are entitled to a maximum of three hours per session
with a maximum of six hours per week in the studio, postproduction
or editing facilities.
E. Waivers. The limitations and restrictions stated above may be waived by
SCTV staff pursuant to the following procedure:
§ 219-8 SALEM CODE § 219-8
1:82
§ 219-9. Program scheduling and cablecasting.
SCTV will attempt to honor all requests for channel time scheduling in
accordance with the following procedures. Subsection A applies to all
programs submitted for cablecast. Subsection B applies to local programs
produced at the SCTV facility. Subsection C applies to prerecorded
programming not produced at the SCTV facility. Any conflicts over program
scheduling will be settled based on the rules and scheduling priorities.
(1) An application in writing seeking a waiver of specific provisions
shall be filed at least three days before any limitation or restriction
has been exceeded.
(2) SCTV staff shall rule on the application based on the following:
(a) The limitation or restriction constitutes a practical difficulty.
(b) The purpose of public access programming on SCTV and the
interest of the community will be promoted by granting the
waiver.
A. General procedures.
(1) Scheduling.
(a) Requests for channel time shall be processed on a fair and
equitable basis. The appropriate channel time scheduling form
should be used to schedule a cablecast. An access user may
specify alternative dates and times for the initial request.
(b) Channel time scheduling requests must be submitted at least
four weeks prior to the desired cablecast date. At the
discretion of the program director, and if the desired time slot
is available, the four-week submission rule may be waived to
allow the timely cablecasting of newsworthy events.
(c) Except for live and series programming, channel time will
generally not be scheduled until a program is complete.
(d) If scheduling allows, a taped program may be repeated two
times during any weekly period, for a total of four cablecasts.
(e) Tapes scheduled for cablecasting must be brought to the staff
at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled cablecast.
(2) Cablecasting requirements.
(a) Label. Before cablecasting, all programs must be clearly
labeled with the following information:
[1] Title of program.
[2] Cablecast date.
§ 219-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-9
1:83
[3] Producer's name.
[4] Length of program.
[5] Audio specifications (Channel 1 or Channel 2).
[6] In-cue and out-cue.
(b) Technical standards.
[1] Screening. SCTV staff will screen the submitted tape only
for the purpose of determining whether it meets minimum
quality standards for cablecast. Because most tapes are
produced by nonprofessional users, tapes are not expected
to meet regular TV broadcast standards. For example,
problems with color, contrast, etc., which may be cause for
rejection by a broadcast TV station will not usually cause
rejection by the SCTV staff.
[2] Videotape format. All videotapes supplied for cablecast
must be in the following formats:
[a] Audio quality of all videotapes will be constant and of
sufficient level to permit adequate reproduction on
SCTV transmission equipment.
[b] If SCTV staff determines that an abnormal number of
production problems exist with the tape, a producer
may be asked to retrain.
[3] Series scheduling.
[a] Regularly scheduled series time slots will be allocated
at the discretion of SCTV staff, provided that ample
time remains available for other community
programming requests.
[b] Series will be allowed for a maximum of six programs,
after which reapplication will be required.
Reapplication will be considered with respect to other
scheduling demands.
[c] A series time slot will be allocated for new series only
if:
[i] The producer has completed two tape
programmings prior to application; or
[ii] The producer has successfully produced two live
programs in the produced series.
[d] If a series producer regularly fails to have the
program ready for scheduled cablecast, the SCTV staff
§ 219-9 SALEM CODE § 219-9
1:84
may, at its discretion, assign the time slot to other
users.
B. Scheduling programs produced locally.
(1) The channel time request form must be filled out at least two weeks
prior to the desired cablecast date.
(2) Leader and trailer.
(a) The beginning of all cablecast programs must have a standard
format in the following order:
[1] Thirty seconds of color bars, with audio test tone at zero
DB;
[2] Ten seconds of standard slate; and
[3] Ten seconds of academy leader (countdown 10-2, with two
seconds of black).
(b) The end of a cablecast program must have a standard format in
the following order:
[1] Appropriate production credits;
[2] SCTV credit ("Produced at SCTV Studio");
[3] Copyright information (Producer's name and date); and
[4] Sixty seconds of standard black.
(3) Program credit for underwriting and grants of locally produced
programs.
(a) Underwriting for programs must be for goods, services, in-kind
contributions and/or donations that aid in developing or
improving programs.
(b) Credit for underwriting should be as follows: "This program
was made possible through a grant by _______________" or
"Goods and services used in this program were contributed by
_______________."
(c) Only the name of the underwriter or donor, not the product,
service, or contribution, can be listed in the credit. Such
credits can only be shown before and after the program.
(d) Verbal credit to donors and underwriters during a program is
not permitted.
(e) SCTV credit must be included in the closing credits.
§ 219-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-9
1:85
§ 219-10. Scheduling priorities.
Public access channel and facility time are provided on a first come, first
served, nondiscriminatory basis to any resident, organization or any other
community user filing a request, in accordance with the operating rules.
It should be understood, however, that since this is a shared community
resource, specific channel time and equipment use requests cannot always
be guaranteed. Moreover, channel capacity for public access is itself subject
to use of channel capacity for governmental access. Governmental access
programming has priority over public access programming.
(f) SCTV staff must be informed, in advance, of any such
underwriting and consulted about the proper format for
underwriting credit.
C. Scheduling prerecorded material.
(1) Prerecorded material is programming not produced at the SCTV
facility. Such programs will only be scheduled at the request of a
community user.
(2) A completed prerecorded channel time request form shall be
submitted at least four weeks prior to the desired cablecast date.
(3) The users are responsible for picking up their tapes within 15 days
after the last cablecast.
(4) After 30 days, SCTV assumes no responsibility for tapes left on the
premises.
A. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRST-TIME USER — An individual or organization who or which has
not used either the equipment, facilities or channel time during the
preceding 12 months.
INDIVIDUAL USER — Any individual who has scheduled equipment,
facilities or channel time in his/her own name.
ORGANIZATIONAL USER — Any group or organization which has
scheduled equipment, facilities or channel time in its name. An
organizational user is subject to the same weekly facility and channel
limitations as individual users, whether one or several book time in the
name of their organization.
REGULAR USER — An individual or organization who or which has
used either the equipment, facilities or channel on two or more
occasions in the four-week period prior to the current request for
scheduling. Regular users also include those who have used the
facilities or channel on a monthly basis for at least six months prior to
the current request for such use.
§ 219-9 SALEM CODE § 219-10
1:86
§ 219-11. Program content.
Public access is a medium for community expression and free speech. No
individual will be denied the use of public access on the basis of race, sex,
age, physical disability, religion or political belief.
SCHEDULING CONFLICTS — When identical requests are received by
staff during the same working day.
B. Equipment, facilities or channel time scheduling conflicts.
(1) Scheduling conflicts. In general, equipment, facility and channel
time requests will be scheduled on a first come, first served,
nondiscriminatory basis. In the case of scheduling conflicts, the
following criteria, in order, will be used:
(a) User who have not been scheduled for their preference of
channel time or facilities/equipment use on two previous
requests shall be given scheduling priority on their next
request.
(b) First-time users shall have priority over regular users.
(c) Facility use for tape dubbing, practice, or any other personal
purposes shall have the lowest priority and may be bumped
from a requested time slot if facilities are needed for
programming.
(d) If none of the above apply, staff may resolve the conflict at its
discretion.
(2) All grievances or unresolved conflicts will be settled by the
grievance procedure outlined in these rules.
A. Program content.
(1) SCTV requires access users to accept full responsibility for
program content. This means that access users, alone, are
accountable for what they communicate. Therefore, access users
should become familiar with local and federal laws and any other
regulations that apply to program content and its cablecast.
Obscene programming is prohibited from broadcast on public
access programming, and the other types of programming
described below should not be shown on public access
programming:
(a) Obscene programming.
[1] For purposes of these rules, to determine whether
programming is obscene, the following test shall be
applied:
§ 219-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:87
[a] Whether the average person applying local community
standards would find that the work, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest;
[b] Whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by
applicable state law; and
[c] Whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
[2] Obscene programming is prohibited. The access
programmer must certify to SCTV that its programming
contains no obscene material.
(b) Indecent programming. For purposes of these rules, indecent
programming is programming that describes or depicts sexual
or excretory activities or organs in a patently offensive manner
as measured by contemporary community standards. The
access user or programmer should certify to the cable operator
that its programming contains no indecent material.
(c) Programming soliciting or promoting unlawful conduct. The
access user or programmer should certify to the cable operator
that its programming contains no material soliciting or
promoting unlawful conduct.
(d) Material which constitutes libel, slander, or invasion of privacy
or which might violate any other local, state or federal law.
(e) Programs containing material which violates copyright,
trademarks or service marks. Use of such material generally
requires obtaining appropriate rights from music licensing
organizations, publishers, representatives, copyright holders,
broadcast stations, networks and any other person as may be
necessary for cablecast. Users may be asked to furnish written
authorization for use of such materials.
(f) Program material that creates the immediate danger of
damage to property or injury to persons, or the substantial
obstruction of law enforcement or other governmental
functions or services, or the deprivation of a legal right of a
person by threat, threat of force or physical action, or the
creation of a public nuisance.
(g) The direct or indirect presentation of lotteries or lottery
information, except for announcements pertaining to statesponsored
lotteries.
(2) Public access programming is, by tradition, nonprofit and
noncommercial. The channel time and facilities are provided in
order to benefit the community. An alternative avenue for
§ 219-11 SALEM CODE § 219-11
1:88
expression of commercial, for-profit expression is provided for
under the leased access provisions of federal cable law. Leased
access is channel capacity to be set aside for commercial purposes.
Accordingly, programming which is commercial should be aired
on leased access channels. Therefore, access programs should not
contain the following:
(a) Advertising material designed to promote the sale of
commercial products, businesses, services, or individuals.
(b) Direct sales or provision of commercial products, businesses or
services during a program.
(c) Material which identifies any product, service, trademark or
brand name in a manner that is not reasonably related to the
noncommercial use of such in the program and which
promotes the commercial gain of such products, services,
trademarks or brand names.
(d) The direct solicitation of funds without first receiving
permission from SCTV.
(3) Labeling of sensitive material.
(a) If an access user makes a good faith determination that the
subject material in a program may offend some viewers and/or
may not be appropriate for children, SCTV requires that the
following announcement be added to the beginning of the
program: "The following program may contain sensitive
material. Viewer discretion is advised."
(b) At its discretion, SCTV may insert the following disclaimer
between programs: "The following program is not a production
of SCTV and does not reflect the views and opinions of SCTV or
its employees."
B. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations regarding
political and issue-oriented programs.
(1) FCC regulations applying to political candidates and issues do not
apply to public access. The two best known rules are the equal
opportunity or equal time rule, which applies to political
candidates, and the fairness doctrine (no longer in force), which
stated that a broadcast programmer must give time, not
necessarily equal time, to diverse sides of an issue. The FCC
personal attack rule also does not apply to public access.
(2) Political candidates and access.
(a) Since FCC regulations concerning equal time for political
candidates do not apply to public access programming, SCTV
places no restrictions on use of channels and facilities by
political candidates, other than those applying to normal and
§ 219-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-11
1:89
§ 219-12. Program ownership and rights.
Both the public access producer and SCTV have the following rights with
regard to programming produced using the facilities and equipment
provided by SCTV:
equitable use of channel scheduling and facility time. SCTV
specifically reserves the right to impose content neutral,
reasonable time, place and manner regulation on political
candidate access by appropriate scheduling.
(b) No paid advertising will be accepted on behalf of candidates
for public office or political parties on SCTV. This includes
advertising, promoting and/or opposing ballot issues by
supporting groups or lobbying organizations.
(3) Coverage of public affairs issues and access. Public access users
are under no legal obligation to show any viewpoint other than
their own. Community residents with diverse viewpoints are
encouraged to use public access to express those views.
A. SCTV program rights in public access programs produced using SCTV
equipment and facilities.
(1) To retain the edited master of the program in its tape library.
(2) To make duplications of the program for noncommercial
distribution, except where permission has been expressly denied in
advance. Producers will always be given graphic credit in the
videotape of such use.
(3) To cablecast the program as often as is deemed appropriate.
B. Public access produced program rights.
(1) Ownership of rights to all original material.
(2) To select a minimum of one program date and time for cablecast in
accordance with scheduling priorities.
(3) To book facility time in order to make one duplicate tape of the
program produced. Fees for additional duplication will be charged.
(4) To request that program master videotapes held by SCTV be
discontinued from cablecast or erased in the event that program
information becomes outdated or obsolete.
(5) To play or distribute the videotape for nonprofit purposes only,
provided that SCTV is given graphic credit within the videotape of
each cablecast date or play.
C. Videotape ownership.
§ 219-11 SALEM CODE § 219-12
1:90
§ 219-13. Community bulletin board announcements.
A text information service is available, free of charge, to nonprofit
organizations providing public service announcements and/or event
information to the community.
(1) SCTV videotapes. SCTV provides videotapes for use during training
and workshops and for working and for master tapes of programs
being produced with SCTV equipment. These videotapes remain
the property of SCTV.
(2) Videotapes for copies. Videotapes for making duplicate (dubs) of
program masters or any other tapes must be purchased or provided
by the individual or group making the dub.
D. Restrictions.
(1) Personal profit and commercial use.
(a) Individuals, community organizations or any other community
users may not use the program or any of its outtakes for
personal profit or gain without the express written permission
of SCTV.
(b) SCTV may require that a producer share such profits in order
to compensate for the facilities, equipment, tape supplies, and
staff time that were provided to the producer.
(c) Community users found to be using the facilities or equipment
for personal profit without prior permission will be subject to
loss of privileges.
(2) Other duplications. Other than the right to assign to SCTV, only the
program producer has ownership and duplication rights for each
program. Other individuals or organizations should make
duplication arrangements with the program producer, unless SCTV
has prior written authorization for such duplication from the
producer.
A. Procedure for placing community bulletin announcement.
(1) To place a message on the calendar, complete the community
calendar request form and return by mail or bring in person to
SCTV studio.
(2) Message requests should be submitted two weeks prior to the
desired starting date.
(3) Messages will run at least one week prior to a scheduled event.
Messages will be removed the morning after the event has
occurred or the first workday thereafter.
§ 219-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-13
1:91
§ 219-14. Grievances.
(4) General messages that do not pertain to a specific event will be
shown as long as possible, depending upon space available. In
order for the message to be renewed, a request must be refiled.
(5) No solicitation of funds nor event price information may be given.
Phone numbers for the purpose of obtaining further information
are permitted.
(6) All other rules regarding limitations on content apply to messages
in cablecast.
A. Informal.
(1) Any grievance regarding assignment of workshop space, channel
time allocation, equipment and studio use, or any other matter
regarding SCTV facilities should first be discussed with the
program director or applicable staff person.
(2) If that consultation does not result in an acceptable solution, a
formal grievance may be filed pursuant to the formal grievance
procedure described below.
B. Formal.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision enforcing or interpreting these
procedures who is unable to resolve that grievance by the informal
procedure outlined above may file a written appeal to the Board of
Selectmen describing the nature of the grievance and describing
what procedure and operating rules are implicated by the appeal.
The Board of Selectmen may, at its discretion, hear the appeal
under this article or designate that the appeal be heard by another
authority. The Board shall have discretion to appoint an ad hoc
hearing authority or designate that the appeal be heard by a
standing or already constituted authority.
(2) The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall, within 30 days of
receipt of such a writing, hold a hearing on the grievance. The
program director of SCTV shall be provided a copy of the written
grievance and shall present the position of SCTV at the hearing.
(a) No formal rules of evidence or procedure shall be required for
such a hearing, but the Board of Selectmen or its designee
shall hear all evidence it deems relevant and shall permit both
parties to address the issues raised by the grievance.
(b) The Board or its designee may consider testimonial,
documentary or other types of evidence.
(c) Within 30 days of the close of such a hearing, the Board of
Selectmen or its designee shall issue a writing deciding the
grievance.
§ 219-13 SALEM CODE § 219-14
1:92
§ 219-15. Public record.
SCTV will maintain a complete public record of all persons, groups or
organizations requesting the use of channel time facilities and/or
equipment. These records will be made available to the public for inspection
during normal business hours. All records will be kept a minimum of two
years. Access to these records shall be governed by RSA 91-A, the New
Hampshire Right-to-Know Law.
[1] The decision of the Board or its designee shall be based on
the evidence submitted to it at the hearing.
[2] The decision may grant the grievance, deny the grievance,
or neither grant nor deny the grievance but modify the
interpretation and actions of SCTV in interpreting or
enforcing the operating rules.
(d) The decision shall remand the matter to the SCTV program
director for action consistent with the decision of the Board of
Selectmen or its designee on the grievance.
§ 219-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 219-15
1:93
Chapter 226
COMMONS, PLAYGROUNDS AND CEMETERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Advisory Committee — See Ch.
131.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 359.
§ 219-15 SALEM CODE § 219-15
1:94
ARTICLE I
Pine Grove Cemetery
[Adopted by the 1907 Town Meeting (Ch. 22 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 226-1. Holding and expenditure of funds.
§ 226-2. Powers and duties of Cemetery Board of Trustees.
Said Trustees shall:
A. All funds belonging to and hereafter received by the Town for the care,
maintenance, beautifying or improvement in any way of Pine Grove
Cemetery in the Town of Salem shall be held by the Town Treasurer.
B. The income and money from such sums shall be laid out or expended
under the direction of the Trustees according to the provisions of the
trust or trusts under which said money is received.
A. Have the entire management of said cemetery.
B. Be empowered to sell lots, wood or surplus rocks or stones from said
cemetery at public or private sale as they may deem advisable.
C. Keep a strict account of all money received and disbursed, for whatever
purpose, and render their report to the Town annually.
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-2
1:95

ARTICLE II
Restrictions on Conduct
[Adopted by the 1978 Town Meeting (Ch. 161 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 226-3. Restrictions established.
No person within any Town common, playground or cemetery shall:
§ 226-4. Licensing provisions.
The Selectmen, in issuing licenses hereunder, may establish reasonable
license fees and may also impose such conditions as they deem reasonably
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and property.
§ 226-5. Violations and penalties.34
Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town of Salem
website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established pursuant
to RSA 31:39, III.
A. Remove, disturb, cut, break, deface, defile, or damage any building,
structure, headstone, fence, tree, bush, plant, turf, or other property.
B. Conduct or participate in a parade or public meeting without a license
from the Board of Selectmen or its designee.
C. Engage in business, or sell or expose for sale any goods or
merchandise, or post or display any sign, placard or advertising device
without a license from the Selectmen or their designee.
D. Engage in organized sports or games without a license from the
Selectmen or their designee.
E. Molest others or interfere with others' peaceful use of such property.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 226-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-5
1:97
Chapter 247
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 310.
§ 226-5 SALEM CODE § 226-5
1:98
ARTICLE I
Actions on Complaints
[Adopted by the 1981 Town Meeting (Ch. 179, Art. I, of the 1995
Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 247-1. Hearing; order to provide police attendance.
Upon complaint to the Board of Selectmen by five citizens disturbed by
the excessive noise and disorder of the patrons and on the premises of a
nearby commercial public entertainment or amusement establishment, the
Selectmen shall conduct a hearing upon proper notice to the proprietor and/
or owner of said establishment, at which the Selectmen shall determine
whether or not the patrons of the establishment are unreasonably
disturbing its neighbors. If the Selectmen shall determine that the patrons
of the establishment are unnecessarily disturbing its neighbors, they may
require the proprietor to procure and pay for police attendance on the
premises for the purpose of maintaining peace, order and quiet during
appropriate hours.
§ 247-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-1
1:99
Chapter 252
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210. Stormwater management — See Ch. 417.
§ 247-1 SALEM CODE § 247-1
1:100
ARTICLE I
Land Disturbance
[Adopted 11-15-1993 (Ch. 182 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 252-1. General purpose and authority.
Chapter 155-E of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated requires
that, with several exceptions, all mining and excavation operations in the
state obtain prior approval and permit from the local municipality in which
the operation is to occur. The purpose of the statute and of these excavation
regulations is to minimize safety hazards created by open excavations; to
safeguard the public health and welfare; to preserve our natural assets
of soil, water, forests and wildlife; to maintain aesthetic features of our
environment; to prevent land and water pollution; and to promote soil
stabilization.
§ 252-2. Definitions.
§ 252-3. Permit required.
All excavation areas require a permit except lawful existing excavations,
stationary manufacturing plants, public highway excavations, and other
exceptions as allowed in RSA 155-E:2 and 155-E:2-A.
§ 252-4. Abandoned excavations.
A. Additional relevant definitions are contained in RSA 155-E, as
amended, and are made part of these regulations.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EARTH — Sand, gravel, rock, soil or construction aggregate produced
by quarrying, crushing or any other mining activity or such other
naturally occurring unconsolidated materials that normally mask the
bedrock.
EXCAVATION — A land area which is used, or has been used, for
commercial taking of earth, including all slopes. Excavations shall be
considered commercial if earth material is sold or resold on or off
the excavation site. In addition, an excavation shall be considered
commercial if earth materials are transported to other land whose
ownership is different than the ownership of the land from which the
earth was excavated.
EXCAVATION AREA — The area within an excavation site where
excavation has occurred or is eligible to occur under the provisions of
RSA 155-E and these regulations.
EXCAVATION SITE — Any area of contiguous land in common
ownership upon which excavation takes place.
REGULATOR — The Town of Salem Planning Board.
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-4
1:101
§ 252-5. Application for permit.
Except as provided for in § 252-3, any owner/operator subject to RSA 155-E
shall, prior to excavation, apply to the Planning Board for a permit for
excavation and submit a reclamation plan. The applicant shall also provide
a copy of the application to the Town of Salem's Conservation Commission
for comments. The permit application shall be signed and dated by the
applicant, and the excavation plan shall contain the applicable information
requested in the Excavation Application Checklist (see Appendix A).35
A. The permit and zoning exemptions under § 252-3 shall not apply to any
abandoned excavations as defined below.
(1) Any excavation, except for stationary manufacturing plants, for
which the affected area has not been brought into complete
compliance with the reclamation standards of these regulations
(§§ 252-6 and 252-8) shall be deemed abandoned if:
(a) No earth material of sufficient weight or volume to be
commercially useful has been removed from the site during
any two-year period; the regulator may extend the two-year
period if the owner/operator submits an acceptable timetable
for reclamation to the regulator and posts a performance
guarantee in a form and amount prescribed by the regulator
sufficient to cover the costs of reclamation;
(b) The excavation site is still in use but does not conform to the
site reclamation requirements of §§ 252-6 and 252-8 of these
regulations, or the owner/operator has not submitted an
acceptable reclamation timetable to the regulator and posted a
performance guarantee sufficient to cover the costs of
reclamation; or
(c) The owner/operator of the excavation has neither secured a
permit pursuant to these regulations nor filed a report of an
existing excavation with the Town of Salem by August 4, 1991.
(2) The regulator, after notice and hearing pursuant to RSA 155-E:7,
may order, in writing, the owner of any land containing an
abandoned excavation to either file an acceptable reclamation
timetable and performance guarantee within a stated reasonable
time by the regulator to do so or complete the reclamation in
accordance with these regulations within one year of notification.
B. Failure to complete said reclamation within the prescribed time period
may result in the regulator requesting the Board of Selectmen to
complete the reclamation at the expense of the Town. The Town's costs
shall constitute an assessment against the owner and shall create a lien
against the real estate on which the excavation is located. Such
assessment and lien may be enforced and collected in the same manner
as provided for real estate taxes.
§ 252-4 SALEM CODE § 252-5
1:102
Waiver requests pertaining to these regulations may be submitted in writing
to the regulator in accordance with § 252-16. All expenses for preparation
of all plans, maps, and reports accompanying the application shall be borne
by the applicant.
§ 252-6. Additional permit requirements.
§ 252-7. Operational standards.
A. Copies of related permit approvals and other documents pertinent to
the excavation proposal, such as the Water Division of the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (RSA 485-A:17),
New Hampshire Wetlands Bureau (RSA 482-A), stump disposal, New
Hampshire Department of Transportation (access permit, RSA 236:9
through 236:14), and any other permits required by state or federal
regulations, shall be submitted, including such other information as the
regulator may reasonably require. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 11-2-2015]
B. Hauling information shall be submitted, including routes to be utilized
and the type and weight of motor vehicles involved, and the frequency
and schedule of operations of such vehicles shall be provided to the
regulator prior to the issuance of an excavation permit. The regulator
may require modifications to such plans and/or may place conditions
upon such operations, depending on surrounding land uses and road
conditions. The regulator reserves the right to conduct a traffic study at
the applicant's expense to ensure that public safety, neighborhood
compatibility and road capacity and condition have been properly
considered and addressed in the hauling plan.
A. Size and reclamation time limit on new excavations. No excavation of a
new area shall exceed five acres in size at any one time. Any permitted
excavation shall be reclaimed according to the approved application
within one year after the permit expiration date. If reclamation of the
site is not completed within one year after the permit expiration date,
the Town may declare part or all of the performance guarantee forfeited
and use these moneys to reclaim the site.
A. No excavation covered under RSA 155-E shall be permitted closer than
50 feet to the boundary of a disapproving abutter. If written
concurrence is received from an abutter, then the boundary setback
shall be 10 feet.
B. No excavation covered under RSA 155-E shall be permitted closer than
150 feet to an existing dwelling or to a dwelling for which a building
permit has been issued at the time the excavation is begun.
C. No excavation shall be permitted within 75 feet of any great pond,
navigable river, or any other standing body of water 10 acres or more in
35.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this article.
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-7
1:103
area or within 25 feet of any other perennial stream, river, or brook (as
delineated on United States Geological Survey maps), or any naturally
occurring standing body of water of less than 10 acres, prime wetlands
as designated in accordance with RSA 482-A:15, I, or any other wetland
greater than five acres in area as defined by the New Hampshire
Wetlands Bureau. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
D. No excavation shall be permitted below road level within 50 feet of the
right-of-way of any public highway as defined in RSA 229:1 unless such
excavation is for the purpose of said highway.
E. Vegetation shall be maintained or provided within the buffer areas
required by Subsections A, B and C.
F. Appropriate erosion, sedimentation, air and water quality measures
shall be integrated into the excavation process. Excavations shall
comply with the grading, drainage, and erosion and sediment control
provisions of the Town's Subdivision Regulations.
G. Where the depth of excavation will exceed 15 feet and temporary slopes
will exceed 1:1 in grade, every reasonable effort shall be made to warn
of danger and/or limit access to the site. In addition, in accordance with
RSA 31:41-b, the regulator may require removal, stabilization, or
fencing of such hazardous embankments, for the protection of the
health and safety of the public.
H. Excavation practices which result in siltation in streams or degradation
of any water supplies are prohibited.
I. Topsoil shall be stripped from the excavation area and stockpiled for
use in subsequent reclamation of the site. It shall be protected from
erosion (e.g., by seeding, covering, or other acceptable practices). No
topsoil shall be removed from the site without specific approval from
the regulator.
J. All temporary structures required during excavation operations shall be
removed from the site within 30 days after such operations cease.
K. All vehicles transporting excavated material shall utilize adequate
covering and/or sideboards to prevent dust and spillage when loaded.
L. No fuels, lubricants or other toxic or polluting chemicals shall be stored
on site unless in compliance with state and federal laws or rules
pertaining to fuels and lubricants or other toxic or polluting chemicals.
M. Prior to the stripping of topsoil or removal of stumps or other material
from any land area that has not yet been excavated, the excavator shall
file a reclamation bond or other performance surety, as prescribed by
the regulator, sufficient to cover the cost of site reclamation.
N. Access roads leading to the excavation site shall intersect existing
streets and roads at locations that have been duly approved by state or
§ 252-7 SALEM CODE § 252-7
1:104
§ 252-8. Site reclamation standards.
Within 12 months after the expiration date of a permit issued under these
regulations, or of the completion of any excavation, whether subject to
permit or not (whichever occurs first), the owner of the excavated land shall
have completed the reclamation of the affected area(s). With the exception
of those excavations associated with stationary manufacturing plants, the
following minimum standards must be met as part of the reclamation:
local officials and in a manner that will not endanger the safety of
highway users and local residents. The provisions of RSA 236:13 and
236:14 (highway access) shall be adhered to by the applicant and shall
be shown on the excavation plan.
O. Permit approval shall be conditional on compliance by the applicant
with street and highway regulations promulgated by federal, state and
local units.
P. No excavation shall substantially damage any aquifer identified on
mapping by the U.S. Geological Survey.
Q. The applicant shall be responsible for a proportionate share of
refurbishing existing Town roads which access the excavation site and
for the repair of Town-maintained roads which are damaged as a result
of hauling earth from the site. The regulator may require these costs to
be part of the performance guarantee.
R. No solid and/or hazardous waste, septage, dredge spoils, or organic
waste and debris shall be disposed of on the excavation site unless
specifically authorized and/or permitted by the appropriate federal,
state and local authority(ies).
S. The applicable state statutes and regulations pertaining to forest
practice and timber harvesting shall apply to the removal of vegetative
cover at excavation sites.
T. The regulator shall approve the hours of operation. Specified days (e.g.,
Sundays and state and/or federal holidays) shall be restricted for
operation by the regulator. Hours of operation, including any machinery
use, other than those stipulated may be allowed if specifically
authorized by the regulator.
U. Excavation operations shall be set back at least 40 feet from wetlands
as defined in Chapter 490, Zoning, and it must be demonstrated that no
sedimentation of the wetlands will occur as a result of the excavation.
The regulator shall have the authority to require greater wetlands
setbacks in situations where it can be demonstrated that such setbacks
are necessary.
A. Reclaimed slopes shall blend with the surrounding terrain and shall not
be abrupt.
§ 252-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:105
§ 252-9. Prohibited projects.
The regulator shall not grant a permit under the following conditions:
B. All debris, stumps, boulders, etc., shall be lawfully disposed of in a
manner acceptable to the regulator or its designee.
C. Ground levels and grades shall be established as shown on the
approved reclamation plan as soon as practical during site excavation,
but not later than one year after excavation has been completed.
D. The responsible party shall not be released from its performance
commitment (performance guarantee) until the regulator certifies
compliance with all terms of the excavation plan and the reclamation
plan.
E. Any excavated area of five contiguous acres or more which is either
fully excavated per the approved plan (excluding bedrock) or from
which no earth materials have been removed for a two-year period shall
be reclaimed in accordance with § 252-6 and this section within one
year following such full excavation or two-year period, regardless of
whether other excavation is occurring on adjacent land in contiguous
ownership.
F. The regulator may require the elimination of any standing bodies of
water created in the excavation project that may constitute a hazard to
health and safety.
G. Upon completing the reclamation, the topography of the land shall be
left so that water draining from the site leaves the property at the
original, natural drainage points and in the natural proportions of flow.
A. Where the excavation would violate the operational standards of
§ 252-7 or the reclamation provisions of §§ 252-6 and 252-8.
B. Where existing visual barriers would be removed, except to provide
access to the excavation.
C. Where the excavation would substantially damage a known aquifer, so
designated by the U.S. Geological Survey in the report titled
"Geohydrology and Water Quality of Stratified-Drift Aquifers in the
Lower Merrimack and Coastal River Basins, Southeastern New
Hampshire, 1992."
D. For excavation within 150 feet of an existing dwelling or a dwelling for
which a building permit has been issued at the time the excavation is
begun.
E. Where the excavation is not permitted by zoning or other applicable
ordinances, unless the application is approved by variance or the
special exception procedure contained in RSA 155-E:4, III.
§ 252-8 SALEM CODE § 252-9
1:106
§ 252-10. Application for amendment.
When the scope of a project for which an excavation permit has been issued
is proposed to be altered so as to affect either the size or location of the
excavation, the rate of removal or the plan for reclamation, the owner
shall submit an application for amendment of his excavation permit. The
amended application shall be subject to approval in the same manner as
provided for an excavation permit.
§ 252-11. Hearing.
Prior to the regulator approving an application for a permit or an
application for an amended permit, a public hearing shall be held within 30
days of receipt of a completed application. A notice of said hearing shall be
sent to all abutters and shall specify the grounds for the hearing as well
as the date, time and place. At least 14 days' notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the
Town, and legal notice thereof shall also be posted in at least three public
places in the Town; the 14 days shall not include the day of publication
or the day of the meeting but shall include any Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays within said period. Within 20 days of said hearing or any
continuation thereof, the Planning Board shall issue a written decision
approving or disapproving the application, giving reasons for disapproval.
§ 252-12. Issuance of permit.
If the regulator, after public hearing, approves the application for a permit
and determines it is not prohibited by these regulations, it shall grant
the excavation permit upon the posting of a performance guarantee in
the amount determined by the regulator to be sufficient to guarantee
compliance with the permit. The performance guarantee shall be for a
reasonable time period determined by the regulator. A copy of the permit
shall be prominently posted at the excavation site and the principal access
thereto. A permit shall not be assigned or transferred without the prior
written consent of the regulator. Unless otherwise specifically decided by
the regulator, a permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance. The regulator may include in a permit such reasonable
conditions as are consistent with the purpose of RSA 155-E and these
regulations and may include excavation permit requirements which are
more stringent than the standards set forth in RSA 155-E, including the
provision of visual barriers to the excavation. A permit fee in an amount
determined by the regulator for application plan review and annual
compliance review, by the regulator or its designated agent, shall be
assessed to the applicant upon application for permit. In addition, fees may
be required for the municipality's designated engineer or other agents of
the regulator to periodically conduct required studies or field reviews at
F. Where an excavation is proposed below road level within 50 feet of any
highway right-of-way unless such excavation is for the purpose of said
highway.
§ 252-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-12
1:107
the excavation site to ensure compliance with the approved excavation and
reclamation plans.
§ 252-13. Bonding.
The regulator shall establish the amount of a performance guarantee prior
to the issuance of the excavation permit. The performance guarantee
amount shall be reasonably sufficient to guarantee compliance with the
restoration in compliance with §§ 252-6 and 252-8. The guarantee
requirements shall be based on the acreage of the project or approved
phases and the estimated per acre restoration costs. The performance
guarantee will be returned to the applicant when restoration work has been
completed and a final satisfactory site inspection has been conducted by the
regulator or its designee.
§ 252-14. Appeals.
If the regulator disapproves or approves an application for an excavation
permit or an application for an amended permit, any interested person
affected by such decision may appeal to the regulator for a rehearing on
such decision or any matter determined thereby. The motion for rehearing
shall fully specify every ground upon which it is alleged that the decision or
order complained of is unlawful or unreasonable, and said appeal shall be
filed within 10 days of the date of the decision appealed from. The regulator
shall either grant or deny the request for rehearing within 10 days, and if
the request is granted, a rehearing shall be scheduled within 30 days. Any
person affected by the regulator's decision on a motion for rehearing may
appeal in accordance with the procedures specified in RSA 677.
§ 252-15. Enforcement.
A. The regulator or its duly authorized agent may suspend or revoke the
permit of any person who has violated any provision of his permit or
these regulations or made a material misstatement in the application
upon which his permit was granted. Such suspension or revocation
shall be subject to a motion for rehearing thereon and appeal in
accordance with § 252-14.
B. Fines, penalties and remedies for violations of this regulation shall be
the same as for violations of RSA Title LXIV, as stated in RSA 676:15,
676:17, 676:17-a and 676:17-b. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 11-2-2015]
C. The regulator or its duly authorized agent(s) will conduct site
inspections to verify permit compliance on an annual basis, unless a
more frequent site visitation is necessary due to special characteristics
of the excavation or restoration plans. To ascertain if there is
compliance with this regulation, a permit issued hereunder or an order
issued hereunder, the regulator or its duly authorized agent(s) may
enter upon any land on which there is reason to believe an excavation is
being conducted or has been conducted since August 24, 1979.
§ 252-12 SALEM CODE § 252-15
1:108
§ 252-16. Waivers.
The regulator, upon application and following a public hearing, may grant
a waiver in writing in cases where, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and
the waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations
(except as prohibited by RSA 155-E). The written decision shall state
specifically what standards, if any, are being relaxed and include reasonable
alternative conditions or standards. The regulator's decision on any waiver
request may be appealed in accordance with § 252-14.
D. Where these regulations are in conflict with other ordinances,
regulations or laws, the more stringent shall apply.
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-16
1:109

ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 2-26-2018]
§ 252-17. General purpose and authority.
Per the Town of Salem, New Hampshire, Board of Selectmen, a person
shall not disturb, excavate, or open the ground or pavement in any street,
highway, sidewalk, or within the Town right-of-way, without first obtaining
authorization from the Municipal Services Department, Engineering
Division. Street opening permits shall be issued on an application form
provided by the Town.
§ 252-18. Permit.
All applications for a permit to excavate in, or open, a public right-ofway
shall include, for each permit applied for, the fees listed in general
permit conditions and construction requirements. The Municipal Services
Department is authorized to establish and publish rules, regulations, and
procedures, including general permit conditions and construction
requirements related to street excavation permits, and to prescribe the
forms necessary for the management and operation of the excavation
permit programs under this Code. These rules, regulations, and procedures
shall be subject to review and approval by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 252-19. Permit requirements.
Permit requirements are as follows:
§ 252-20. Violations and penalties.
Persons who operate without a permit or violate the provisions of any
permit required by this article shall be subject to the penalty outlined
in general permit conditions and construction requirements. If the
Engineering Division determines that an excavation is not being carried out
in accordance with the requirements, a written notice will be issued to the
persons or business entities in violation. The written notice will generally
contain pertinent information, including excavation location, violation, and
any applicable penalties assessed, including right to excavate in the Town.
A. Completed application.
B. Required bonding and insurance on file with Town.
C. Proposed traffic control plan.
D. Work zone photos with premarks.
E. Valid Dig Safe number.
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-21
1:111
§ 252-21. Protection of streets.
Per Article 36 of the 1990 Annual Town Meeting: to prohibit excavation,
including utility cuts, within the traveled way of any newly reconstructed
roadway of the Town for a period of five years from such reconstruction,
except for emergency excavation which the Board of Selectmen determines
to be in the interest of public health and safety.
§ 252-22. Standard construction requirements.
A. In an effort to protect the Town's investment in its infrastructure,
excavations in newly constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or
overlaid pavements within the public right-of-way or on Town property,
no excavation shall occur under the following:
(1) For newly reconstructed roads, the moratorium period shall be five
years from such reconstruction.
(2) For newly milled and overlaid roads, the moratorium period shall
be three winters from such mill and overlay.
B. The Town through its Board of Selectmen may grant waivers under the
following but not limited to:
(1) Excavations to remedy a public emergency or a situation that
creates an imminent threat to the public safety, health, or welfare.
(2) Repair or modification to prevent interruption of essential utility
services where no reasonable alternatives are available to avoid
excavation in new pavements.
(3) Relocation work that is mandated by state or federal legislation.
(4) Utility services for new development, buildings, or parcels without
existing utility services where no other reasonable means of
providing services exists or which are identified in utility master
plans as determined by the Engineering Division.
(5) Excavations within streets under moratorium where reconstruction
is needed due to failure of original pavement.
C. In all of the above, if warranted and allowed, the applicant will pay an
additional pavement life reduction factor. This is calculated by the
following:
(1) Street pavement less than two years old: three times the street
damage charge.
(2) Street pavement two to five years old: two times street damage
charge; or
D. The Board of Selectmen as recommended by Municipal Services may
require full lane width mill and overlay for any trench that falls into this
category.
§ 252-21 SALEM CODE § 252-22
1:112
A. Pavement cutting. All bituminous concrete or concrete pavements shall
be cut before any excavation is started. The pavement shall be neatly
and uniformly saw cut at each side of all trenches to ensure against
unnecessary damage to pavement. An acceptable alternative to saw
cutting is cold planing.
B. Excavation. Excavation shall be performed in a manner as to produce
the minimum possible width of disturbance. Excavation and handling of
materials shall be performed in a manner as to minimize the possibility
of cave-ins. Sheeting and shoring shall be used in accordance with
OSHA requirements to prevent such undermining. Pavement projecting
over undermined areas shall be saw cut square and removed. No
opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center line
of the street before the excavated side of the street is made passable to
traffic. Where a trench crosses a street, steel plates capable of bridging
the trench and supporting traffic may be used.
C. Backfill.
(1) Backfill material may consist of material excavated during the
course of construction if dry, but excluding pieces of pavement,
frozen material, organic matter, topsoil, muck, peat, clay, rocks
larger than six inches, or any other deleterious material that is
deemed unacceptable by the Engineering Division. If considered
unsuitable for backfill, excavated material shall be replaced with
granular backfill as specified in the "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction," State of New Hampshire,
Department of Transportation (Sand-NHDOT 209.3 Gravel-NHDOT
209.4).
(2) Excavated material shall be replaced or backfilled in layers or
courses not to exceed 12 inches in compacted thickness; and shall
be compacted at or near optimum moisture content using
pneumatic tampers, vibratory compactors or other approved
means. Select materials immediately under the pavement (gravels
and processed gravels or reclaimed asphalt) shall be replaced in
kind or to a minimum depth of 12 inches of gravel and four inches
of crushed gravel meeting NHDOT Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction (Gravel NHDOT 304.2, Crushed
Gravel 304.3).
D. Compaction. All excavated materials shall be compacted to a minimum
of 95% of the optimum density (ASTM 1557 Method D). A compaction
test performed by a certified material testing laboratory may be
required. If required, the compaction test must be performed prior to
paving and the results submitted to the Engineering Division. If a
trench exceeds 100 feet in length, compaction tests shall be required
every 100 feet prior to paving.
§ 252-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-22
1:113
E. Work zone maintenance. The roadway shall be periodically swept to
remove materials from the traveled way. The roadway shall be cleaned
of all foreign materials at the end of each working day.
F. Trench restoration. A typical section for permanent pavement repair is
attached as a reference. In general these guidelines will be followed
accordingly with the Engineering Division making the final
determination on any variance in consideration of the application.
G. Bituminous trench patch. A temporary patch shall be placed using one
of the following methods:
(1) Temporary patch method one. Bituminous concrete binder course
will be brought to the surface grade at a minimum depth of 2 1/2
inches. This temporary patch will be maintained as necessary by
the contractor and allowed to remain in place for a minimum of 30
days but not more than 60 days (stabilization period). At the end of
the stabilization period the temporary patch will be cut out and the
trench trimmed with neat straight cuts and square corners a
minimum distance of 12 inches onto undisturbed material beyond
the limits of the temporary patch area or of the observed
settlement area, whichever is greater. The contractor will add or
remove crushed gravel and compact, if necessary.
(2) Temporary patch method two. The gravels shall be brought to the
appropriate grade and bituminous concrete binder course brought
to the surface grade. This temporary patch will be maintained as
necessary by the contractor and allowed to remain in place for a
minimum of 30 days but not more than 60 days (the stabilization
period). At the end of the stabilization period the temporary patch
will be milled to the depth of 1 1/2 inches a minimum distance of 12
inches onto undisturbed material beyond the limits of the
temporary patch area or of the observed settlement area,
whichever is greater.
H. Permanent patch shall be installed as follows:
(1) Temporary patch and existing pavement shall be removed in a
manner that results in no damage to adjacent pavement and shall
be replaced with an equal depth but not less than four inches (twoand-
five-tenths-inch binder course Type B and one-and-five-tenthsinch
wearing course Type F) of hot bituminous pavement
conforming to the standard specifications below.
(2) Limits of saw cuts or milling for final patching shall be approved by
the Engineering Division prior to execution of final paving. The
Town may require the limits of the area to increase due to any
damage in the work area.
(3) In the case of a transverse or diagonal trenching, the pavement
shall be cut to provide a diamond-shaped patch with at least twofoot
minimum overlap, four-foot in center if full width, of the final
§ 252-22 SALEM CODE § 252-22
1:114
patch onto undisturbed material that will permit only one wheel of
a vehicle at a time to strike the patch area.
(4) An approved asphalt emulsion (tack coat) shall be applied to the
face of all exposed joints of the existing pavement and between all
pavement lifts. Rolling shall be done with a self-propelled roller
weighing not less than eight tons to achieve ninety-five-percent
compaction and shall continue until a firm, even surface true to the
lines and grade is obtained.
(5) In cases where multiple excavations are made in a street which
would result in multiple patches, the Engineering Division at its
discretion may require a continuous patch or overlay across the
entire work zone.
§ 252-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-22
1:115
Chapter 260
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 40.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 279.
Life safety — See Ch. 314.
§ 252-22 SALEM CODE § 252-22
1:116
ARTICLE I
Payment for Fire Department Services
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-11-1959 (Ch. 190 of the 1995
Code)]
§ 260-1. Payment required.
Any person or persons starting a fire which results in calling the Fire
Department shall pay for the services of the Fire Department.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-1
1:117

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention
[Adopted by the 2009 Town Meeting (Ch. 187 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 260-2. Title. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-201536]
This article shall be known as the "Town of Salem Fire Prevention Code."
§ 260-3. Adoption of standard code. [Amended by the 3-18-2017
Town Meeting]
Under the authority of RSA 49:B-8, 155, 155-A:2, VI, 153:5, 674:51 and
674:51-a, the Town of Salem hereby adopts the International Fire Code as
published by the International Code Council, being particularly the 2015
edition thereof and the whole thereof as amended, deleted or modified
by this chapter, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the
construction, remodeling, change of occupancy, alteration, addition or
erection of buildings, structures or systems within the Town of Salem.
Furthermore under the authority of RSA 49:B-8, 155, 155-A:2, VI, the Town
of Salem hereby adopts the National Fire Protection Association Uniform
Fire Code (NFPA 1) being particularly the 2015 edition thereof and the
whole thereof as amended, deleted or modified by this chapter, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing existing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire and explosion, as hereinafter deleted,
modified, or amended by this chapter, and the same codes are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length, and from the date
that this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
§ 260-4. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. The Fire Prevention Code as contained in this article and all related
federal and state laws, Town ordinances and referenced codes,
standards and regulations shall be enforced by the Fire Department of
the Town of Salem. Within the Fire Department there is hereby
established a Bureau of Fire Prevention which shall be operated under
the supervision of the Fire Chief.
B. The Fire Chief shall recommend and the Town Manager shall appoint a
Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, who shall be known as the "Fire
Marshal," and such other members (Inspectors) of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention as shall from time to time be necessary.
C. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Town Manager. It shall contain all proceedings under
this article, with such statistics as the Fire Chief decides to include
therein. The Fire Chief shall also recommend any amendments to the
code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
36.Editor's Note: This enactment also repealed original § 187-2, Repealer, which immediately
followed this section.
§ 260-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:119
D. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Fire Inspectors and all members of the
Fire Department may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary, in the discharge of their duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the municipality.
E. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Fire Inspectors and other designated
members of the Department shall have the authority to enforce any
federal, state or local law, ordinance, standard, code or regulation
pertaining to fire and building safety and the control of combustible or
hazardous materials, or both, the design of exits, and other fire safety
measures, including the International Building and Mechanical Codes
as adopted by the State of New Hampshire, Chapter 314, Life Safety, of
this Code, this article and the State Fire Code enacted pursuant to RSA
153:5.
F. The Fire Chief and duly authorized members of the Fire Department
shall have the authority to inspect all buildings, structures, or other
places in the Town of Salem, including but not limited to any place
where any combustible or hazardous material, including wastepaper,
rags, shavings, waste, leather, rubber, crates, boxes, barrels, rubbish or
other combustible material, that is or may become dangerous as a fire
menace to such buildings, structures or other places has been allowed
to accumulate or where such authorized member of the Fire
Department has reason to believe that such material of a combustible
or hazardous nature has accumulated. If consent for such inspection is
denied or not reasonably obtainable, the authorized member of the Fire
Department may obtain an administrative inspection warrant under
RSA 595-B.
G. The Fire Chief and duly authorized members of the Fire Department,
upon complaint or whenever they shall deem it necessary, may inspect
all buildings, excluding single-family dwellings and residences in
multiunit dwellings containing not more than two units, and premises
within the Town of Salem.
H. Whenever any member of the Fire Department finds any condition that
such member deems to be hazardous to life or property or in violation of
any law, ordinance, code, standard or regulation, the member shall
order the hazardous condition to be remedied by written order setting
forth a compliance date or time. In cases of de minimis violations a
notice of hazard may be issued setting forth the violation and providing
a fixed time for compliance as determined by the Fire Department
member issuing the notice. If such order or notice of hazard requires a
structural change or alteration, it shall be reviewed and approved by
the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal before it is shall take effect. Such order
or notice shall be complied with by the owner, occupant, responsible
party or other person in receipt of the order or notice within the time
limit specified in such order or notice; provided, however, that any such
owner who is aggrieved by an order may, within 20 days, file an appeal.
All orders issued under this section shall be posted in a conspicuous
place and shall not be removed, defaced or altered except by
§ 260-4 SALEM CODE § 260-4
1:120
§ 260-5. Interpretation of terms.
§ 260-6. Occupancy registration.
§ 260-7. Modifications.
The Fire Chief shall have the authority to modify any of the provisions
of the fire prevention codes and referenced standards upon application in
writing by the property owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when
there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter
permission of the fire official. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
I. The Bureau of Fire Prevention may investigate fires of suspicious origin
to determine the origin and cause. Specially trained and certified
members may be empowered to seek the arrest and prosecution of
those responsible under RSA 153:11.
A. Where the term "authority having jurisdiction," "code official" or "fire
official" is used in the State Fire Code and in all codes and standards
issued by the National Fire Protection Association, it shall be held to
mean the Fire Chief or in his absence the Chief of the Fire Prevention
Bureau (Fire Marshal). [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
B. Where the term "governing jurisdiction" or "jurisdiction" is used, it shall
be held to mean the Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
A. All assembly, educational, institutional, detention and correctional,
residential, mercantile, business, factory, high hazard, storage, utility
and miscellaneous, and storage occupancies as defined in the
International Building Code, Chapter 3, established within the Town of
Salem shall register said establishment with the Bureau of Fire
Prevention. One- and two-family dwellings are exempt from this
requirement. Registration shall be annually on form provided by the
Town.
B. No person, corporation, business or partnership shall occupy a building
or structure for which a building permit has been issued unless
required inspections have been completed and the certificate of
occupancy has been cosigned by the fire official. No change in the
existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion
thereof shall be made until the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
[Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
C. In addition to penalties provided for in § 260-18, the fire official may
seek injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction to order
vacated any building in violation of this section.37
37.Editor's Note: Original § 187-7, Amendments to the standard code, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:121
of the codes, provided that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification,
when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Fire Chief thereon shall
be entered upon the records of the Department, and a signed copy shall be
furnished to the applicant.
§ 260-8. Amendments to the standard code.38
A. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the addition of
Section 104.1.1 as follows:
104.1.1 The Fire Chief shall have the authority to specify suitable
fire protection devices, appliances, systems and modifications to the
Fire and Building Codes as may be required to provide safety to life
and property. Said rules and regulations shall be available for public
review and no building shall be built or occupied in violation of rules,
regulations or modifications to codes and standards as specified by the
Fire Chief.
B. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the deletion of
Section 108.1 and the following inserted in place thereof:
SECTION 108 Means of Appeal
108.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision
of the Code Official to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. An
application for appeal can only be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the code do not fully apply,
or an equally good or better method of complying with the intent
of the International Fire Code, Uniform Fire Code, International
Building Code and referenced documents is available. The appeal
must be filed within 20 calendar days after the person filing the
appeal was notified, in writing, of a decision or hazard or 20
calendar days after a notice or decision was mailed by regular mail
to the last known address of the property owner or aggrieved party
as recorded in the Assessor's office of the Town or as provided by
an applicant or design professional.
C. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the addition of
Sections 107.4.1 and 107.4.1.1 which shall read as follows:
38.Editor's Note: As a result of the inclusion of this section, and at the direction of the Town,
former §§ 260-8 through 260-18 were renumbered as §§ 260-9 through 260-19,
respectively.
§ 260-7 SALEM CODE § 260-8
1:122
107.4.1 Criminal mischief. No person shall, without privilege to do
so, move, tamper, destroy, obstruct or otherwise improperly tamper
with any safety device, the property of another or the property of
the offender when required or placed for the safety of others or the
offender, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose.
107.4.1.1 Safety device. "Safety device" shall be defined as any fire
extinguisher, fire hydrant, fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, exit
or exit component, or emergency escape equipment, or any life line, or
any alarm, light, signal, exit sign, emergency light or notice intended
to warn of danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes,
or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting
property or preserving the safety of persons.
D. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the modification of
Section 105.1.1 which shall read as follows:
105.1.1 Permits. Permits required by the International Fire Code and
Uniform Fire Code shall be obtained from the code official. The Fire
Chief shall select those permits contained in the International Fire
Code and Uniform Fire Code that he feels shall be in the best interest
of the Town. Permit fees as established by the Board of Selectmen
shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall
be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be
readily available for inspection by any member of the Fire Department
or any other Town inspector. Any permit that is issued after work
or processes have begun will be surcharged an amount equal to the
original fee but not less than $50. The issuance of a permit and/or
review of construction documents does not relieve the applicant or
any agent of the applicant from complying with the laws, ordinances,
codes, standards or regulations enacted by the Town of Salem or the
State of New Hampshire.
E. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the modification of
Section 105.4.1 which shall read as follows:
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:123
105.4.1 Construction. Any and all construction for which a building
permit is required under Section 105 of the International Building
Code (2009 edition), except Use Group R-3, shall be submitted to the
Fire Code Official for review and evaluation. No building or other
permit shall be issued until plans have been reviewed by the Fire Code
Official and released for construction. Construction documents shall be
submitted in two or more sets and in such form and detail as required
by the Fire Code Official. A reviewed set of plans shall be maintained
on the job site for examination by the code official at all times. When
deemed necessary, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention (Fire
Marshal) may require:
1. That proposed building construction plans bear the seal of
a licensed professional engineer or registered architect,
indicating that the plans as submitted comply with all
applicable codes, standards and regulations of the Town.
2. That a third-party reviewer of the Town's choosing may be
retained to review all aspects of the construction and may
recommend corrections, modifications or additions. All costs
incurred for these services shall be paid by the applicant as a
special permit fee. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until all fees and permits are paid.
3. Where proposed projects and/or developments are of a
technical nature, the code official may select a consultant to
examine the plans and/or field conditions and to perform any
necessary testing or inspections to determine the adequacy
of construction, safety systems and utilities to determine that
work performed is in compliance with approved plans, state
and Town codes and nationally recognized standards for
construction and safety. The cost of the consultant and all
related testing shall be paid by the applicant to the Town of
Salem as a special permit fee. No occupancy certificate may be
issued unless and until the special permit fee has been paid in
full and all conditions of approval and inspections have been
completed and approved by the Fire Department.
4. Permits issued for installation, repair, modification or addition
shall expire 180 days after issuance unless there has been
continuous progress towards completion of the permitted
activity. Renewal of permits is at the discretion of the fire
official. The fee for the reissuance of a permit shall be 1/2 the
original fees.
F. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the addition of
Section 105.1.3 which shall read as follows:
105.1.3 A copy of all proposed site and subdivision plans shall be
submitted to the Bureau of Fire Prevention for review of all aspects
pertaining to life safety and fire protection prior to being heard by the
Town of Salem Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 260-8 SALEM CODE § 260-8
1:124
G. The Fire Prevention Code is hereby amended by the deletion of Section
109.3 and replaced by § 260-19.
H. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the modification of
Section 901.6.2 which shall read as follows:
901.6.2 Records. Records of all system inspections, tests and
maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained
on the premises for a minimum of one year and copies shall be
forwarded to the Bureau of Fire Prevention by the property owner and
servicing contractor within 30 days of inspection or test.
I. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the addition of
Section 3804.2 which shall read as follows:
3804.2 Bulk storage. The areas in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas or liquid is permitted are hereby established as follows:
1. The Commercial-Industrial B District west of Interstate 93 as
defined in the Town of Salem Zoning Ordinance.
J. The International Fire Code is hereby amended by the modification of
Section 3301.1, which shall read as follows:
3301.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale,
handling, and use or explosion of Division 1.3G and 1.4G (Class B and
C) fireworks is prohibited.
Exception:
1. The possessions, storage, handling and use of specific types
of Division 1.3G fireworks (Class B) shall be permitted for
public and private display, provided that a State Department
of Safety and a Salem Fire Department permit are issued and
such fireworks comply with CPSC 16 CFR 1500 through 1507,
and DOTn 49 CFR 100 through 178, inclusive. All displays of
Division 1.3G (Class B) fireworks shall be in accordance with
NFPA 1123 (2015 Edition).
K. The following appendixes contained in the International Fire Code are
hereby specifically incorporated as part of this chapter and the Salem
Fire Code and shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention:
Appendix B Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings
Appendix C Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution
Exception; Table C105.1 note C shall read: Where new water mains are
extended along streets where hydrants are not needed for protection
of structures or similar fire problems, fire hydrants shall be provided
at spacing not to exceed 500 feet.
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads
Exception; D103.1 shall be amended by removing the "26 feet"
reference and inserting "24 feet."
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-8
1:125
§ 260-9. Conflicts. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
Where a conflict between codes, within codes or between a code and a
referenced document occurs, the specific requirement shall prevail over the
general, and that provision which provides for the greatest degree of public
safety, as determined by the fire official, shall prevail. Where a specific state
law addresses a specific fire safety requirement, the state law shall prevail
over the provision of the Town ordinance and codes, provided that the state
law provides a level of protection not less than would be required by the
Town ordinance or codes.
§ 260-10. New materials, processes or occupancies which may
require permits.
The Town Manager or, in the absence of the Town Manager, a Selectman
designated by the full Board of Selectman, the Chief of the Fire Department,
and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention (Fire Marshal) shall act
as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons
an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, conditions, processes, or
occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in this article and referenced codes and standards.
§ 260-11. Sprinkler and standpipe regulations.
Exception; D103.5 Section 6 shall be amended to read: Manual
opening gates shall not be locked without special authorization from
the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Approved locks shall be compatible with
the Salem Fire Department Knox lock system.
Addition; D103.5 Section 8: Gated areas shall not be used for snow
storage, and gate operation shall not be interrupted by plowing or
snow accumulation.
Addition; D103.6.3: Fire Lanes shall be painted with six-inch-wide
yellow paint causing a grid or hashed pattern and shall include the
words "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" in not less than twenty-four-inch
letters.
Appendix E Hazard Categories
Appendix F Hazard Ranking
Appendix G Cryogenic Fluids
A. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the most recent revisions of NFPA 13, 13D, 13R, 14,
and 25, as applicable, Salem Fire Department Automatic Sprinkler
Rules and Regulations and the contents of this article, in the locations
specified herein and where required by the International Building Code
(IBC), as adopted. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
§ 260-8 SALEM CODE § 260-11
1:126
(1) All buildings or portions thereof classified as a place of assembly
with an occupant load of 100 or more people as calculated by the
tabular area method (IBC Use Group A).
(a) In addition the following new assembly occupancies shall be
protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic
sprinkler system regardless of the occupant load:
[1] Bars.
[2] Dance halls.
[3] Discotheques.
[4] Nightclubs.
[5] Assembly occupancies with festival seating.
(b) In existing occupancies where occupant loads exceed 100, the
following assembly occupancies shall be protected throughout
by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system:
[1] Bars.
[2] Dance halls.
[3] Discotheques.
[4] Nightclubs.
[5] Assembly occupancies with festival seating.
(2) All buildings or portions thereof classified as an educational
occupancy, including day-care centers, with an occupant load of 50
or more people as calculated by the tabular area method (IBC Use
Group E).
(3) All buildings or portions thereof classified as institutional,
regardless of the occupant load. Day-care centers providing care
for five or more children under the age of 30 months shall be
classified as institutional (IBC Use Group I).
(4) All buildings or portions thereof classified as hotels, motels,
dormitories, lodging houses, rooming houses and boardinghouses
(IBC Use Groups R-1 and R-2).
(5) All buildings or portions thereof classified as apartments or
residential condominiums, with four or more dwelling units and/or
three or more stories in height, and residential care facilities with
more than five clients but fewer than 16 clients, provided that the
clients are capable of self-preservation (IBC Use Groups R-2 and
R-4).
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-11
1:127
(6) All buildings or portions thereof classified as mercantile which
have a gross floor area exceeding 9,999 square feet (IBC Use
Group M).
(7) All buildings or portions thereof classified as business which have a
gross floor area exceeding 9,999 square feet (IBC Use Group B).
(8) All buildings or portions thereof classified as factory or industrial
which have a gross floor area exceeding 9,999 square feet or are
over 30 feet in height at any point measured to the grade at a point
20 feet from the foundation wall (IBC Use Group F).
(9) All buildings or portions thereof classified as storage which have a
gross floor area in excess of 9,999 square feet or are over 30 feet in
height at any point measured to the grade at a point 20 feet from
the foundation wall (IBC Use Group S).
(10) All buildings or portions thereof classified as high hazard by the
fire official in accordance with the Building Code (IBC Use Group
H). Exception: Where in the opinion of the fire official the
installation of a water-based fire suppression system increases the
hazard, alternate fire suppression shall be provided.
(11) All buildings or portions thereof with a floor level three or more
stories above the level of Fire Department access shall be provided
with standpipes installed in accordance with NFPA 14.
(12) All buildings, or portions thereof, where required by the
International Building Code as adopted by the State of New
Hampshire or Town of Salem.
B. The Fire Chief may issue regulations concerning the specific methods
and materials to be used when installing fire sprinkler systems. These
regulations are incorporated herein. For the purpose of this section,
"floor area" and "gross floor area" are as defined in the International
Building Code Section 1002.1 and shall include all attic spaces with
permanent or temporary flooring.
C. Compliance.
(1) Any building, other than those listed in Subsection A(1)(b), not in
compliance with this section that is remodeled or altered to an
extent that the cost of building modifications exceeds 50% of the
assessed value as determined by the Town Assessor and Fire
Marshal shall install all required fire protection systems prior to
occupancy.
(2) Any building, other than those listed in Subsection A(1)(b), not in
compliance with this section that is remodeled or altered to an
extent that the building modifications increase the size of the
building by 50% of the original gross square footage shall install all
required fire protection systems throughout prior to occupancy.
§ 260-11 SALEM CODE § 260-11
1:128
§ 260-12. Fire alarm regulations.
(3) For the purpose of this section, any remodeling, renovation,
addition or other construction started, finished or for which
permits have been issued within the previous year (365 days) shall
be included in determining the extent of remodel, alteration or
revaluation.
D. Responsibility. The owner, operator and occupant of any building shall
be individually and separately responsible for compliance with this
section.
E. Installation. No person, firm, company or corporation shall install,
repair, or operate any fire sprinkler equipment without having first
obtained a certificate of fitness from the Fire Department. Emergency
repairs shall require prior authorization from the Fire Department.
A. Fire alarm systems shall be installed in accordance with the most
recent revision of NFPA 72, the National Fire Alarm Code, NFPA 70, the
National Electrical Code, International Building Code (IBC), State Fire
Code, Salem Fire Department Fire Alarm Rules and Regulations, and
the contents of this article in the following locations: [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
(1) Any location identified in the International Building Code, State
Fire Code and NFPA 101 (Life Safety Code).
(2) All places of assembly with an occupant load of 50 or more persons
as calculated by the tabular area method, IBC Use Group A.
(3) All educational buildings or portions thereof with an occupant load
of 50 or more persons as calculated by the tabular area method
(IBC Use Group E).
(4) All buildings or portions thereof classified as Use Group I in
accordance with IBC.
(5) All buildings or portions thereof of Use Groups R-1 and R-2 as
defined by IBC.
(6) All buildings or portions thereof of Use Group R-4 where more than
one individual is being cared for.
(7) All buildings or portions thereof classified as mercantile in
accordance with IBC and having more than 2,999 gross square feet
of area.
(8) All buildings or portions thereof classified as business in
accordance with IBC and having more than 2,999 gross square feet
of area.
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:129
(9) All buildings or portions thereof classified as factory in accordance
with IBC and having more than 2,999 gross square feet of area or
which are two or more stories in height, including basements.
(10) All buildings or portions thereof classified as storage in accordance
with IBC and having more than 2,999 gross square feet.
(11) All buildings or portions thereof classified as high hazard in
accordance with IBC.
(12) All buildings or portions thereof that are protected by automatic
sprinklers except one- and two-family dwellings.
B. All fire alarm systems installed in compliance with this section or
installed in compliance with any previous regulations shall transmit
alarm, supervisory and trouble signals to the Fire Department by way of
a radio alarm transmitter approved by the Fire Department.
C. The Fire Chief may issue regulations concerning the specific methods
to be used when installing fire alarm systems. These regulations are
incorporated in the Salem Fire Department Fire Alarm Rules and
Regulations and herein.
D. Existing buildings.
(1) Existing buildings not in compliance with this section shall be
allowed to continue to be occupied provided there is no change in
use group classification caused by a change of occupant or change
of operations.
(2) Any building not in compliance with this section that is remodeled
or altered to an extent that the cost of building modifications
exceeds 25% of the assessed value as determined by the Town
Assessor shall install all required fire alarm systems prior to
occupancy.
(3) Any building not in compliance with this section that is remodeled
or altered to an extent that the size of building modifications
exceeds 25% of the gross square footage shall install all required
fire alarm systems prior to occupancy.
(4) For the purpose of this section any remodeling, renovation,
addition or other construction started, finished or for which
permits have been issued within the previous year (365 days) shall
be included in determining the extent of remodel, alteration or
revaluation.
E. No person, firm, company or corporation shall install, repair, or operate
any fire alarm equipment without having first obtained a certificate of
fitness from the Fire Department. Emergency repairs shall require prior
authorization from the Fire Department.
§ 260-12 SALEM CODE § 260-12
1:130
§ 260-13. Key vault.
Any building with an automatic sprinkler system, fire alarm system or
firefighter elevator recall shall be provided with an emergency access key
vault (Knox-Box®) compatible with the Salem Fire Department key system.
Each key vault will be supplied with all necessary keys to gain access to
all interior spaces within the building. Property owners and occupants shall
notify the Fire Department when keys or locks are changed and provide
keys for the key vault.
§ 260-14. Emergency contact information.
Any building with an automatic sprinkler system, fire alarm system or
key vault will provide a list of not fewer than three people who can be
contacted after normal working hours to provide information about the
building or who can respond to emergency request for assistance to the Fire
Department. The owner and occupant shall notify the Fire Department of all
changes to the emergency contact list.
§ 260-15. Elevators.
§ 260-16. False alarms.
F. The owner, operator and occupant of any building shall be individually
and separately responsible for compliance with this section.
G. All required fire alarm systems monitored or supervised by the Salem
Fire Department shall be assessed an annual monitoring fee as set forth
on the fee schedule adopted by the Town of Salem Board of Selectmen.
[Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
A. In buildings constructed after the adoption of this section in which
elevators are provided or required by this or other codes, including the
Americans with Disabilities Act, at least one elevator car in each bank
of elevators shall have a minimum inside clear dimension of 60 inches
by 96 inches with a minimum door opening of 42 inches. The elevator
shall be designated by the international medical symbol for emergency
medical services (Star of Life).
B. Firefighter recall Phase I and II shall be provided. Key access to the
firefighter recall shall be by use of a 3502 key and cylinder. The 3502
key shall be located in the key vault required by § 260-12.
A. Any building that causes more than one Fire Department emergency
response in any thirty-calendar-day period or more than three in any
three-hundred-sixty-five-day period due to a faulty fire alarm or
sprinkler system shall be charged a nuisance fee established by the
Board of Selectmen and payable to the Town Clerk.
§ 260-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:131
§ 260-17. Fire protection water supply.
B. Any detection device which activates without cause shall be marked on
the first occurrence with a single line. Upon a second false activation
the device shall be marked with an X and shall be replaced.
C. Any sprinkler system that improperly reports an alarm condition shall,
upon order of the fire official, be inspected by a person holding a valid
certificate of fitness. Any system that for lack of maintenance or repair,
improper installation or failure of the piping system is not in proper
working order as determined by the fire official shall be subjected to an
air tightness test of 40 pounds per square inch. Any system that leaks
more than 10 pounds of air in 24 hours shall be repaired or replaced.
A. The owner and occupant of any property on or adjacent to which is
placed a public or private fire hydrant shall maintain the hydrant in an
unobstructed condition for a ten-foot diameter at all times.
Obstructions shall include but are not limited to:
(1) Snow and ice.
(2) Parked or standing vehicles.
(3) Storage.
(4) Vegetation.
(5) Fences and landscaping.
B. All water mains and related fire protection piping and hydrants shall be
installed in compliance with Salem Water Division regulations. Private
fire hydrants shall be painted in accordance with the most recent
edition of NFPA 25. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
C. With the exception of Town of Salem employees, no person, firm or
corporation shall use, open, or otherwise access the municipal water
system without the express written authorization of the Salem Water
Division. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
D. Any development or site approval that is within 500 feet of an existing
municipal water supply shall be provided with municipal water for fire
protection. Water mains and hydrants shall be installed in accordance
with the State Fire Code and Salem Water Division regulations. All
water main extensions shall be installed or bonded to the Town at the
time of the site approval, and no certificate of occupancy may be issued
until the water main and all associated testing are completed and the
Water Division has released the construction for use. Exception: Site
approvals and developments of not more than two additional lots for
single-family homes not exceeding 3,000 square feet may be waived
upon special request for an exception to the Fire Chief. [Amended by
the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
§ 260-16 SALEM CODE § 260-17
1:132
§ 260-18. Fire protection installation and maintenance. [Amended
by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
All fire protection systems, devices, systems and related components shall
be installed in accordance with the requirements of the International
Building Code, State Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, NFPA and
other recognized standards. Where there is a conflict between codes, that
code which provides the highest degree of safety as determined by the fire
official shall prevail. All systems, devices, and related components shall be
maintained in accordance with the most recent revision of NFPA 25 and the
State Fire Code. All private fire hydrants shall be flow tested annually and
shall be color coded in accordance with the most recent revision of NFPA
25.
§ 260-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 11-2-2015]
Pursuant to RSA 31:39 and RSA 155-A, violations of this article shall be
subject to the civil penalty set forth in RSA 676:17.
E. Fire cisterns. In areas where municipal water is not available and
approval has been granted by the Fire Chief, cisterns may be installed
in lieu of water mains. Cisterns shall not be approved where the
development is located within 500 feet of an existing water service.
Cisterns shall be provided whenever there is a subdivision of land
creating three or more residential lots, including the original lot. Any
commercial development that is located more than 500 feet from a
municipal water service shall be provided with a cistern or a water main
extension.
(1) Cisterns shall be sized in accordance with the State Fire Code by
multiplying the fire flow in gallons per minute by the required
duration converted to minutes. Construction types shall be as
defined in the International Building Code. [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
(2) Cistern locations shall be approved by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and shall be installed in accordance with regulations
published by the Salem Fire Department. All cistern installations
shall be bonded to the Town and shall be certified liquid-tight for
one year after acceptance.
(3) Exception. Owners of site approvals and developments of singlefamily
homes may install and maintain residential sprinkler
systems complying with the most recent revision of NFPA 13D.
§ 260-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-19
1:133
Chapter 270
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS AND RETAIL FOOD
STORES
§ 260-19 SALEM CODE § 260-19
1:134
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 270-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the authority granted to towns in RSA 31:39,
I(k), to license food service establishments pursuant to RSA 147:1, RSA 143
and RSA 143-A, as these laws exist and as they may be amended in the
future. On February 8, 1988, the Salem Board of Health adopted fees and
licensing categories referred to as Salem Chapter 196, Sanitary Food Code,
for all food service establishments pursuant to this authority. Revisions were
adopted on November 18, 1996. This chapter is based on NH He-P 2300,
New Hampshire Rules for the Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food,
adopted by the New Hampshire Legislature on March 26, 1998, and by the
Salem Board of Selectmen on October 19, 1998, as it exists and as it may
be amended in the future. In the event of differences in the two documents,
the more stringent shall apply.
[Note: On June 6, 1979, the New Hampshire Senate and House of
Representatives in General Court approved Chapter 173 (SB 226). This
bill established regulations for food service establishments in the Town of
Salem. This bill was adopted by the Town and went into effect on November
1, 1979. The Town later adopted Chapter 196, Sanitary Production and
Distribution of Food, which also incorporated the State Food Code, NH He-
P 2300, by reference. The State of New Hampshire adopted the 2009 FDA
Food Code in 2011. Due to the adoption by reference section in Chapter 196
(now Chapter 270), the Town of Salem enforces the Food Code regulations
as codified in the 2009 FDA Food Code.]
§ 270-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the health of the public
is protected from the consumption of food contaminated by food service
establishments or retail food stores during storage, preparation, service or
display and to ensure that food service establishments and retail food stores
have adequate facilities and procedures in place to minimize contamination
during storage, preparation, service and display of food.
§ 270-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE LEVEL — The presence of a hazard which does not pose the
likelihood of causing an unacceptable health risk.
ACID FOODS — Foods that have a natural pH of 4.6 or below.
ACIDIFIED FOODS — Low-acid foods to which acid(s) or acid food(s) is
added, which result in a water activity greater than 0.85 and have a finished
equilibrium pH of 4.6 or below. These foods include, but are not limited
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:135
to, beans, cucumbers, cabbage, artichokes, cauliflower, puddings, peppers,
tropical fruits, and fish, singly or in any combination.
ADULTERATED — As defined in RSA 146:3.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute.
ASEPTIC PROCESSING AND PACKAGING — The filling of a commercially
sterile, cooled product into presterilized containers, followed by hermetic
sealing, with a presterilized closure in an atmosphere free of
microorganisms.
aw — Water activity which is a measure of the free moisture in a food and
is the quotient of the water vapor pressure of the substance divided by the
vapor pressure of pure water at the same temperature.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A transient lodging facility which is the owner's
personal residence, is occupied by the owner at the time of rental to a
patron, and in which the only meal served to in-house guests is breakfast.
Requires a commercial kitchen.
BEVERAGE — As defined in RSA 143:9.
BOTTLED DRINKING WATER — Water that is sealed in bottles, packages,
or other containers and offered for sale for human consumption, including
bottled mineral water.
BULK FOOD — Processed or unprocessed food in aggregate containers
from which quantities desired by the consumer or the employees are
withdrawn. The term "bulk food" does not include fresh whole fruits or fresh
whole vegetables.
CERTIFICATION NUMBER — A unique combination of letters and numbers
assigned by the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services
or a shellfish control authority which is legally responsible for administering
a program that includes certification of molluscan shellfish harvesters and
dealers for interstate commerce according to the provisions of the National
Shellfish Sanitation Program.
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP — Any time a controlling interest in a sole
proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or any other kind of entity is transferred to another sole
proprietor, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company
or any other kind of entity.
CIP — Cleaned in place by the circulation or flowing by mechanical means
through a piping system of a detergent solution, water rinse, and sanitizing
solution onto or over equipment surfaces that require cleaning, including
but not limited to the method used, in part, to clean and sanitize a frozen
dessert machine. "CIP" does not include the cleaning of equipment,
including but not limited to band saws, slicers, or mixers, that is subjected
to in-place manual cleaning without the use of a CIP system.
COLORIMETRIC METHOD — The method of determining the value of the
pH of a food product using indicator dyes in solutions that gradually change
color over limited pH ranges.
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:136
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN — A room or building, or any part thereof, used
for food preparation which meets all the requirements of this chapter and is
not a residential kitchen.
COMMERCIAL STERILITY — The condition achieved by the application of
heat, chemical sterilants, or other treatments or by the control of water
activity with the application of heat that renders the equipment, containers
and thermally processed foods free of viable microorganisms, including
spores, of public health significance, as well as microorganisms of
nonhealth significance, capable of reproducing in the food under normal
nonrefrigerated conditions of storage and distribution.
COMMINUTED — Reduced in size by methods including chopping, flaking,
grinding, or mincing. "Comminuted" includes fish or meat products that are
reduced in size and restructured or reformulated, including but not limited
to gefilte fish, gyros, ground beef, and sausage, and a mixture of two or
more types of meat that have been reduced in size and combined, such as
sausages made from two or more meats.
COMMISSARY — A catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place
licensed in which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared,
packaged, cleaned or stored.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department
of Health and Human Services.
CONDIMENT — Any food such as, but not limited to, chutney, ketchup,
mayonnaise, mustard and relish that is used to enhance the flavor of other
foods.
CONFIRMED DISEASE OUTBREAK — A food-borne disease outbreak in
which laboratory analysis of appropriate specimens identifies a causative
organism and epidemiological analysis implicates the food as the source of
the illness.
CONSTRUCTION ITEMS — Inspection sheet items 8, 14, 29, 31, 34, 36 and
45 to 54 which are structural components of the food service establishment
or retail food store.39
CONSUMER — A person who is a member of the public, takes possession
of food, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a food service
establishment, retail food store or food service establishment that
commercially processes food, and does not offer the food for resale.
CONTROLLED ATMOSPHERE PACKAGING — Packaging of a product in a
modified atmosphere followed by maintaining subsequent control of that
atmosphere.
COOK-CHILL — A specialized process of reduced oxygen packaging where
large volumes of food are cooked, sealed in heat-stable cooking bags from
which air has been expelled and rapidly chilled.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:137
CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIAL — A material that maintains surface
cleanability characteristics required by § 270-17 under prolonged influence
of the food to be contacted, the normal use of cleaning compounds and
sanitizing solutions, and other conditions of the use environment.
CRITICAL CONTROL POINT — A point or procedure in a specific food
system where loss of control results in an imminent health hazard.
CRITICAL FACTOR — Any property, characteristic, condition, aspect, or
other parameter, variation of which may affect the scheduled process and
the attainment of commercial sterility.
CRITICAL ITEM — An inspection item on the inspection sheet that is
depicted in red; a violation or hazard that is associated with foodborne
illness or injury.40
CRITICAL LIMIT(S) — Criteria that must be controlled to ensure
prevention, elimination, or reduction of hazards within safety parameters
determined by the HACCP Plan for each preventive measure associated
with the critical control point.
DEVIATION — A condition which occurs when one or more of the critical
factors indicated in the scheduled process are not met or when failure to
meet a required critical limit for a critical control point raises a question
regarding the public health, safety and/or commercial sterility of the
product.
DISHWASHING — The cleaning and sanitizing of food-contact surfaces of
equipment and utensils.
DRINKING WATER — Potable water that meets the requirements of NH
Env-Dw 700.41
EASILY CLEANABLE — A characteristic of a surface that:
EASILY MOVABLE —
A. Allows effective removal of soil by normal cleaning methods;
Is dependent on the material, design, construction, and installation of
the surface; and
B.
Varies with the likelihood of the surface's role in introducing pathogenic
or toxigenic agents or other contaminants into food based on the
surface's approved placement, purpose, and use.
C.
Weighing 14 kg, 30 pounds, or less, mounted on casters, gliders, or
rollers, or provided with a mechanical means requiring no more than
14 kg, 30 pounds, of force to safely tilt a unit of equipment for cleaning;
and
A.
Having no utility connection, a utility connection that disconnects
quickly, or a flexible utility connection line of sufficient length to allow
B.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:138
EMPLOYEE — The license holder, person in charge, person having
supervisory or management duties, person on the payroll, family member,
volunteer, person performing work under contractual agreement, or other
person working in a food service establishment or retail food store.
EQUIPMENT — An article that is used in the operation of a food service
establishment or retail food store, including but not limited to a freezer,
grinder, hood, ice maker, meat block, mixer, oven, reach-in refrigerator,
scale, sink, slicer, stove, table, temperature measuring device for ambient
air, vending machine, or dishwashing machine. "Equipment" does not
include items used for handling or storing large quantities of packaged
foods that are received from a supplier in a cased or overwrapped lot,
including but not limited to hand trucks, forklifts, dollies, pallets, racks, and
skids.
ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE CONSUMERS — Individuals who are more
likely than other consumers to experience food-borne disease, including but
not limited to persons who:
FINISHED EQUILIBRIUM pH — The pH of the product usually taken 24
hours after processing to ensure all components of the product have been
acidified equally.
FISH — Fresh or saltwater finfish, crustaceans, and other forms of aquatic
life, including but not limited to alligator, frog, aquatic turtle, jellyfish, sea
cucumber, and sea urchin and the roe of such animals, other than birds
or mammals, and all mollusks, if such animal life is intended for human
consumption. "Fish" also includes an edible human food product derived in
whole or in part from fish, including fish that have been processed in any
manner.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption or as defined in RSA 143-A:3.
FOOD-BORNE DISEASE OUTBREAK — An incident in which two or more
persons experience a similar illness after ingestion of a common food and
epidemiological analysis implicates the food as the source of illness, or
a single case of illness such as one person ill from botulism or chemical
poisoning.
FOOD-CONTACT SURFACE — A surface or a utensil with which food
normally comes into contact, or a surface of equipment or a utensil from
the equipment to be moved for cleaning of the equipment and adjacent
area.
A. Have a liver disease;
B. Have reduced stomach acidity;
C. Have a weakened immune system; or
Are older adults, pregnant women and children three years old or
younger.
D.
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:139
which food may drain, drip, or splash back into a food or onto a surface
normally in contact with food.
FOOD EMPLOYEE — An individual working with unpackaged food, food
equipment or utensils, or food-contact surfaces in a food service
establishment or retail food store.
FOOD PREPARATION SINK — A separate and individual sink unit, with one
or more compartments, which is used exclusively in conjunction with food
preparation or production, included but not limited to the washing of fresh
produce and the thawing of frozen food.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant;
temporary food service establishment; coffee shop; cafeteria; short-order
cafe; luncheonette; grill; tea room; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern;
bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding
establishment; food vending operation; home food manufacturing site and
bed-and-breakfast facility, whether attended or unattended; private, public
or nonprofit organization or institution routinely serving food; catering
kitchen; commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared
for sale or service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or
drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for
the public with or without charge.
HACCP — Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles developed by
the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.
HACCP PLAN — A written document that delineates the formal procedures
for following the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point principles developed
by the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.
HAZARD — A biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause an
imminent health hazard.
HEALTH DIVISION — The Salem Health Division unless otherwise noted.42
HERMETICALLY SEALED CONTAINER — A container that is designed and
intended to be secure against the entry of microorganisms and, in the case
of low acid canned foods, to maintain the commercial sterility of its contents
after processing.
HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION — A group of persons who are more
likely than other populations to experience food-borne disease because they
are:
A. Immunocompromised;
Older adults and in a facility that provides health care or assisted living
services, including but not limited to a hospital or nursing home; or
B.
Preschool age children in a facility that provides custodial care,
including but not limited to a day-care center.
C.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Throughout this chapter, "Health Department" and "Department" were amended to
"Health Division" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:140
IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD — A significant threat or danger to health
that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a
product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires
immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on
the number of potential injuries and the nature, severity, and duration of the
anticipated injury.
INDICATOR PAPERS — The paper tape treated with indicator dye which
changes color when dipped into the sample solution of the food product
which determines the approximate value of the pH of the food when the
color is compared to a standard color chart.
INDICATOR SOLUTIONS — The aqueous solutions used in comparing the
test color of a solution of a food product to a set of color standards in which
the comparison determines an approximate value of pH.
INJECTED — Manipulating a meat so that infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms may be introduced from its surface to its interior through
tenderizing with deep penetration or injecting the meat as with juices which
may be referred to as "injecting," "pinning" or "stitch pumping."
INSPECTION ITEM — Those inspection report items which are checked
during an inspection of a food service establishment, retail food store, or
food service establishment that commercially processes food.
KITCHENWARE — Food preparation and storage utensils.
LICENSE — The document issued by the Salem Health Division which
authorizes a license holder to operate a food service establishment or retail
food store in the Town of Salem.
LICENSE HOLDER — The person legally responsible for the operation of a
licensed food service establishment or retail food store, including but not
limited to the owner, the owner's agent, or other person.
LINENS — Fabric items including but not limited to cloth hampers, cloth
napkins, tablecloths, and work garments, including cloth gloves.
LOT — The amount of a product produced during a period of time indicated
by a specific code.
LOW-ACID FOODS — Any foods with a finished equilibrium pH greater than
4.6 and a water activity greater than 0.85, except alcoholic beverages and
tomatoes or tomato products having a finished equilibrium pH less than 4.7.
MANUFACTURES FOOD IN A RESIDENTIAL KITCHEN — An operation
that prepares and packages nonpotentially hazardous food using a
residential kitchen. Residential kitchen food preparation, production and
distribution is prohibited in the Town of Salem without a fully licensed
commercial kitchen.
MEAT — The flesh of animals used as food, including but not limited to
dressed flesh of cattle, swine, sheep, or goats and other edible animals,
except fish and poultry, that is offered for human consumption.
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:141
mg/l — Milligrams per liter, which is the metric equivalent of parts per
million (ppm).
MOBILE FOOD UNIT — A food service establishment mounted on wheels or
otherwise designed to be immediately moveable.
MODIFIED ATMOSPHERE PACKAGING — Packaging of a product in an
atmosphere which has had a one-time modification of gaseous composition
so that it is different from that of air, which normally contains 78.08%
nitrogen, 20.96% oxygen, and 0.03% carbon dioxide.
MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH — Any edible species of fresh or frozen oysters,
clams, mussels, and scallops or edible portions thereof, except when the
scallop product consists only of the shucked adductor muscle.
MONITORING — A planned sequence of observations or measurements
of critical limits designed to produce an accurate record and intended to
ensure that the critical limit maintains product safety.
NATURAL pH — The pH of the raw product.
PACKAGED — Bottled, canned, cartoned, securely bagged, or securely
wrapped, whether packaged in a food service establishment, a retail food
store or a food service establishment processing food. "Packaged" does not
include a wrapper, carry-out box, or other nondurable container used to
containerize food with the purpose of facilitating food protection during
service and receipt of the food by the consumer.
PERSON IN CHARGE — Either the license holder or an individual
designated as such by the license holder or the individual with whom the
inspector communicates during the inspection.
pH — The symbol for the negative log of the hydrogen ion concentration,
which is a measure of the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a solution.
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device that is permanently or
temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and
demands a supply of water from the system or discharges used water, waste
materials, or sewage directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the
premises.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing
fixtures and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; sanitary and storm sewers
and building drains, including their respective connections, devices, and
appurtenances within the premises; and water-treating equipment.
POISONOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS — Substances that are not intended
for ingestion and are included in four categories including:
Cleaners and sanitizers, which include cleaning and sanitizing agents
and agents including but not limited to caustics, acids, drying agents,
polishes, and other chemicals;
A.
Pesticides, which include substances such as insecticides and
rodenticides;
B.
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:142
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD —
POTENTIOMETRIC METHOD — The method used to determine the value of
pH of a food product with the use of a pH meter or potentiometer.
POULTRY — Any domesticated bird, including but not limited to chickens,
turkeys, ducks, geese, or guineas, whether live or dead.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision of piped water for
human consumption that is not a public water supply as defined in RSA 485.
PROCESSES FOOD IN A COMMERCIAL KITCHEN — An operation that
manufactures, thermally processes, and/or packages food in a licensed
commercial kitchen.
PROCESSES FOOD IN A RESIDENTIAL KITCHEN — An operation that
manufactures, processes, and/or packages food using a residential kitchen.
This type of operation is prohibited in the Town of Salem.
PROCESSING AUTHORITY — Those processing institutions approved by
the State of New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services and
listed in § 270-54.
Substances necessary for the operation and maintenance of the
establishment, including but not limited to non-food-grade lubricants
and personal care items that may be deleterious to health; and
C.
Substances that are not necessary for the operation and maintenance
of the establishment and are on the premises for retail sale, including
but not limited to petroleum products and paints.
D.
A food which is natural or synthetic and is in a form capable of
supporting the:
Rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms;
(1)
(2) Growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum; or
(3) In raw shell eggs, the growth of Salmonella enteritidis; and
A.
A food including but not limited to:
An animal food or a food of animal origin that is raw or heat
treated; or
(1)
A food of plant origin that is heat treated or consists of raw seed
sprouts;
(2)
(3) Cut melons; and
Garlic and oil mixtures that are not acidified or otherwise modified
at a food service establishment that processes food in a way that
results in mixtures that do not support the rapid and progressive
growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms or the growth and
toxin production of Clostridium botulinum.
(4)
B.
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:143
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A public water system as defined in RSA
485:1-a.
PUSHCART — A non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving nonpotentially
hazardous foods, commissary-wrapped food maintained at proper
temperatures, or limited to the preparation and serving of frankfurters.
READY-TO-EAT FOOD — Food that is in a form that is edible without
washing, cooking, or additional preparation by the food service
establishment, retail food store or the consumer and that is reasonably
expected to be consumed in that form, including but not limited to:
RECALL — A procedure for removing product from distribution and/or the
marketplace for products that are contaminated.
RECONSTITUTED — Recombining dehydrated food products with water or
other liquids.
REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING — The reduction of the amount of oxygen
in a package by mechanically evacuating the oxygen, displacing the oxygen
with another gas or combination of gases, or otherwise controlling the
oxygen content in a package to a level below that normally found in the
surrounding atmosphere, which is 21% oxygen. "Reduced oxygen
packaging" includes methods that may be referred to as modified
atmosphere, controlled atmosphere, low oxygen, and vacuum packaging,
including sous vide and cook-chill.
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — The local, state or federal authority having
jurisdiction over the food service establishment, retail food store or food
service establishment processing food.
REMODELED — Undertaking construction which involves adding new seats
or adding food preparation area or affects the kitchen or any other part of a
food service establishment or retail food store that requires service by piped
water.
RESIDENTIAL KITCHEN — The kitchen in a private residence where only
the family customarily prepares food for consumption.
RETAIL FOOD STORE — Any establishment or section of an establishment
where food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended
for off-premises consumption. The term includes delicatessens that offer
Potentially hazardous food that is unpackaged and cooked to
temperature and time required for the specific food under § 270-6B to
F(4), H and I;
A.
B. Raw, washed, and cut fruits and vegetables;
Whole raw fruits and vegetables that are presented for consumption
without the need for further washing, such as at a buffet; and
C.
Other food presented for consumption for which further washing or
cooking is not required and from which rinds, peels, husks, or shells are
removed.
D.
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:144
prepared food in bulk quantities only. The term does not include
establishments that handle only prepackaged, nonpotentially hazardous
foods; roadside markets that offer only fresh fruits and fresh vegetables for
sale; food service establishments; or food and beverage vending machines
or "retail food store" as defined in RSA 143-A:3, VII.
RETORT — Any closed vessel or other equipment used for thermal
processing of low acid foods under pressure.
SANITIZATION — The application of cumulative heat or chemicals on
cleaned food-contact surfaces that, when evaluated for efficacy, is sufficient
to yield a reduction of five logs, which is equal to 99.999% reduction of
representative disease microorganisms of public health importance.
SCHEDULED PROCESS — The process selected by the processor under
the conditions of manufacture for a given product to achieve commercial
sterility.
SERVICING AREA — An operating base location to which a mobile food
establishment or transportation vehicle returns regularly for such things as
discharging liquid or solid wastes, refilling water tanks and ice bins, and
boarding food.
SEWAGE — Sewage as defined in RSA 485-A:2, X.
SHELLFISH CONTROL AUTHORITY — A state, federal, foreign, tribal or
other government entity legally responsible for administering a program
that includes certification of molluscan shellfish harvesters and dealers for
interstate commerce.
SHELLSTOCK — Raw, in-shell molluscan shellfish.
SHUCKED SHELLFISH — Molluscan shellfish that have one or both shells
removed.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES — Tableware, carry-out utensils, and other
items, including but not limited to bags, containers, placemats, stirrers,
straws, toothpicks, and wrappers, that are designed and constructed for
one-time, one-person use.
SINGLE-USE ARTICLES — Utensils and bulk food containers designed and
constructed to be used once and discarded. Single-use articles also include
but are not limited to wax paper, butcher paper, plastic wrap, formed
aluminum food containers, jars, plastic tubs or buckets, bread wrappers,
pickle barrels, ketchup bottles, and Number 10 cans.
SLACKING — The process of moderating the temperature of a food, such as
allowing a food to gradually increase from a temperature of -23° C. (-10° F.)
to -4° C. (25° F.), in preparation for deep-fat frying or to facilitate even heat
penetration during the cooking of previously block-frozen food, including
but not limited to spinach.
SMOOTH — A food-contact surface having a surface free of pits and
inclusions with a cleanability equal to or exceeding that of 100 grit, Number
3 stainless steel; and a non-food-contact surface of equipment having a
surface equal to that of commercial grade hot-rolled steel free of visible
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:145
scale; and a floor, wall, or ceiling having an even or level surface with no
roughness or projections that render it difficult to clean.
SOLID WASTE — Solid waste as defined in RSA 149-M:4.
SOUP KITCHEN — A food service establishment operated by a charitable
organization, including religious societies and fraternal organizations
organized pursuant to RSA 292, RSA 306, and RSA 418, that prepares and
serves meals to the poor without charge.
SOUS VIDE — A specialized process of reduced oxygen packaging where
raw or partially cooked food is placed in a pouch which is vacuum sealed,
cooked or pasteurized, then rapidly chilled and refrigerated.
SUPPORT ANIMAL — A trained animal, including but not limited to a
Seeing Eye dog, that accompanies a person with a disability to assist in
managing the disability and enables the person to perform functions that
the person would otherwise be unable to perform.
TABLE-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT — Equipment that is not portable and is
designed to be mounted off the floor on a table, counter, or shelf.
TABLEWARE — Eating, drinking, and serving utensils for table use,
including but not limited to flatware, including forks, knives, and spoons;
hollowware, including but not limited to bowls, cups, serving dishes, and
tumblers; and plates.
TEMPERATURE MEASURING DEVICE — A thermometer, thermocouple,
thermistor, or other device that indicates the temperature of food, air, or
water.
TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food service
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of
time not to exceed two weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
THERMAL PROCESS — The application of heat to food, either before
or after sealing in a hermetically sealed container, for a period of time
and at a temperature scientifically determined to ensure destruction of
microorganisms of public health significance.
TITRATABLE ACIDITY — A method or the process of determining the acidity
of a food in terms of the smallest amount of reagent of known concentration
required to bring about a given effect in reaction with a known volume of
test solution.
UTENSIL — Any food-contact implement or container used in the storage,
preparation, transportation, dispensing, sale or service of food, such as
kitchenware or tableware that is multiuse, single-service, or single-use;
gloves used in contact with food; and food temperature measuring devices.
VACUUM PACKAGING — A process that reduces the amount of air from a
package and hermetically seals the package so that a near-perfect vacuum
remains inside the package.
§ 270-3 SALEM CODE § 270-3
1:146
VENDING MACHINE — Any self-service device that, upon insertion of a
coin, paper currency, token, card or key, dispenses unit servings of food
in bulk or in packages without the necessity of replenishing the device
between each vending operation.
VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space, or area
where one or more vending machines are installed and operated and
includes the storage and servicing areas on the premises that are used in
conjunction with the vending machines.
VERIFICATION — Methods, procedures, and tests used to determine if the
HACCP system in use is in compliance with the HACCP plan.
§ 270-4. Condition and sources of food.
A. Condition.
(1) Food in food service establishments and retail food stores shall be:
(a) In sound condition, free from spoilage, filth, or other
contamination; and
(b) Safe for human consumption.
(2) A food that is unsafe or adulterated shall be either:
(a) Salvaged according to a procedure proposed by the license
holder subject to approval by the Salem Health Division; or
(b) Discarded.
(3) Ready-to-eat food that may have been contaminated by an
employee who has been restricted or excluded as specified in
§ 270-14B shall be discarded.
(4) Food that is contaminated by food employees, consumers, or other
persons through contact with their hands, bodily discharges,
including but not limited to nasal or oral discharges, or other
means shall be discarded.
(5) Only the following egg products shall be acceptable for sale or use:
(a) Clean and sound eggs which are labeled and graded in
accordance with the requirements of the New Hampshire
Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food under the
provisions of RSA 428:22 to 428:30;43
(b) Liquid, frozen, or dry eggs and egg products if obtained
pasteurized; and
(c) Hard boiled, peeled eggs, commercially prepared and
packaged.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-4
1:147
(6) Retail food store or food service establishment operators shall not
apply sulfiting agents to fresh fruits and vegetables intended for
raw consumption nor serve or offer for sale for raw consumption
these foods if so treated before receipt by others, with the
exception of grapes.
(7) Only the following milk products shall be acceptable for sale or use:
(a) Pasteurized fluid milk and fluid milk products; and
(b) Dry milk and dry milk products made from pasteurized milk
and milk products.
(8) The following foods shall be discarded as solid waste in accordance
with § 270-38:
(a) Spoiled foods;
(b) Refrozen foods;
(c) Foods from swollen, rusty or leaky cans;
(d) Foods damaged by fire, smoke, water or other contaminating
substance; and
(e) Dented cans with compromised hermetic seals.
(9) Shellstock shall meet the requirements of NH He-P 2150.03(a).
B. Sources.
(1) Food in food service establishments and retail food stores shall be
obtained from sources that comply with all laws relating to food
and food labeling.
(2) Food that is not from an approved source as specified in this section
shall be discarded.
(3) Food in hermetically sealed containers that was not prepared in a
food service establishment that commercially processes food shall
not be sold or used by food service establishments or retail food
stores.
(4) Ice shall be:
(a) Manufactured from potable water and handled in a sanitary
manner if used or offered for sale by license holders; and
(b) Packaged if offered for sale by license holders.
(5) All bottled water used or served in food service establishments or
retail food stores shall be from a source which is licensed or
registered by the New Hampshire Department of Health and
Human Services in accordance with RSA 143:10.
§ 270-4 SALEM CODE § 270-4
1:148
(6) Molluscan shellfish shall be obtained from sources certified under
RSA 143:21.
(7) Fish, other than molluscan shellfish, intended for consumption in
their raw form shall be:
(a) Obtained from a supplier which freezes the fish as specified
under § 270-6; or
(b) Frozen on the premises as specified under § 270-6P, and
records of freeze temperature and time to which the fish is
subjected shall be retained for a period of 90 calendar days
beyond the time of service or sale of the fish.
(8) Raw and frozen shucked shellfish shall be obtained in
nonreturnable packages legibly bearing:
(a) The name and address of the shucker-packer of the shellfish;
(b) The person's authorized certificate number; and
(c) The sell by date for packages with a capacity of less than 1.87
liters, 1/2 gallon, or the date shucked for packages with a
capacity of 1.87 liters, 1/2 gallon, or more.
(9) Food service establishments and retail food stores shall not sell or
provide fish unless they are commercially caught or harvested.
(10) Molluscan shellfish which have been recreationally caught or
harvested shall not be sold by license holders.
(11) For highly susceptible populations:
(a) Pasteurized shell eggs or pasteurized liquid, frozen or dry eggs
or egg products shall be substituted for raw shell eggs in the
preparation of:
[1] Foods including but not limited to Caesar salad,
hollandaise or bernaise sauce, mayonnaise, eggnog, ice
cream, and egg-fortified beverages that are not cooked as
specified in § 270-6; and
[2] Cooked eggs if the eggs are broken, combined in a
container, and not cooked immediately or if the eggs are
held before service following cooking.
(b) Apple juice, apple cider, and other beverages containing apple
juice shall be obtained pasteurized or in a commercially sterile
shelf-stable form in a hermetically sealed container.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-4
1:149

ARTICLE II
Food Protection
§ 270-5. Food storage and identification.
§ 270-6. Temperature requirements for potentially hazardous foods.
A. Bulk foods. Unless its identity is unmistakable, bulk food, including but
not limited to cooking oil, syrup, salt, sugar, or flour, not stored in the
product container or package in which it was obtained, shall be stored
in a container identifying the food by common name.
B. Shellstock and shucked shellfish identification and original container.
(1) Except as specified in Subsection B(2) and (3) below, molluscan
shellfish shall not be removed from the container in which they
were received other than immediately before sale or preparation
for service.
(2) Shellstock may be removed from the container in which they were
received and displayed on drained ice or held in a display container,
and a quantity specified by a consumer shall only be removed from
the display or display container and provided to the consumer if:
(a) The source of the shellstock on display is identified and
recorded as specified under NH He-P 2150.03(a); and
(b) The shellstock are protected from contamination.
(3) Shucked shellfish may be removed from the container in which they
were received and held in a display container from which individual
servings are dispensed upon a consumer's request if:
(a) The labeling information for the shellfish on display as
specified under § 270-4 is retained and correlated to the date
when, or dates during which, the shellfish are sold or served;
and
(b) The shellfish are protected from contamination.
C. Consumption of raw or undercooked animal foods. If a raw or
undercooked animal food, including but not limited to beef, eggs, fish,
lamb, pork, poultry, or shellfish, is offered in a ready-to-eat form as a
deli, menu, vended, or other item, or as a raw ingredient in another
ready-to-eat food, the license holder shall inform consumers by
brochures, deli case or menu advisories, label statements, table tents,
placards or other effective written means of the significantly increased
risk associated with especially vulnerable consumers eating such foods
raw or undercooked.
A. Potentially hazardous foods.
§ 270-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:151
(1) Potentially hazardous foods, as defined in § 270-3, shall include but
not be limited to:
(a) An animal food, or a food of animal origin, that is raw or heattreated;
(b) A food of plant origin that is heat-treated or consists of raw
seed sprouts;
(c) Cut melons; and
(d) Garlic and oil mixtures that are not acidified or otherwise
modified at a food service establishment that processes food in
a way that results in mixtures that do not support the rapid and
progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms
or the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum.
(2) Potentially hazardous foods shall not include:
(a) An air-cooled hard-boiled egg with shell intact.
(b) A food with an aw value of 0.85 or less.
(c) A food with a pH level of 4.6 or below when measured at 24° C.
(75° F.).
(d) A food, in an unopened hermetically sealed container, that is
commercially processed to achieve and maintain commercial
sterility under conditions of nonrefrigerated storage and
distribution.
(e) A food for which laboratory evidence demonstrates that the
rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic
microorganisms or the growth of Salmonella enteritidis in eggs
or Clostridium botulinum cannot occur, such as a food that has
an aw value above 0.85 and a pH level above 4.6 when
measured at 24° C. (75° F.), and that may contain a
preservative, other barrier to the growth of microorganisms, or
a combination of barriers that inhibit the growth of
microorganisms.
(f) A food that does not support the rapid and progressive growth
of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms or the growth and
toxin production of Clostridium botulinum even though the
food may contain an infectious or toxigenic microorganism or
chemical or physical contaminant at a level sufficient to cause
illness.
(3) The temperature of potentially hazardous food shall be 5° C. (41°
F.) or below or 60° C. (140° F.) or above at all times, except as
otherwise provided in these rules.
§ 270-6 SALEM CODE § 270-6
1:152
(4) Refrigerated potentially hazardous food shall be at a temperature
of 5° C. (41° F.) or below when received, except as provided in
Subsection J(3).
(5) Potentially hazardous food cooked to the temperature and time
specified in Subsections B to F which is received hot shall be
maintained at a temperature of 60° C. (140° F.) or above.
(6) Potentially hazardous food shall be at proper temperatures in
accordance with this section and shall show no signs of spoilage
when received.
B. Raw animal foods.
(1) Except as specified in Subsection B(2) and (3) below, raw animal
foods, including but not limited to eggs, fish, poultry, meat, and
foods containing these raw animal foods, shall be cooked so that
the entire portion of each of the identified foods meets the
following time and temperature requirements:
(a) Sixty-three degrees Celsius (145° F.) or above for 15 seconds
for:
[1] Raw shell eggs that are broken and prepared in response
to a consumer's order for immediate service; and
[2] Fish and meat, except for those identified in Subsection
B(3) below.
(b) For pork, comminuted fish and meats, injected meats, and eggs
that are not prepared as specified in Subsection B(1)(a)[1]
above, 68° C. (155° F.) for 15 seconds or the temperature
specified in Subsection C that corresponds to the cooking time.
(c) As specified in Subsection E for whole beef roasts and corned
beef roasts.
(d) Seventy-four degrees Celsius (165° F.) or above for 15 seconds
for poultry, stuffed fish, stuffed meat, stuffed pasta, stuffed
poultry, or stuffing containing fish, meat or poultry.
(2) The requirements of Subsection B(1) above shall not apply if,
except for food establishments serving a highly susceptible
population, the food is:
(a) A raw animal food, including but not limited to raw egg, raw
fish, raw marinated fish, raw molluscan shellfish, or steak
tartare; or
(b) A partially cooked food, including but not limited to lightly
cooked fish, rare meat, or soft cooked eggs served or offered
for sale in a ready-to-eat form, and the consumer is informed
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:153
under § 270-5C that, to ensure its safety, the food should be
cooked as specified under Subsection B(1) above.
(3) Roasts of beef and corned beef roasts shall be cooked:
(a) In an oven that is preheated to the temperature specified for
the roast's weight in Subsection D that is held at or above that
temperature; and
(b) To the temperature specified in Subsection E and held for the
corresponding amount of time required by Subsection E for
that temperature.
C. Minimum food temperature and holding time required for cooking all
parts of pork, comminuted fish and meats, and injected meats. The
minimum food temperature and holding time required under
Subsection B(1)(b) for cooking all parts of pork, comminuted fish, and
injected meats shall be in compliance with the requirements set forth in
Table 2.4.1 below:
Table 2.4.1 Minimum Temperature and Holding Time for
Cooking All Parts of Pork, Comminuted Fish and Meats, and
Injected Meats
Minimum Temperature Minimum Time
63° C. (145° F.) 3 minutes
66° C. (150° F.) 1 minute
D. Oven parameters required for destruction of pathogens on the surface
of whole beef roasts and corned beef roasts.
(1) Whole beef roasts and corned beef roasts shall be cooked in an
oven that is preheated to the temperature specified for the roast's
weight and held at that temperature, as specified in the
requirements set forth in Table 2.4.2 below:
Table 2.4.2 Cooking Temperatures for Beef Roasts and
Corned Beef Roasts Based on Oven Type and Weight
Oven Temperature/Roast Weight
Oven Type
Less than 4.5 kg (10
pounds)
4.5 kg (10 pounds) or
More
Still dry 177° C. (350° F.) or
more
121° C. (250° F.) or
more
Convection 163° C. (325° F.) or
more
121° C. (250° F.) or
more
High humidity 121° C. (250° F.) or
less
121° C. (250° F.) or less
(2) For cooking whole beef roasts and corned beef roasts in high
humidity oven types:
§ 270-6 SALEM CODE § 270-6
1:154
(a) The relative humidity shall be greater than 90% for at least one
hour as measured in the cooking chamber or exit of the oven;
or
(b) The roasts of beef or corned beef roasts shall be in a moistureimpermeable
bag that provides 100% humidity.
E. Minimum holding cooking required at specified temperatures for
cooking all parts of roasts of beef and corned beef.
(1) Whole beef roasts and corned beef roasts shall be cooked to heat all
parts of the roast to a temperature and for the holding time that
corresponds to that temperature as specified in Table 2.4.3 below:
Table 2.4.3 Minimum Holding Cooking Required at
Specified Temperatures for Cooking All Parts of Roasts of
Beef and Corned Beef
Temperature
Time
(minutes)
54° C. (130° F.) 121
56° C. (132° F.) 77
57° C. (134° F.) 47
58° C. (136° F.) 32
59° C. (138° F.) 19
60° C. (140° F.) 12
61° C. (142° F.) 8
62° C. (144° F.) 5
63° C. (145° F.) 3
(2) Holding times in Table 2.4.3 may include post-oven heat rise.
F. Microwave cooking. Raw animal foods cooked in a microwave oven
shall be:
(1) Rotated or stirred throughout or midway during cooking to
compensate for uneven distribution of heat;
(2) Covered to retain surface moisture;
(3) Heated to a temperature of at least 74° C. (165° F.) in all parts of
the food; and
(4) Allowed to stand covered for two minutes after cooking to obtain
temperature equilibrium.
G. Cooked fruits and vegetables. Fruits and vegetables cooked for hot
holding shall be cooked to a temperature of 60° C. (140° F.).
H. Reheating for hot holding.
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:155
(1) Potentially hazardous food that is cooked, cooled, and reheated for
hot holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the food reach a
temperature of at least 74° C. (165° F.) for 15 seconds.
(2) Potentially hazardous food reheated in a microwave oven for hot
holding shall be reheated so that all parts of the food reach a
temperature of at least 74° C. (165° F.) and the food is rotated or
stirred, covered, and allowed to stand covered for two minutes
after reheating.
(3) Ready-to-eat food taken from a commercially processed,
hermetically sealed container or from an intact package from a
licensed food service establishment commercially processing food
that is heated for hot holding shall be heated to a temperature of at
least 60° C. (140° F.).
(4) Reheating for hot holding shall be done so that the temperature of
the food goes from 5° C. (41° F.) to 74° C. (165° F.) within two
hours.
(5) Remaining unsliced portions of roasts of beef cooked as specified in
Subsection B shall be reheated for hot holding using oven
parameters and minimum time and temperature conditions
specified in Subsection B.
I. Reheating for immediate service. License holders shall serve cooked
and refrigerated food prepared for immediate service in response to an
individual consumer order, including but not limited to a roast beef
sandwich au jus, at any temperature.
J. Cooling.
(1) Cooked potentially hazardous food not being hot held or served
immediately to consumers shall be cooled as follows:
(a) From 60° C. (140° F.) to 21° C. (70° F.) within two hours; and
(b) From 21° C. (70° F.) to 5° C. (41° F.) or below within four hours.
(2) Potentially hazardous food shall be cooled to 5° C. (41° F.) or below
within four hours if prepared from ingredients at ambient
temperature, including but not limited to reconstituted foods and
canned tuna.
(3) A potentially hazardous food, including but not limited to shell eggs
and shellfish, received in compliance with laws allowing a
temperature above 5° C. (41° F.) during shipment from the supplier
shall be cooled to 5° C. (41° F.) or below within four hours.
K. Cooling methods.
§ 270-6 SALEM CODE § 270-6
1:156
(1) Cooling shall be accomplished by one or more of the following
methods based on the type of food being cooled, including but not
limited to:
(a) Placing the food in shallow pans;
(b) Separating the food into smaller or thinner portions;
(c) Using rapid cooling equipment;
(d) Stirring the food in a container placed in an ice water bath;
(e) Using containers that facilitate heat transfer; or
(f) Adding ice or frozen ingredients.
(2) When placed in cooling or cold holding equipment, food containers
in which food is being cooled shall be:
(a) Arranged in the equipment to provide maximum heat transfer
through container walls; and
(b) Loosely covered, or uncovered if protected from overhead
contamination as specified § 270-11E, during the cooling
period to facilitate heat transfer from the surface of the food.
L. Potentially hazardous food; hot and cold holding. Except during
preparation, cooking or cooling, or when time is used as a public health
control as specified in Subsection O, potentially hazardous food shall be
maintained:
(1) At 60° C. (140° F.) or above, except that roasts cooked to a
temperature and for time specified in Subsection E(1) may be held
at a temperature of 54° C. (130° F.); or
(2) At 5° C. (41° F.) or less, except as specified Subsection N(6).
M. Vending machines; automatic shutoff.
(1) A machine vending potentially hazardous food shall have an
automatic control that prevents the machine from vending food if
there is a power failure, mechanical failure, or other condition that
results in an internal machine temperature that cannot maintain
food temperatures as required under this section until the machine
is serviced and restocked with food that has been maintained at
required temperatures.
(2) It shall be permissible for the temperature specified for activation
of the automatic shutoff within a machine vending potentially
hazardous food to deviate from the temperature required under
Subsection M(1) above in accordance with the following:
(a) In a refrigerated vending machine, at an ambient temperature
of 7° C. (45° F.) or more, for no more than 30 minutes
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:157
immediately after the machine is filled, serviced or restocked;
or
(b) In a hot holding vending machine, at an ambient temperature
of 60° C. (140° F.) or less, for no more than 120 minutes after
the machine is filled, serviced, or restocked.
N. Ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food; date marking and disposition.
(1) Except as specified in Subsection N(3) below, refrigerated, readyto-
eat, potentially hazardous food prepared and held for more than
24 hours in a food service establishment and a retail food store
shall be marked with the date of preparation and consume by date
as specified under Subsection N(5) below.
(2) Except as specified in Subsection N(3) and (4) below, a container of
refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food prepared and
packaged by another food service establishment, retail food store
or a food service establishment commercially processing food shall
be marked to indicate the date, as specified under Subsection N(7)
below, by which the food shall be consumed.
(3) The requirements of Subsection N(1) and (2) above shall not apply
to individual meal portions served or repackaged for sale from a
bulk container upon a consumer's request.
(4) The requirements of Subsection N(2) above shall not apply to
whole, unsliced portions of a cured and processed product with
original casing maintained on the remaining portion, such as
bologna, salami, or other sausage in a cellulose casing.
(5) A food specified in Subsection N(1) above shall be discarded if not
consumed within seven calendar days from the date of preparation.
(6) Refrigerated, ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food prepared in
a food service establishment or retail food store and dispensed in a
vending machine with an automatic shutoff control that is activated
at:
(a) A temperature of 5° C. (41° F.) shall be discarded if not sold
within seven days.
(b) A temperature of 7° C. (45° F.) shall be discarded if not sold
within four days.
(7) A food specified in Subsection N(2) above shall be discarded if not
consumed within seven calendar days after the original package is
opened in a food establishment.
O. Time as a public health control.
(1) The measures contained in this subsection shall be implemented by
any license holder choosing to use time only, rather than time in
§ 270-6 SALEM CODE § 270-6
1:158
conjunction with temperature, as a public health control to assure
the safety of:
(a) A working supply of potentially hazardous food which has not
yet been cooked; and
(b) A supply of ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food that is
displayed or held for service for immediate consumption.
(2) Foods listed under Subsection O(1)(a) and (b) above shall be:
(a) Marked or otherwise identified to indicate the time of day that
is four hours later than the time of day when the food is
removed from temperature control, and discarded if not served
by that marked or identified time; or
(b) Discarded if found in unmarked containers or packages or if
marked with a time that is more than four hours past the time
that the food is removed from temperature control.
(3) License holders choosing to use time only as a public health
control, as authorized by this subsection, shall prepare written
procedures specifying the method for ensuring compliance with:
(a) The provisions of Subsection O(2) above; and
(b) Subsection J for food that is prepared, cooked, and refrigerated
before time is used as a public health control.
P. Parasite destruction.
(1) Before service or sale in ready-to-eat form, raw, raw-marinated,
partially cooked, or marinated partially cooked fish other than
molluscan shellfish shall be frozen throughout to:
(a) A temperature of -20° C. (-4° F.) or below for 168 hours, seven
days, in a freezer; or
(b) A temperature of -35° C. (-31° F.) or below for 15 hours in a
blast freezer.
(2) Records of freezing temperatures and time to which the fish are
subjected shall be recorded, and records shall be retained for 90
calendar days beyond the time of service or sale of the fish.
Q. Nondairy creaming, whitening, or whipping agents. Nondairy
creaming, whitening, or whipping agents reconstituted on the premises
shall be stored in sanitized, covered containers not exceeding one
gallon in capacity and cooled to 5° C. (41° F.) or below within four hours
after preparation.
R. Frozen foods. Frozen foods shall be kept frozen until cooked or thawed
as provided under § 270-9.
§ 270-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:159
§ 270-7. Cooling, heating and holding capacities.
§ 270-8. Temperature measuring devices.
S. Refrigeration and hot food facilities to maintain product temperature.
Refrigeration and hot food facilities shall be provided to assure the
maintenance of all potentially hazardous food at required temperatures
during storage, preparation, display, service and transportation.
A. Equipment for cooling and heating food, and holding cold and hot food,
shall be sufficient in number and capacity, based upon the amount and
type of food, to provide food temperatures as specified under § 270-6A
to K.
B. Cooling systems which use outside air to cool walk-ins shall be
acceptable, provided that:
(1) The regulatory authority is notified prior to installation;
(2) The air intake is located where it will not receive exhaust from
idling vehicles, rest rooms, hoods or any toxic fumes;
(3) Air filters shall be used; and
(4) The walk-in compressor shall automatically start when the outside
air is unable to cool the walk-in to 5° C. (41° F.).
A. Specifications.
(1) Food temperature measuring devices shall be provided and readily
accessible for use in assuring attainment and maintenance of food
temperatures as specified under § 270-6A to K.
(2) In a mechanically refrigerated or hot food storage unit, the sensor
of a temperature measuring device shall be located to measure the
air temperature in the warmest part of a mechanically refrigerated
unit and in the coolest part of a hot food storage unit.
(3) Except as specified in Subsection A(4) below, cold or hot holding
equipment used for potentially hazardous food shall be designed to
include and shall be equipped with at least one integral or
permanently affixed temperature measuring device that is located
to allow easy viewing of the device's temperature display.
(4) The requirements of Subsection A(3) above shall not apply to
equipment for which the placement of a temperature measuring
device is not a practical means for measuring the ambient air
surrounding the food because of design, type, and use of the
equipment, including but not limited to calrod units, heat lamps,
cold plates, bain-maries, steam tables, insulated food transport
containers, and salad bars.
§ 270-6 SALEM CODE § 270-8
1:160
§ 270-9. Proper thawing of potentially hazardous foods.
(5) Temperature measuring devices shall be designed to be easily
readable.
(6) Food temperature measuring devices and water temperature
measuring devices on dishwashing machines shall have a
numerical scale, printed record, or digital readout in increments no
greater than 1° C. or 2° F. in the intended range of use.
B. Accuracy of ambient temperature measuring devices.
(1) Ambient air and water temperature measuring devices that are
scaled only in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius and Fahrenheit
shall be designed to be easily readable and accurate to +/- 1.5° C.
(2.7° F.) in the intended range of use.
(2) Ambient air and water temperature measuring devices that are
scaled only in Fahrenheit shall be accurate to +/- 3° F. in the
intended range of use.
(3) Food temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in Celsius
or dually scaled in Celsius and Fahrenheit shall be accurate to +/-
1° C. (1.8° F.) in the intended range of use.
(4) Food temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in
Fahrenheit shall be accurate to +/- 2° F. in the intended range of
use.
A. Proper thawing. Potentially hazardous food shall be thawed:
(1) By keeping it under refrigeration that maintains the food
temperature at 5° C. (41° F.) or below;
(2) By completely submerging it under running water:
(a) At a water temperature of 21° C. (70° F.) or below; and
(b) With sufficient water velocity to agitate and float off loose
particles in an overflow;
(3) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of readyto-
eat food to rise above 5° C. (41° F.);
(4) For a period of time that does not allow thawed portions of a raw
animal food requiring cooking as specified in § 270-6B(1)(a) to (d)
to be above 5° C. (41° F.) for more than four hours, including:
(a) The time the food is exposed to the running water; and
(b) The time needed for preparation for cooking or the time it
takes under refrigeration to lower the food temperature to 5°
C. (41° F.);
§ 270-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-9
1:161
§ 270-10. Returned food; reservice or sale.
§ 270-11. Packaged and unpackaged food; separation, packaging
and segregation.
(5) As part of a cooking process if the frozen food is:
(a) Cooked as specified in § 270-6B(1)(a) to (d); or
(b) Thawed in a microwave oven and immediately transferred to
conventional cooking equipment, with no interruption in the
process; or
(6) Using any procedure that thaws a portion of frozen ready-to-eat
food that is prepared for immediate service in response to an
individual consumer's order.
B. Potentially hazardous food; slacking. Frozen potentially hazardous food
that is slacked to moderate the temperature shall be held:
(1) Under refrigeration that maintains the food temperature at 5° C.
(41° F.) or less; or
(2) At any temperature if the food remains frozen.
A. Returned food.
(1) Except as specified under Subsection A(2) below, after being
served or sold and in the possession of a consumer, food that is
unused or returned by the consumer shall not be offered as food for
human consumption.
(2) Except as specified under Subsection B, food that is not potentially
hazardous, such as crackers and condiments, in an unopened
original package maintained in sound condition may be reserved or
resold.
B. Reservice prohibited for certain populations. Food, in an unopened
original package, shall not be reserved in a food service establishment
that serves an especially vulnerable population.
A. Separation.
(1) Food shall be protected from cross-contamination by:
(a) Separating raw animal foods during storage, preparation,
holding, and display from:
[1] Raw ready-to-eat food, including other raw animal food,
including but not limited to fish for sushi, molluscan
shellfish, or other raw ready-to-eat food such as
vegetables; and
[2] Cooked ready-to-eat food;
§ 270-9 SALEM CODE § 270-11
1:162
(b) Separating types of raw animal foods from each other,
including but not limited to beef, fish, lamb, pork, and poultry,
during storage, preparation, holding and display, except when
combined as ingredients, by:
[1] Using separate equipment for each type of food;
[2] Arranging each type of food in equipment so that crosscontamination
of one type with another is prevented; or
[3] Preparing each type of food at different times or in
separate areas;
(c) Cleaning and sanitizing equipment and utensils as specified
under § 270-25;
(d) Except as specified in Subsection A(2) below, storing the food
in packages, containers, or wrappings;
(e) Cleaning hermetically sealed food containers of visible soil
before opening;
(f) Protecting food containers that are received packaged
together in a case or overwrap from cuts when the case or
overwrap is opened;
(g) Storing damaged, spoiled or recalled food being held in the
establishment in designated areas and segregated from other
food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service and singleuse
articles; and
(h) Separating fruits and vegetables, before they are washed as
specified under Subsection J, from ready-to-eat food.
(2) The requirements of Subsection A(1)(d) above shall not apply to:
(a) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables and nuts in the shell
that require peeling or hulling before consumption;
(b) Primal cuts, quarters, or sides of raw meat or slab bacon that
are hung on clean, sanitized hooks or placed on clean,
sanitized racks;
(c) Whole, uncut, processed meats, including but not limited to
country hams, and smoked or cured sausages that are placed
on clean, sanitized racks;
(d) Food being cooled as specified under § 270-6K(2)(b); and
(e) Shellstock.
B. Consumer self-service operations.
(1) Unpackaged, raw animal food, including but not limited to beef,
lamb, pork, poultry, frozen shrimp and fish, shall not be offered for
§ 270-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-11
1:163
consumer self-service, except that this subsection shall not apply
to:
(a) Consumer self-service of ready-to-eat foods at buffets or salad
bars that serve foods, including but not limited to sushi or raw
shellfish; or
(b) Ready-to-cook individual portions for immediate cooking and
consumption on the premises, including but not limited to
consumer-cooked meats or consumer-selected ingredients for
Mongolian barbecue.
(2) Consumer self-service operations for ready-to-eat foods shall be
provided with suitable utensils or effective dispensing methods that
protect the food from contamination.
(3) Consumer self-service operations, including but not limited to
buffets and salad bars, shall be monitored by employees trained in
food safety procedures.
C. Food contact with equipment and utensils. Food shall not contact:
(1) Probe-type price or identification tags; or
(2) Surfaces of utensils and equipment that are not cleaned as
specified under § 270-17 of these rules.
D. Preventing contamination when tasting food. A food employee shall not
use a utensil more than once to taste food that is to be sold or served.
E. Food protection from contamination. Food shall be protected from
potential contamination, including but not limited to dust, insects,
rodents, unclean equipment and utensils, unnecessary handling,
coughs and sneezes, flooding, drainage, and overhead leakage or
overhead drippage from condensation, at all times, including while
being:
(1) Stored;
(2) Prepared;
(3) Displayed;
(4) Served; and
(5) Transported.
F. Transportation of food and food utensils.
(1) During transportation, food and food utensils shall be kept in
covered containers or completely wrapped so as to be protected
from contamination.
§ 270-11 SALEM CODE § 270-11
1:164
(2) Foods in original individual packages shall not be required to be
overwrapped or covered if the original package has not been torn
or broken.
(3) During transportation, including transportation to another location
for service or catering operations, food shall meet the
requirements of these rules relating to food protection and food
storage.
G. Food on display. Food on display shall be protected from contamination
by the use of:
(1) Packaging;
(2) Counter, service line or salad bar food guards;
(3) Enclosed display cases; or
(4) Other means which protect food from contamination.
H. Using clean tableware for second portions and refills.
(1) Food employees shall not use tableware and single-service articles
soiled by the consumer to provide second portions or refills.
(2) Except as specified in Subsection H(3) below, self-service
consumers shall not be allowed to use soiled tableware, including
single-service articles, to obtain additional food from the display
and serving equipment.
(3) Self-service consumers shall be allowed to reuse cups and glasses if
refilling is a contamination-free process, as specified under
§§ 270-12 and 270-13.
I. Refilling returnables. A take-home food container returned to a food
service establishment or retail food store shall not be refilled with a
potentially hazardous food.
J. Washing of raw fruits and raw vegetables. Except for raw fruits and
vegetables that are intended for washing by the consumer before
consumption, raw fruits and raw vegetables shall be thoroughly washed
in a food preparation sink with potable water before being cooked or
served.
K. Storage of food and containers.
(1) Containers of food shall be stored either:
(a) A minimum of six inches (15 centimeters) above the floor in a
manner that protects the food from splash and other
contamination and that permits cleaning of the storage area;
or
§ 270-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-11
1:165
(b) On dollies, racks or pallets, provided that equipment can be
moved.
(2) Food and containers of food shall not be stored under exposed or
unprotected sewer lines or waterlines, except for automatic fire
protection sprinkler heads required by law.
(3) Food shall not be stored in toilet rooms, dressing rooms, locker
rooms, garbage rooms, in mechanical rooms or vestibules.
L. Ice as a cooling medium. Ice shall not be used as food after use as a
medium for cooling:
(1) The exterior surfaces of food, including but not limited to melons
and fish;
(2) Packaged foods such as canned beverages; or
(3) Cooling coils and tubes of equipment.
M. Storage or display of food in contact with water or ice.
(1) Packaged food shall not be stored in direct contact with ice or
water if the food is subject to the entry of water because of:
(a) The nature of its packaging, wrapping, or container; or
(b) Its positioning in the ice or water.
(2) Unpackaged food shall only be stored in direct contact with drained
ice, except for immersion of:
(a) Whole raw fruits or vegetables;
(b) Cut raw vegetables, including but not limited to celery, carrot
sticks and cut potatoes;
(c) Tofu in ice or water; or
(d) Raw chicken and raw fish that are received immersed in ice in
shipping containers and that remain in that condition while in
storage awaiting preparation, display, service or sale.
N. Service of cream, half-and-half, and nondairy creaming or whitening
agents. Cream, half-and-half, and nondairy creaming or whitening
agents shall be provided in an individual service container or covered
pour-type pitcher or drawn from a refrigerated dispenser designed for
such service.
O. Service of condiments, sugar, seasonings and dressings.
(1) Condiments, seasonings and dressings for self-service use shall be
provided in individual packages, from dispensers, or from
containers protected in accordance with Subsection G.
§ 270-11 SALEM CODE § 270-11
1:166
§ 270-12. Handling of food and ice minimized.
§ 270-13. Storage of utensils.
During pauses in food preparation or dispensing, food preparation and
dispensing utensils shall be stored:
(2) Except for catsup and other sauces served in the original container
or pour-type dispenser, condiments provided for table or counter
service shall be individually portioned.
(3) Sugar for consumer usage shall be provided in individual packages
or in pour-type dispensers.
A. Single-use gloves, used for one purpose and discarded. If used, singleuse
gloves shall be:
(1) Worn for only one task, including but not limited to working with
ready-to-eat food or with raw animal food, and then discarded;
(2) Discarded if damaged or soiled, or when interruptions occur in the
operation; and
(3) Used in conjunction with the requirements of § 270-15.
B. Consumer self-service utensils. A food dispensing utensil shall be
available for each container displayed at a consumer self-service unit,
including but not limited to a buffet or salad bar.
C. Ice for consumers. Ice for consumer use shall be dispensed:
(1) By employees with scoops, tongs, or other ice dispensing utensils;
or
(2) Through automatic self-service ice dispensing equipment.
A. Except as specified under Subsection D(1) below, in the food with their
handles above the top of the food and the container;
B. On a clean portion of the food preparation table or cooking equipment
which is cleaned and sanitized at a frequency specified under
§ 270-25E;
C. In running water of sufficient velocity to flush particulates to the drain,
if used with moist food, including but not limited to ice cream or
mashed potatoes; or
D. When the food is not potentially hazardous:
(1) With their handles above the top of the food within containers or
equipment that can be closed, including but not limited to bins of
sugar, flour, or cinnamon; or
(2) In a clean, protected location.
§ 270-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-13
1:167

ARTICLE III
Personnel
§ 270-14. Reporting of diagnosis or symptoms suggestive of foodborne
illness.
A. Person in charge.
(1) The license holder shall ensure that a person in charge is present at
the food service establishment or retail food store during all hours
of operation.
(2) The person in charge shall require food employees and food
employee applicants to whom a conditional offer of employment is
made to report information about their health and activities, as
they relate to diseases that are transmissible through food, in a
manner that allows the person in charge to prevent the likelihood
of food-borne disease transmission if the food employee or food
employee applicant:
(a) Is diagnosed with an illness due to:
[1] Salmonella species;
[2] Shigella species;
[3] Escherichia coli 0157:H7;
[4] Hepatitis A virus infection;
[5] Amebiasis;
[6] Campylobacteriosis;
[7] Cryptosporidiosis; or
[8] Yersiniosis;
(b) Has a symptom caused by illness, infection, or other source
that is:
[1] Associated with an acute gastrointestinal illness, including
but not limited to diarrhea, fever, vomiting, or jaundice;
[2] Sore throat with fever; or
[3] A lesion containing pus, including but not limited to a boil
or infected wound that is open or draining and is:
[a] On the hands or wrists, unless an impermeable cover
such as finger cot or stall protects the lesion and a
single-use glove is worn over the impermeable cover;
[b] On exposed portions of the arms, unless the lesion is
protected by an impermeable cover; or
§ 270-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-14
1:169
[c] On other parts of the body, unless the lesion is covered
by a dry, durable, tight-fitting bandage;
(c) Had a past illness from an infectious agent specified in
Subsection A(2)(a) above; or
(d) Meets one or more of the following high-risk conditions:
[1] Is suspected of causing or being exposed to a confirmed
disease outbreak caused by Salmonella species, Shigella
species, E. coli 0157 or Hepatitis A virus illness, including
an outbreak at an event including but not limited to a
family meal, church supper, or ethnic festival because the
food employee or applicant:
[a] Prepared food implicated in the outbreak;
[b] Consumed food implicated in the outbreak; or
[c] Consumed food at the event prepared by a person who
is infected or ill with the infectious agent that caused
the outbreak or who is suspected of being a shedder of
the infectious agent;
[2] Lives in the same household as a person who is diagnosed
with a disease caused by Salmonella species, Shigella
species, E. coli 0157:H7, or Hepatitis A virus infection;
[3] Lives in the same household as a person who attends or
works in a setting where there is a confirmed disease
outbreak caused by Salmonella species, Shigella species,
E. coli 0157:H7, or Hepatitis A virus infection;
[4] Traveled out of the United States or to a United States
territory within the last 50 calendar days to an area that is
identified as having epidemic or endemic disease caused
by Hepatitis A based on information published by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, including but
not limited to the document titled "Health Information for
International Travel"; or
[5] Traveled out of the United States or to a United States
territory within the last seven calendar days to an area
that is identified as having epidemic or endemic disease
caused by Salmonella species, Shigella species or E. coli
0157:H7.
B. Exclusions and restrictions.
(1) A food employee shall be excluded from a food service
establishment or retail food store if diagnosed with an infectious
agent specified in Subsection A(2)(a) until the provisions of NH He-
P 301.05 are met and the person excluded provides to the license
§ 270-14 SALEM CODE § 270-14
1:170
§ 270-15. Personal cleanliness.
holder written medical documentation from a physician licensed to
practice medicine that specifies that the excluded person is able to
work in an unrestricted capacity in a food service establishment or
retail food store.
(2) A food employee shall be restricted from working with exposed
food, clean equipment, utensils, and linens, and unwrapped singleservice
and single-use articles until the food employee is no longer
experiencing a symptom specified in Subsection A(2)(b) but has a
stool specimen that yields a specimen culture that is positive for an
infectious agent specified in Subsection A(2)(a).
C. Suspected or confirmed food-borne disease outbreaks.
(1) During a suspect or confirmed food-borne disease outbreak, as
determined by the Health Division, all food employees in the
implicated establishment shall submit biological specimens as
required under RSA 141-C:9.
(2) During a suspect or confirmed food-borne disease outbreak, as
determined by the Health Division, any food employee who has had
any of the symptoms specified in Subsection A(2)(b) within the
previous two weeks shall be excluded from work until the
appropriate biological specimens requested by the Health Division
under RSA 141-C:9 are submitted and found negative.
D. Reporting by the person in charge. The person in charge shall notify the
Health Division's Bureau of Disease Prevention and Control of a food
employee or a person who applies for a job as a food employee who is
diagnosed with or suspected of having an illness due to any food-borne
disease that is reportable under NH He-P 301.02.
A. Employees shall keep their hands and exposed portions of their arms
clean.
B. Employees shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms
with a cleaning compound in a handwashing sink that is equipped as
specified under § 270-35 by vigorously rubbing together the surfaces of
their lathered hands and arms for a least 20 seconds and thoroughly
rinsing with clean water. Employees shall pay particular attention to the
areas underneath the fingernails and between the fingers.
C. Employees shall clean their hands and exposed portions of their arms as
specified in Subsection B above:
(1) Before engaging in food preparation, including working with
exposed food, clean equipment and utensils, and unwrapped singleservice
and single-use articles;
§ 270-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-15
1:171
(2) After touching bare human body parts other than clean hands and
clean, exposed portions of arms;
(3) After using the toilet room;
(4) After caring for or handling support animals or aquatic animals;
(5) After coughing, sneezing, using a handkerchief or disposable
tissue, using tobacco, eating or drinking;
(6) After handling soiled equipment or utensils;
(7) During food preparation, as often as necessary to remove soil and
contamination and to prevent cross-contamination when changing
tasks;
(8) When switching between working with raw foods and working with
ready-to-eat foods; and
(9) After engaging in any other activity that contaminates the hands.
D. Employees shall:
(1) Clean their hands in a handwashing sink; and
(2) Not clean their hands:
(a) In a sink used for food preparation; or
(b) In a three-compartment sink used for dishwashing.
E. A hand sanitizer and a chemical hand sanitizing solution used as a hand
dip shall not be used in lieu of handwashing as required by this section.
F. Employees shall keep their fingernails trimmed, filed, and maintained
so the edges and surfaces are smooth and cleanable and not rough.
G. While preparing food, employees shall not wear jewelry on their arms
and hands except for a plain wedding band.
H. Preventing contamination from hands.
(1) Except when washing fruits and vegetables as specified under
§ 270-11J, food employees shall not contact exposed, ready-to-eat
food with their bare hands and shall use suitable utensils, including
but not limited to deli tissue, spatulas, tongs, single-use gloves or
dispensing equipment.
(2) Food employees shall minimize bare hand and arm contact with
exposed food that is not in a ready-to-eat form.
I. Hygienic practices.
(1) An employee shall not eat, drink, or use any form of tobacco except
in designated areas which are protected against causing
contamination of:
§ 270-15 SALEM CODE § 270-15
1:172
§ 270-16. Clean clothes; hair restraint.
(a) Exposed food;
(b) Clean equipment;
(c) Utensils;
(d) Linens; or
(e) Unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
(2) A food employee may drink from a closed beverage container if the
container is handled so as to prevent contamination of:
(a) The employee's hands;
(b) The container;
(c) Exposed food;
(d) Clean equipment;
(e) Utensils;
(f) Linens; and
(g) Unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
(3) Utensil washing, equipment washing or food preparation sinks
shall not be used for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor
cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water or similar liquid
wastes.
A. Food employees shall wear clean outer clothing.
B. When moving from a raw food operation to a ready-to-eat operation,
food employees shall wear a clean outer covering or change to clean
clothing if their clothing is soiled.
C. Employees working with exposed food, clean equipment, utensils,
linens, or unwrapped single-service and single-use articles shall wear
hair restraints, including but not limited to hats or hair nets.
D. Food employees shall remove aprons when using the rest room.
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-16
1:173

ARTICLE IV
Food Equipment and Utensils: Food-Contact Surfaces
§ 270-17. Food-contact equipment and surfaces to meet standards.
A. All food equipment shall be certified or classified for sanitation by an
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) accredited certification
program.
(1) Characteristics of multiuse materials. Materials used in the
construction of utensils and food-contact surfaces of equipment
shall:
(a) Not allow the migration of deleterious substances;
(b) Not impart colors, odors, or tastes to food; and
(c) Be:
[1] Safe;
[2] Durable, corrosion-resistant, and nonabsorbent;
[3] Sufficient in weight and thickness to withstand repeated
dishwashing;
[4] Finished to have a smooth, easily cleanable surface; and
[5] Resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring,
distortion, and decomposition.
(2) Good repair and proper adjustment.
(a) Equipment shall be maintained in a state of repair and
condition that meets the requirements specified in this section
and § 270-18.
(b) Equipment components, including but not limited to doors,
seals, hinges, fasteners and kick plates, shall be kept intact,
tight, and adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
(c) Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be kept sharp to
minimize the creation of metal fragments that can contaminate
food when the container is opened.
(3) Multiuse food-contact surfaces. Multiuse food-contact surfaces
shall be:
(a) Smooth;
(b) Free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar
imperfections;
(c) Free of sharp internal angles, corners, and crevices;
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:175
(d) Finished to have smooth welds and joints; and
(e) Accessible for cleaning and inspection by one of the following
methods:
[1] Without being disassembled;
[2] By disassembling without the use of tools; or
[3] By easy disassembling with the use of handheld tools
commonly available to maintenance and cleaning
personnel, including but not limited to screwdrivers,
pliers, open-end wrenches, and Allen wrenches.
(4) Single-service articles. Single-service articles shall be made from
clean, sanitary, food-grade materials.
(5) CIP equipment.
(a) CIP equipment shall meet the characteristics specified under
Subsection A(1) above and shall be designed and constructed
so that:
[1] Cleaning and sanitizing solutions circulate throughout a
fixed system and contact all interior food-contact surfaces;
and
[2] The system is self-draining or capable of being completely
drained of cleaning and sanitizing solutions.
(b) CIP equipment that is not designed to be disassembled for
cleaning shall be designed with inspection access points to
assure that all interior food-contact surfaces throughout the
fixed system are being effectively cleaned.
(6) New or remodeled walk-in refrigerators and freezers.
(a) New or remodeled walk-in refrigerators and freezers shall not
contain interior wood surfaces.
(b) Upon change of ownership, all existing walk-in refrigerators
and freezers shall not contain interior wood surfaces.
(7) Limitation on use of wood.
(a) Except for the following which shall be hard maple or an
equivalently hard, close-grained, nonabsorbent wood, wood
and wood wicker shall not be used as a food-contact surface:
[1] Cutting boards;
[2] Cutting blocks;
[3] Bakers' tables;
§ 270-17 SALEM CODE § 270-17
1:176
[4] Utensils, including but not limited to rolling pins,
doughnut dowels, salad bowls, and chopsticks; and
[5] Paddles used in confectionery operations for pressure
kettles when manually preparing confections at a
temperature of 110° C. (230° F.) or above.
(b) Whole, uncut, raw fruits and vegetables and nuts in the shell
may be kept in the wood shipping containers in which they
were received until used.
(8) Limitation on use of cast iron. Cast iron shall not be used for
utensils or food-contact surfaces of equipment except as:
(a) A surface for cooking; or
(b) In utensils for serving food if the utensils are used only as part
of an uninterrupted process from cooking through service.
(9) Limitation on use of lead in solder and flux. Solder and flux
containing lead in excess of 0.2% shall not be used on surfaces that
contact food.
(10) Limitation on use of lead in ceramic, china, and crystal utensils.
Ceramic, china, crystal utensils, and decorative utensils, including
but not limited to hand-painted ceramic or china that is used in
contact with food, shall be lead-free or contain levels of lead not
exceeding the limits of the utensil categories specified in Table
2.6.1 below:
Table 2.6.1 Maximum Lead Limits Allowed in Certain
Utensil Categories
Utensil Category Description
Maximum Lead
(mg/l)
Hot beverage mugs Coffee mugs 0.5
Large hollowware Bowls > 1.1 liters (1.16
quarts)
1
Small hollowware Bowls ? 1.1 liters (1.16
quarts)
2.0
Flat utensils Plates, saucers 3.0
(11) Limitation on use of copper, copper alloys and brass. Copper,
copper alloys, and brass shall not be used:
(a) In contact with a food that has a pH below six, including but
not limited to vinegar, fruit juice or wine; or
(b) For a fitting or tubing installed between a backflow prevention
device and a carbonator.
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:177
(12) Limitation on use of galvanized metal. Galvanized metal shall not
be used for utensils or food-contact surfaces of equipment used in
contact with acidic foods, including but not limited to vinegar, fruit
juice, or wine.
(13) Limitation on use of linens, napkins, and sponges.
(a) Linens and napkins shall not be used in contact with food
except:
[1] To line containers used for the service of foods if the linens
and napkins are replaced with clean ones each time the
container is refilled for a new customer; and
[2] When cloth gloves are used in direct contact with food that
is subsequently cooked.
(b) Sponges shall not be used in contact with cleaned and
sanitized or in-use food-contact surfaces.
(14) Limitation on use of lead in pewter alloys. Pewter alloys containing
lead in excess of 0.05% shall not be used as a food-contact surface.
(15) Use of mollusk and crustacea shells. Mollusk and crustacea shells
shall be used only once as a serving container.
(16) Molluscan shellfish tanks. Molluscan shellfish life support system
display tanks shall:
(a) Only be used to display shellfish that are not offered for human
consumption; and
(b) Be conspicuously marked so that it is obvious to the consumer
that the shellfish are for display only.
(17) Fixed equipment. Fixed equipment designed and fabricated to be
cleaned and sanitized by pressure spray methods shall have sealed
electrical wiring, switches, and connections.
(18) Location of equipment. Equipment, including but not limited to ice
makers and ice storage equipment, shall not be located under
exposed or unprotected sewer lines or waterlines, open stairwells,
or other sources of contamination, except for automatic fire
protection sprinkler heads required by law.
(19) Slash-resistant gloves; use limitation. Slash-resistant gloves used
to protect hands during operations requiring cutting shall be used
in direct contact only with food that is subsequently cooked as
specified in § 270-6, including but not limited to frozen food and
prime cuts of meat.
(20) Limitation on use of V threads. V-type threads in connectors on
equipment shall not be used on food-contact surfaces, except for
hot oil cooking or filtering equipment.
§ 270-17 SALEM CODE § 270-17
1:178
(21) Hot oil filtering equipment. Hot oil filtering equipment shall:
(a) Meet the characteristics specified under Subsection A(2) and
(4); and
(b) Be readily accessible for filter replacement and cleaning of the
filter.
(22) Can openers. Cutting or piercing parts of can openers shall be
readily removable for cleaning and for replacement.
(23) Food temperature measuring devices. Except for thermometers
with glass sensors or stems encased in a shatterproof coating,
including but not limited to a candy thermometer, food temperature
measuring devices shall not have sensors or stems constructed of
glass.
(24) Equipment containing bearings and gears. Equipment containing
bearings and gears requiring other than food-grade lubricants shall
be designed and constructed so that the lubricant cannot leak, drip
or be forced into food or onto food-contact surfaces. Only foodgrade
lubricants shall be used on equipment designed to receive
lubrication of bearings and gears on or within food-contact
surfaces.
(25) Beverage tubing; separation. Beverage tubing and cold-plate
beverage cooling devices shall not be installed in contact with
stored ice which is to be used for consumption.
(26) Ice units; separation of drains. Liquid waste drain lines shall not
pass through an ice machine or ice storage bin.
(27) Dispensing equipment; protection of equipment and food. In
equipment that dispenses or vends liquid food or ice in unpackaged
form:
(a) The delivery tube, chute, orifice, and splash surfaces directly
above the container receiving the food shall be designed so
that drips from condensation and splash are diverted from the
opening of the container receiving the food;
(b) The delivery tube, chute, and orifice shall be protected from
manual contact by being recessed or by some equally effective
design approved by the Health Division;
(c) The delivery tube or chute and orifice of equipment used to
vend liquid food or ice in unpackaged form to self-service
consumers shall be designed so that the delivery tube or chute
and orifice are protected from dust, insects, rodents, and other
contamination by a self-closing door if the equipment is:
[1] Located in an area outside the confines of a licensed food
service establishment or retail food store which otherwise
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:179
affords protection against the rain, windblown debris,
insects, rodents, and other contaminants that are present
in the environment; or
[2] Available for self-service during hours when it is not under
the full-time supervision of an employee; and
(d) The dispensing equipment actuating lever or mechanism and
filling device of consumer self-service beverage dispensing
equipment shall be designed to prevent contact with the lipcontact
surface of glasses or cups that are refilled.
(28) Can openers on vending machines. Cutting or piercing parts of can
openers on vending machines shall be protected from manual
contact, dust, insects, rodents, and other contamination.
B. Exceptions to equipment requirements.
(1) Equipment installed in a given food service establishment or retail
food store as of the effective date of these rules which does not
meet fully all of the design and fabrication requirements of these
rules shall be deemed acceptable in that same establishment as
long as:
(a) There is no change of ownership;
(b) The equipment is in good repair;
(c) The equipment is able to be maintained in a sanitary condition;
and
(d) The food-contact surfaces are nontoxic.
(2) Upon change of ownership of any food service establishment or
retail food store governed by Subsection B(1) above, all equipment
shall meet the requirements of these rules.
(3) If Subsection B(1)(b), (c) or (d) above cannot be complied with, the
license holder shall immediately remedy the noncompliance or
enter into a compliance agreement under § 270-62 which shall
state when the noncompliance will be remedied.
(4) All equipment installed after the effective date of these rules shall
meet the provisions of this section. (March 26, 1998)
§ 270-17 SALEM CODE § 270-17
1:180
ARTICLE V
Food Equipment and Utensils: Non-Food-Contact Surfaces
§ 270-18. Non-food-contact surfaces and equipment to meet
standards.
A. Non-food-contact surfaces. Surfaces of equipment not intended for
contact with food, but which are exposed to splash or food debris or
which otherwise require frequent cleaning, shall be:
(1) Designed and fabricated to be smooth, washable, free of
unnecessary ledges, projections, or crevices, and readily accessible
for cleaning; and
(2) Constructed of such material and in such repair as to be easily
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. Fixed equipment spacing or sealing.
(1) A unit of equipment that is fixed because it is not easily movable
shall be installed so that it is:
(a) Spaced to allow access for cleaning along the sides, behind,
and above the unit;
(b) Spaced from adjoining equipment, walls, and ceilings a
distance of not more than one millimeter or 1/32 inch; or
(c) Sealed to adjoining equipment or walls, if the unit is exposed to
spillage or seepage.
(2) Table-mounted equipment that is not easily movable shall be
installed to allow cleaning of the equipment and areas underneath
and around the equipment by being:
(a) Sealed to the table; or
(b) Elevated on legs as specified under Subsection D(2).
C. Fixed equipment elevation or sealing.
(1) Except as specified in Subsection C(2) and (3) below, floor-mounted
equipment that is not easily movable shall be sealed to the floor or
elevated on legs that provide at least 15 centimeters (six inches) of
clearance between the floor and the equipment.
(2) If no part of the floor under the floor-mounted equipment is more
than 15 centimeters (six inches) from the point of cleaning access,
the clearance space shall be not less than 10 centimeters (four
inches).
(3) This subsection shall not apply to display shelving units, display
refrigeration units, and display freezer units located in the
§ 270-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-18
1:181
consumer shopping areas of a retail food store, if the floor under
the units is maintained in a clean condition.
D. Table-mounted equipment that is not easily movable shall be elevated
on legs that provide at least 10 centimeters (four inches) of clearance
between the table and equipment, except that:
(1) It shall be acceptable for the clearance space between the table
and table-mounted equipment to be not less than 7.5 centimeters
(three inches) if the horizontal distance of the tabletop under the
equipment is no more than 50 centimeters (20 inches) from the
point of access for cleaning; and
(2) It shall be acceptable for the clearance space between the table
and table-mounted equipment to be not less than five centimeters
(two inches) if the horizontal distance of the tabletop under the
equipment is no more than 7.5 centimeters (three inches) from the
point of access for cleaning.
E. Aisles and working spaces.
(1) Aisles and working spaces between units of equipment and walls
shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees
to perform their duties readily without contamination of food or
food-contact surfaces by clothing or personal contact.
(2) All easily movable storage equipment, including but not limited to
pallets, racks and dollies, shall be positioned to provide
accessibility to working areas.
F. Removable kick plates. Kick plates shall be designed so that the areas
behind them are accessible for inspection and cleaning.
G. Vending machines; vending stage closure. The dispensing compartment
of vending machines that serve potentially hazardous food shall be
equipped with a self-closing door or cover if the machines are:
(1) Located in an area that is outside the confines of a licensed food
establishment or retail food store which otherwise affords
protection against the rain, windblown debris, insects, rodents, and
other contaminants that are present in the environment; or
(2) Available for self-service during hours when they are not under the
full-time supervision of a food employee.
H. Vending machines; liquid waste products.
(1) Vending machines designed to store beverages which are
potentially hazardous food packaged in containers made from
paper products shall be equipped with diversion devices and
retention pans or drains for container leakage.
§ 270-18 SALEM CODE § 270-18
1:182
(2) Vending machines that dispense liquid potentially hazardous food
in bulk shall be:
(a) Provided with an internally mounted waste receptacle for the
collection of drip, spillage, overflow, or other internal wastes;
and
(b) Equipped with an automatic shutoff device that will place the
machine out of operation before the waste receptacle
overflows.
(3) Shutoff devices specified in Subsection H(2)(b) above shall prevent
water or liquid food from continuously running if there is a failure
of a flow control device in the water or liquid food system or waste
accumulation that could lead to overflow of the waste receptacle.
I. Vending machine doors and openings.
(1) Vending machine doors and access opening covers to food and
container storage spaces shall be tight-fitting so that the space
along the entire interface between the doors or covers and the
cabinet of the machine, if the doors or covers are in a closed
position, is no greater than 1.5 millimeters or 1/16 inch.
(2) Vending machine service connection openings through an exterior
wall of a machine shall be closed by sealants, clamps, or grommets
so that the openings are no larger than 1.5 millimeters or 1/16 inch.
J. Drainage of equipment compartments. Equipment compartments that
are subject to conditions inviting accumulation of moisture, including
but not limited to condensation, food or beverage drip, or water from
melting ice, shall be sloped to an outlet that allows complete draining.
K. Self-draining sinks and drain boards. Sinks and drain boards shall be
self-draining.
§ 270-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-18
1:183

ARTICLE VI
Dishwashing Equipment Requirements
§ 270-19. Manual dishwashing; sink compartment requirements.
A. A sink with at least three compartments shall be provided for manually
washing, rinsing, and sanitizing equipment and utensils.
B. Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate immersion
of the largest equipment and utensils.
C. If equipment or utensils are too large for the dishwashing sink, a
dishwashing machine or the following alternative manual dishwashing
equipment shall be used:
(1) High-pressure detergent sprayers.
(2) Low-pressure or line-pressure spray detergent foamers.
(3) Other task-specific cleaning equipment.
(4) Brushes or other implements.
D. Manual dishwashing equipment; wash solution temperature. The
temperature of the wash solution used in manual dishwashing
equipment shall be maintained at not less than 43° C. (110° F.), unless a
different temperature is specified on the cleaning agent manufacturer's
label instructions.
E. Manual dishwashing; washing, rinsing and sanitizing. Except for fixed
equipment and utensils too large to be cleaned in sink compartments,
manual washing, rinsing and sanitizing shall be conducted in the
following sequence:
(1) Sinks shall be cleaned prior to use;
(2) Equipment and utensils shall be thoroughly washed in the first
compartment with a hot detergent solution that is kept clean;
(3) Equipment and utensils shall be rinsed free of detergent and
abrasives with clean water in the second compartment; and
(4) Equipment and utensils shall be sanitized in the third
compartment.
F. Dishwashing sinks; alternative uses. Food service establishments and
retail food stores that use only single-service equipment and utensils
and that use the sanitizing sink of the three-compartment dishwashing
sink to wash produce or thaw food shall clean and sanitize the sink and
the adjacent drainboard before and after each time it is used to wash
produce or thaw food, provided that the sink compartment is plumbed
as required by § 270-34.
G. Dishwashing machines.
§ 270-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-19
1:185
(1) Equipment and utensils shall be cleaned and sanitized by:
(a) Spray-type or immersion dishwashing machines; or
(b) Any other type of machine or device that thoroughly cleans and
sanitizes.
(2) Dishwashing machines and devices shall be properly installed and
maintained in good repair.
(3) Dishwashing machines and devices shall be operated in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions, and utensils and equipment
placed in the machine or device shall be exposed to all dishwashing
cycles.
(4) Automatic detergent dispensers, wetting agent dispensers, and
liquid sanitizer injectors shall be properly installed and maintained.
H. Dishwashing machine; data plate operating specifications. A
dishwashing machine shall be provided with an easily accessible and
readable data plate affixed to the machine by the manufacturer that
indicates the machine's design and operating specifications, including:
(1) The temperatures required for washing, rinsing, and sanitizing;
(2) The pressure required for the freshwater sanitizing rinse, unless
the machine is designed to use only a pumped sanitizing rinse; and
(3) The conveyor speed and timing for conveyor machines or cycle
time for stationary rack machines.
I. Conveyors. Conveyors in dishwashing machines shall be accurately
timed to assure proper exposure times in wash and rinse cycles in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
J. Rinse water tanks. Rinse water tanks shall be protected by baffles,
curtains, or other effective means to minimize the entry of wash water
into the rinse water.
K. Mechanical dishwashing equipment; sanitization pressure.
(1) The flow pressure of the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse in a
dishwashing machine shall be not less than 100 kilopascals (15
pounds per square inch) or more than 170 kilopascals (25 pounds
per square inch) as measured in the waterline immediately
downstream or upstream from the fresh hot water sanitizing rinse
control valve.
(2) A one-fourth-inch iron pipe size (IPS) valve shall be provided
immediately upstream from the final rinse control valve on all
spray-type dishwashing machines to permit checking the flow
pressure of the final rinse water.
§ 270-19 SALEM CODE § 270-19
1:186
§ 270-20. Chemical sanitization.
When chemicals are used for sanitization:
L. Field conversion kits. Field conversion kits to change a dishwashing
machine from a hot water sanitizer to a chemical sanitizer shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's directions.
M. Drainboards.
(1) Drainboards shall be provided in kitchens of food service
establishments and retail food stores.
(2) Each drainboard shall be:
(a) Equivalent in size to the length and width of one compartment
of the three-compartment sink and used for holding soiled
utensils prior to washing and air drying cleaned utensils
following sanitization; and
(b) Located one on each side of the three-compartment sink and
constructed so as not to interfere with the use of the
dishwashing facilities.
(3) The use of easily moveable dish tables for the storage of soiled
utensils or clean utensils following sanitization shall be permitted.
N. Manual dishwashing equipment, heaters and baskets. If hot water is
used for sanitization in manual dishwashing operations, the sanitizing
compartment of the sink shall be:
(1) Designed with an integral heating device capable of maintaining
water at a temperature not less than 77° C. (171° F.); and
(2) Provided with a rack or basket to allow complete immersion of
equipment and utensils into the hot water.
O. Temperature measuring devices in dishwashing.
(1) Machine or waterline mounted numerically scaled indicating
thermometers, accurate to +/- 1.5° C. (2.7° F.), shall be provided
for all mechanical dishwashers to indicate the temperature of the
water in each tank of the machine and the temperature of the final
rinse water as it enters the manifold.
(2) In manual dishwashing operations, a temperature measuring
device shall be provided and readily accessible for frequently
measuring the washing and sanitizing temperatures.
A. The licensee shall have available and use a test kit or other device that
accurately measures the parts per million concentration of the
sanitizing agent; and
§ 270-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-20
1:187
B. The concentration shall not exceed that permitted under § 270-25A(2)
to (4), unless specified in the manufacturer's specifications.
§ 270-20 SALEM CODE § 270-20
1:188
ARTICLE VII
Single-Service Articles
§ 270-21. Storage and dispensing of single-service articles.
§ 270-22. Reuse of single-service articles.
Single-service articles shall not be reused.
A. Single-service articles shall be:
(1) Stored at least six inches (15 centimeters) above the floor in closed
cartons or containers which protect them from splash, dust or
other contamination; and
(2) Not placed under exposed sewer lines or waterlines, except for
automatic fire protection sprinkler heads.
B. Single-service articles shall be handled and dispensed in a manner that
prevents contamination of surfaces which might come in contact with
food or with the mouth of the user.
C. Single-service knives, forks and spoons packaged in bulk shall be
inserted into holders or be wrapped by an employee who has washed
his hands immediately prior to sorting or wrapping the utensils, except
as provided in Subsection D below.
D. If single-service knives, forks and spoons are not prewrapped or
prepackaged, holders which present the handle of the utensil to the
consumer shall be provided.
§ 270-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-22
1:189

ARTICLE VIII
Cleanliness of Food Equipment and Utensils
§ 270-23. Equipment and utensils to be flushed and scraped.
§ 270-24. Wash and rinse water for food equipment and utensils.
§ 270-25. Sanitization rinse.
A. If the dishwashing machine operation does not include a prewash cycle,
equipment and utensils shall be flushed or scraped and, when
necessary, soaked to remove food debris prior to being washed.
B. Equipment and utensils shall be placed in racks, trays, baskets, or on
conveyors which permit free draining so that food-contact surfaces are
exposed to the unobstructed application of detergent wash and clean
rinse waters.
A. Food equipment and utensil wash water and rinse water shall be kept
clean.
B. Food equipment and utensil wash water and rinse water shall meet the
temperature requirements of § 270-25B and C.
C. Concentrations of washing detergent shall be maintained in the wash
water according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
A. Manual sanitizing of all equipment and utensils shall be performed in
the third sink compartment by one of the following methods:
(1) Immersion for at least 1/2 minute in clean, hot water at a
temperature of at least 77° C. (171° F.) using:
(a) An integral heating device or fixture installed in, on, or under
the sanitizing compartment of the sink capable of maintaining
the water temperature of at least 77° C. (171° F.);
(b) A numerically scaled indicating thermometer, accurate to +/-
1.5° C. (2.7° F.), convenient to the sink for frequent checks of
water temperature; and
(c) Dish baskets of a size and design which permit complete
immersion of the tableware, kitchenware and equipment in the
hot water;
(2) Immersion for at least 10 seconds in a clean solution containing 50
parts per million of available chlorine as a hypochlorite which is
maintained at not less than 24° C. (75° F.);
(3) Immersion for at least 30 seconds in a clean solution containing
12.5 parts per million of available iodine having a pH range which
the manufacturer has demonstrated to be certified or classified for
§ 270-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:191
sanitization by an ANSI accredited certification program and which
is maintained at not less than 24° C. (75° F.); or
(4) Immersion for at least 30 seconds in a clean solution containing
200 parts per million of a quaternary ammonium compound which
is maintained at not less than at least 24° C. (75° F.), or the
concentration specified in the manufacturer's recommendations.
B. If commercial machines using hot water for sanitizing are used, wash
water and pumped rinse water shall be:
(1) Kept clean; and
(2) Maintained at not less than the following temperatures:
(a) A single-tank, stationary-rack, dual-temperature machine shall
have a wash temperature of not less than 66° C. (150° F.) and a
final rinse temperature of not less than 82° C. (180° F.);
(b) A single-tank, stationary-rack, single-temperature machine
shall have a wash temperature not less than 74° C. (165° F.)
and a final rinse temperature of not less than 74° C. (165° F.).
(c) A single-tank conveyor machine shall have a wash temperature
of not less than 71° C. (160° F.) and a final rinse temperature of
not less than 82° C. (180° F.);
(d) A multi-tank conveyor machine shall have a wash temperature
of not less than 66° C. (150° F.), a pumped rinse temperature of
not less than 71° C. (160° F.), and a final rinse temperature of
not less than 82° C. (180° F.); and
(e) A single-tank, pot, pan, and utensil washer (either stationary or
moving rack) shall have a wash temperature of not less than
60° C. (140° F.) and a final rinse temperature of not less than
82° C. (180° F.).
C. If machines including but not limited to single-tank, stationary-rack,
door-type machines and spray-type glass washers using chemicals for
sanitization are used:
(1) The temperature of the wash water shall not be less than 49° C.
(120° F.);
(2) The wash water shall be kept clean;
(3) Chemicals added for sanitization purposes shall be automatically
dispensed;
(4) There shall be a visual and audible alarm to indicate the lack of
sanitizer;
§ 270-25 SALEM CODE § 270-25
1:192
§ 270-26. Wiping cloths.
(5) Utensils and equipment shall be exposed to the final chemical
sanitizing rinse in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications for time and concentration;
(6) The chemical sanitizing rinse water temperature shall be not be
less than the temperature specified by the machine's
manufacturer; and
(7) Chemical sanitizers used shall meet the concentration
requirements of Subsection A(2), (3) or (4) above.
D. The temperature of the utensil surface in hot water mechanical
operations in Subsection B(2) above shall achieve 71° C. (160° F.), as
measured by an irreversible registering temperature indicator.
E. Where equipment and utensils are used for the preparation of
potentially hazardous foods on a continuous or production-line basis,
utensils and the food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be washed,
rinsed, and sanitized:
(1) Each time there is a change in processing between types of raw
animal products, including but not limited to beef, fish, lamb, pork
and poultry;
(2) Each time there is a change from raw to ready-to-eat foods;
(3) Between uses with raw fruits or vegetables and with potentially
hazardous food;
(4) After any interruption of operations in which contamination may
have occurred; and
(5) After final use each working day.
F. Before using or storing a food temperature measuring device, it shall be
washed, rinsed and sanitized.
G. Equipment food-contact surfaces and utensils shall be clean to sight
and touch.
H. A food service establishment without facilities specified under
§§ 270-23 through 270-27 for cleaning and sanitizing kitchenware and
tableware shall provide only single-use kitchenware, single-service
articles, and single-use articles for use by food employees and singleservice
articles for use by consumers.
I. Air drying equipment and utensils after sanitization. After sanitization
all equipment and utensils shall be air dried.
A. Cloths that are in use for wiping food spills shall be used for no other
purpose.
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-26
1:193
§ 270-27. Cleaning food-contact surfaces.
§ 270-28. Cleaning non-food-contact surfaces.
§ 270-29. Storage and handling of clean equipment and utensils.
B. Cloths used for wiping food spills shall be:
(1) Dry and used for wiping food spills from tableware and carry-out
containers; or
(2) Moist and cleaned before being used with a fresh solution of
cleanser or sanitizer, stored in a chemical sanitizer, and used for
wiping spills from food-contact and non-food-contact surfaces of
equipment.
C. Dry or moist cloths used with raw animal foods shall be:
(1) Kept separate from cloths used for other purposes; and
(2) Kept in a separate sanitizing solution.
A. To prevent cross-contamination, kitchenware and food-contact surfaces
of equipment shall be washed, rinsed, and sanitized after each use and
following any interruption of operations during which contamination
may have occurred.
B. The food-contact surfaces of grills, griddles, and similar cooking
devices and the cavities and door seals of microwave ovens shall be
cleaned at least once a day, except that this shall not apply to hot oil
cooking equipment and hot oil filtering systems.
C. The food-contact surfaces of all cooking equipment shall be kept free of
encrusted grease deposits and other accumulated soil.
D. Tableware shall be washed, rinsed, and sanitized after each use.
A. Non-food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be kept cleaned so they
are free of accumulations of dust, dirt, food particles, and other debris.
B. All dishwashing machines shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once a
day.
A. Except for items that are kept in closed packages less than 15
centimeters (six inches) above the floor on dollies, pallets, racks, and
skids, cleaned equipment and utensils, laundered linens, and singleservice
and single-use articles shall be stored:
(1) In a clean, dry location;
(2) Where they are not exposed to splash, dust, or other
contamination; and
(3) At least 15 centimeters (six inches) above the floor.
§ 270-26 SALEM CODE § 270-29
1:194
§ 270-30. Storage of clean kitchenware and tableware.
B. Clean equipment and utensils shall be stored as specified under
Subsection A above and:
(1) In a self-draining position that allows air drying; and
(2) Covered or inverted.
C. Single-service and single-use articles shall be:
(1) Stored as specified under Subsection A above; and
(2) Kept in the original protective package or stored by using other
means affording protection from contamination until used.
A. Single-service and single-use articles and cleaned and sanitized utensils
shall be handled, displayed, and dispensed so that contamination of
food- and lip-contact surfaces is prevented.
B. If consumer self-service is provided, knives, forks and spoons that are
not prewrapped shall be presented so that only the handles are touched
by employees and by consumers.
C. Single-service articles not intended for food or lip contact shall be
furnished for consumer self-service:
(1) With the original individual wrapper intact; or
(2) From an approved dispenser.
D. Cleaned and sanitized equipment, utensils, laundered linens, and
single-service and single-use articles shall not be stored:
(1) In toilet rooms;
(2) In garbage rooms;
(3) In mechanical rooms;
(4) Under sewer lines that are not shielded to intercept potential drips;
(5) Under leaking waterlines, including leaking automatic fire
sprinkler heads or under lines on which water has condensed;
(6) Under open stairwells; or
(7) In locker rooms, except for laundered linens and single-service and
single-use articles packaged or stored in a cabinet.
E. Soiled tableware. Soiled tableware shall be removed from consumer
eating and drinking areas and handled so that clean tableware is not
contaminated.
F. Preset tableware. If tableware is preset:
§ 270-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-30
1:195
(1) It shall be protected from contamination by being wrapped,
covered, or inverted; or
(2) If exposed and unused, settings shall be:
(a) Removed when a consumer is seated; or
(b) If not removed when a consumer is seated, cleaned and
sanitized before further use.
§ 270-30 SALEM CODE § 270-30
1:196
ARTICLE IX
Water System
§ 270-31. Potable water.
A. Food service establishments and retail food stores shall have access to
enough potable water to meet their needs at all times.
B. In all food preparation areas license holders shall assure that:
(1) Hot and cold water is available at all times; and
(2) Water pressure meets the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
as adopted pursuant to RSA 155-A.44
C. Food service establishments and retail food stores served by a public or
private water source shall assure that the bacteria level in their water
does not exceed the acceptable bacteria levels for drinking water
prescribed by New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
Rule Env-Dw 700.45
D. If the water serving a food service establishment or retail food store is
found to be bacteriologically contaminated, the person in charge shall:
(1) Notify the state regulatory authority and the local health officer
within 12 hours;
(2) Boil all water used for drinking purposes or to reconstitute frozen
juices until:
(a) Notified by the public water supply that it is safe to discontinue
boiling, if the license holder is served by a public water supply;
or
(b) The license holder receives results from water samples taken
on two consecutive days which show results which comply with
Subsection C above, if served by other than a public water
supply;
(3) Disconnect coffee and juice machines connected directly to the
water supply;
(4) Disconnect the ice machine if it is connected directly to the water
supply and discard the ice contained in the machine;
(5) Use only boiled water or bottled water pursuant to § 270-11 to
wash fresh fruits and vegetables which are eaten raw;
(6) Clean and sanitize equipment in Subsection D(3) and (4) above
prior to reuse; and
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-31
1:197
(7) Use only single-service and single-use articles for food service.
E. All potable water not provided directly by pipe to the food service
establishment or retail food store from the source shall:
(1) Be transported in a water transport system designed to carry
potable water;
(2) Be delivered in a closed water system; and
(3) Have a minimum free available chlorine residual of 0.2 mg/l.
F. Steam used in contact with food or food-contact surfaces shall be free
from any toxic materials or additives.
G. Bottled and packaged potable water shall be
(1) Obtained from a source licensed by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services in accordance with RSA
143:11 or registered under RSA 143:12;
(2) Handled and stored in a manner which protects it from
contamination; and
(3) Dispensed from the original container.
H. System flushing and disinfection. All parts of the drinking water system
controlled by a license holder shall be flushed and disinfected before
being placed into service:
(1) After any construction, repair, or modification connected with the
food service establishment or retail food store which could disturb
that system; and
(2) After an emergency situation connected with the food service
establishment or retail food store which could disturb that system,
including but not limited to floods and other natural disasters.
I. Cleaning of water reservoir of fogging devices. A reservoir used to
supply water to a mechanical device, including but not limited to a
produce fogger, shall be:
(1) Maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications;
and
(2) Cleaned in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
J. Alternative water supply. Water meeting the requirements specified in
Subsections A to H shall be made available for mobile food units and for
a food service establishment or retail food store with a temporary
interruption of its water supply through:
(1) A supply of containers of commercially bottled drinking water
licensed under RSA 143:11 or registered under RSA 143:12;
§ 270-31 SALEM CODE § 270-31
1:198
(2) One or more closed portable water containers;
(3) An enclosed vehicular water tank designed to carry potable water;
or
(4) An on-premises water storage tank.
K. Design of conditioning device. A water filter, screen, and other water
conditioning device installed on waterlines shall be:
(1) Designed to facilitate disassembly for periodic servicing and
cleaning; and
(2) Provided with a replaceable water filter element.
§ 270-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-31
1:199

ARTICLE X
Sewage Disposal
§ 270-32. Sewage and waste disposal.
A. All sewage shall be disposed of through a wastewater system which
meets all the current requirements of the New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services and the Town of Salem.
B. Existing wastewater systems shall not create a public health hazard.
C. No increase in seating capacity in an existing food service
establishment which has a private wastewater system, as referred to in
Subsection A, shall be approved prior to the Health Division receiving
written documentation from the Salem Engineering Department and
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services that such
increase complies with New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services Rules Env-Wq 1000.46
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-32
1:201

ARTICLE XI
Plumbing
§ 270-33. Installation and maintenance of plumbing.
§ 270-34. Backflow and backsiphonage prevention.
A. Plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to the
provisions of the State Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to RSA
155-A.47
B. In new or remodeled food service establishments or retail food stores at
least one utility sink or curbed cleaning facility with a floor drain shall
be provided and shall be the only drain used for:
(1) Cleaning mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools; and
(2) Disposing of mop water or similar liquid wastes.
C. Utility sinks or curbed cleaning facilities shall be installed on the main
food preparation level.
A. All plumbing shall be installed and maintained as follows:
(1) Devices shall be installed to protect against backflow and
backsiphonage at all fixtures and equipment where an air gap at
least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet, but not less than
25 millimeters (one inch), is not provided between the water supply
inlet and the fixture's flood level rim;
(2) A backsiphonage device shall be installed on all faucets to which
hoses are attached;
(3) There shall be no direct connection between the wastewater
system and:
(a) Any drains originating from refrigerator coils, walk-in freezers,
iceboxes, ice making machines, coffee urns or similar types of
enclosed equipment; or
(b) Food preparation sinks;
(4) Each waste pipe from the equipment listed in Subsection A(3)
above shall discharge into an open, accessible, individual waste
sink, floor drain or other fixture which is trapped and vented; and
(5) Each waste pipe from the equipment listed in Subsection A(3)
above shall contain an air gap in the fixture waste line which is at
least twice the effective diameter of the drain served.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-34
1:203
B. Use of nonpotable water. Nonpotable water shall be allowed for
appropriate uses, including but not limited to air conditioning and fire
protection, provided that:
(1) The system is installed according to the provisions of the State
Plumbing Code as adopted pursuant to RSA 155-A;48
(2) Nonpotable water does not come into contact with food or utensils;
and
(3) The piping of the water system is durably identified so that it is
readily distinguishable from piping that carries potable water.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-34 SALEM CODE § 270-34
1:204
ARTICLE XII
Toilet and Handwashing Facilities
§ 270-35. Design and installation.
§ 270-36. Cleaning and waste receptacles.
A. Design and installation of toilet facilities.
(1) Toilet facilities shall be:
(a) Installed according to the provisions of the State Plumbing
Code as adopted pursuant to RSA 155-A;49
(b) Conveniently located and accessible to employees and patrons
at all times;
(c) Designed to be easily cleanable; and
(d) Located so patrons do not have to pass through food
preparation areas to gain access to them.
(2) At least one toilet room for each sex, for every 75 seats, shall be
provided in all food service establishments or retail food stores that
have any seating capacity.
(3) In new or extensively remodeled establishments, handicapped
bathrooms must be provided for each sex. State and local plumbing
codes shall be met in all changes of ownership.
B. Design and installation of handwashing facilities.
(1) Handwashing sinks shall be:
(a) Designed and installed in food preparation, display and
dispensing areas so as to protect food and food-contact
surfaces from splash;
(b) Equipped to provide water at a temperature of at least 43° C.
(110° F.) through a mixing valve or combination faucet;
(c) Provided in all areas where there is hand to food contact by
employees;
(d) Provided in or immediately adjacent to toilet rooms or
vestibules; and
(e) Accessible to employees at all times.
(2) Self-closing, slow-closing or metering faucets shall provide a flow
of water for at least 15 seconds without the need to reactivate the
faucet.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-36
1:205
A. Toilet facilities.
(1) Toilet facilities shall be:
(a) Completely enclosed and provided with a tight-fitting and selfclosing
door;
(b) Kept clean and in good repair; and
(c) Provided with a supply of toilet tissue at all times.
(2) At least one easily cleanable and covered waste receptacle shall be
provided in each toilet room, and those used by female patrons
shall have one covered waste receptacle in each stall.
(3) Waste receptacles in toilet rooms shall be emptied at least once a
day and more frequently when necessary to prevent overflow of
waste material to the floor.
B. Handwashing facilities; supplies and cleaning.
(1) A supply of hand cleansing soap or detergent shall be available at
each handwashing sink.
(2) A supply of paper towels or a hand-drying device providing heated
air shall be conveniently located near each hand washing sink.
(3) Common towels shall not be used.
(4) A sign requiring handwashing after using the rest room shall be
placed at each handwashing sink where it can be readily seen and
read by employees.
(5) Waste receptacles near handwashing sinks shall be emptied at
least once a day and more frequently when necessary to prevent
overflow of waste material to the floor.
(6) Handwashing sinks, soap dispensers, hand-drying devices and all
related fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair.
§ 270-36 SALEM CODE § 270-36
1:206
ARTICLE XIII
Solid Waste Disposal
§ 270-37. Solid waste containers.
§ 270-38. Solid waste storage.
A. Solid waste shall be kept in durable, easily cleanable, insect-proof and
rodent-proof containers which:
(1) Do not leak;
(2) Do not absorb liquids; and
(3) Are lined with plastic bags or wet-strength paper bags.
B. Solid waste containers used in food preparation and utensil washing
areas shall be kept covered after they are filled.
C. Solid waste containers stored outside the establishment, dumpsters,
compactors and compactor systems shall be:
(1) Easily cleanable; and
(2) Provided with tight-fitting lids, doors or covers which shall be kept
closed.
D. In containers designed with drains, drain plugs shall be in place at all
times, except during cleaning.
E. There shall be a sufficient number of containers to hold all the garbage
and refuse that accumulates.
F. Solid waste shall be disposed of often enough to prevent the
development of odor and the attraction of insects and rodents.
G. Suitable facilities, including hot water and detergent or steam, shall be
provided and used for washing containers, including:
(1) Cleaning soiled containers frequently enough to prevent insect and
rodent attraction.
(2) Thoroughly cleaning each container on the inside and outside in a
way that does not contaminate food equipment, utensils, or food
preparation areas.
H. Refuse receptacles shall not be located within a vending machine,
except for receptacles for beverage bottle crown closures.
A. Solid waste stored on the premises shall be inaccessible to insects and
rodents.
B. Unprotected plastic bags or wet-strength paper bags or baled units
containing solid waste shall not be stored outside.
§ 270-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-38
1:207
C. Cardboard or other packaging material not containing food wastes shall
not be required to be stored in covered containers.
D. Solid waste storage rooms, if used, shall be:
(1) Constructed of easily cleanable, nonabsorbent, washable materials;
(2) Kept clean;
(3) Insect-proof and rodent-proof; and
(4) Large enough to store the solid waste containers that accumulate.
E. Outside storage areas or enclosures shall be:
(1) Large enough to store the solid waste containers that accumulate;
and
(2) Kept clean.
F. Solid waste containers, dumpsters and compactor systems located
outside shall be stored on or above a smooth surface of nonabsorbent
material, including but not limited to concrete or machine-laid asphalt,
which is:
(1) Kept clean;
(2) Maintained in good repair; and
(3) Curbed, graded and designed so that liquid waste that results from
the refuse and from cleaning the area and waste receptacle is not
released into the environment.
§ 270-38 SALEM CODE § 270-38
1:208
ARTICLE XIV
Insect, Rodent and Animal Control
§ 270-39. Measures to minimize infestation.
A. The premises.
(1) The premises of food service establishments and retail food stores
shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or
feeding of insects or rodents.
(2) Measures intended to minimize the presence of rodents, flies,
cockroaches, and others insects on the premises, including but not
limited to extermination by a pesticide applicator licensed under
RSA 430, shall be utilized.
(3) Only pesticide applicators authorized under RSA 430 shall be
allowed to apply poisons for rodent or cockroach control in the food
storage, food preparation or food service area of a license holder.
(4) Openings to the outdoors shall be protected against the entry of
insects and rodents by:
(a) Filling or closing holes and other gaps along floors, walls and
ceilings;
(b) Installing closed, tight-fitting windows and solid self-closing,
tight-fitting doors; or
(c) Installing:
[1] Screens of 16 mesh to 25.4 millimeters (16 mesh to one
inch); or
[2] Properly designed air curtains.
(5) Screen doors shall be self-closing.
(6) Screens for windows, doors, skylights, transoms, intake and
exhaust air ducts, and other openings to the outside shall be tightfitting,
free of breaks and use screening material not less than 16
mesh to 25.4 millimeters (16 mesh to one inch).
(7) Insect control devices used to electrocute or stun flying insects
shall be designed to retain the insect within the device.
(8) Any insect control devices used shall be installed so that:
(a) The devices are not located over a food-contact surface or food
preparation area; and
(b) Dead insects and insect fragments are prevented from being
impelled onto or falling on:
[1] Exposed food;
§ 270-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-39
1:209
[2] Clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and
[3] Unwrapped single-service and single-use articles.
B. Prohibiting animals.
(1) Live animals shall not be allowed in dining, kitchen or storage
areas of food service establishments or retail food stores except
for:
(a) Edible fish or decorative fish in aquariums;
(b) Shellfish or crustacea on ice or under refrigeration;
(c) Shellfish and crustacea in display tanks;
(d) Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers in dining
and storage areas; and
(e) Sentry dogs running loose in outside fenced areas.
(2) Support animals, including but not limited to guide dogs, trained to
assist an employee or patron who is handicapped shall be allowed
in areas of a food service establishment or retail food store not used
for food preparation, including but not limited to dining areas,
provided they are:
(a) Controlled by the handicapped employee or person; and
(b) Kept off seats or tables.
C. Storage of fish bait. When live or dead fish bait is stored in retail food
stores, contamination of food, clean equipment, utensils, linens, and
unwrapped single-service and single-use articles shall not result.
§ 270-39 SALEM CODE § 270-39
1:210
ARTICLE XV
Floors, Walls and Ceilings
§ 270-40. Construction and maintenance of floors.
A. Floors and floor coverings in food service establishments and retail food
stores, except for those in dining areas, shall be:
(1) Constructed of smooth durable material, including but not limited
to sealed concrete, terrazzo, ceramic tile, durable grades of
linoleum or plastic, or wood impregnated with plastic; and
(2) Maintained in good repair.
B. Carpeting shall be prohibited in:
(1) Food preparation, equipment washing and utensil washing areas;
(2) Food storage areas; and
(3) Toilet room areas where urinals or toilet fixtures are located.
C. Carpeting, if used as a floor covering, shall be:
(1) Of closely woven construction;
(2) Properly installed;
(3) Easily cleanable; and
(4) Maintained in good repair.
D. Sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, or similar material shall not be
used as a floor covering.
E. Floors that are water flushed for cleaning, receive discharges of water
or other fluid waste from equipment, or are located in areas where
pressure spray methods for cleaning equipment are used shall be:
(1) Constructed only of sealed concrete, terrazzo, ceramic tile or
similar material;
(2) Graded so as to drain; and
(3) Provided with properly installed, trapped floor drains.
F. Mats and slatted wooden floorings shall be:
(1) Constructed of nonabsorbent, grease-resistant material.
(2) Sized, designed, and constructed to facilitate easy cleaning.
G. In all new or remodeled food service establishments or retail food
stores in which cleaning methods other than water flushing are used for
cleaning floors, the floor and wall junctures shall be coved and closed to
no larger than one millimeter (1/32 inch).
§ 270-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-40
1:211
§ 270-41. Construction and maintenance of walls and ceilings.
H. The floors in all new or remodeled food service establishments or retail
food stores in which water flush cleaning methods are used shall be:
(1) Provided with drains;
(2) Graded so as to drain; and
(3) Provided with coved and sealed floor and wall junctures.
I. Exposed utility service lines and pipes shall be installed so as not to
obstruct or prevent cleaning of the floor.
J. Exposed horizontal utility service lines and pipes shall not be installed
on the floor of new or remodeled food service establishments and retail
food stores.
K. Floors, mats, and slatted wooden flooring shall be:
(1) Kept clean;
(2) Cleaned with dustless methods of cleaning, including but not
limited to vacuum cleaning, wet cleaning, or the use of dustarresting
compounds with brooms; and
(3) Except for emergency cleaning, cleaned during periods when the
least amount of food is exposed, including but not limited to after
closing or between meals.
L. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, anti-slip floor covering
shall be allowed in areas where its use is necessary for safety reasons.
A. Walls and ceilings in food service establishments and retail food stores,
including doors, windows, skylights and similar closures, shall be:
(1) Maintained in good repair; and
(2) Kept clean.
B. The walls, including nonsupporting partitions, wall coverings, and
ceilings, of walk-in refrigerating units, food preparation areas,
equipment washing and utensil washing areas, toilet rooms and
vestibules shall be:
(1) Light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable; and
(2) If constructed of concrete or pumice blocks, finished and sealed to
provide a smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable surface.
C. Studs, joists, and rafters shall not be exposed in:
(1) Walk-in refrigerator and freezer units;
(2) Food preparation areas;
§ 270-40 SALEM CODE § 270-41
1:212
(3) Equipment and utensil washing areas; or
(4) Toilet rooms and vestibules.
D. Utility service lines and pipes shall:
(1) Not be unnecessarily exposed on walls or ceilings in:
(a) Walk-in refrigerator and freezer units;
(b) Food preparation areas;
(c) Equipment and utensil washing areas; or
(d) Toilet rooms and vestibules.
(2) If exposed, be installed so as not to obstruct or prevent cleaning of
the walls and ceilings.
E. Light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans, decorative materials,
and similar equipment attached to walls and ceilings shall be:
(1) Easily cleanable;
(2) Maintained in good repair; and
(3) Kept clean.
F. Wall and ceiling covering materials shall be attached and sealed in a
manner which renders them easily cleanable.
G. Walls, ceilings, attached equipment, and decorative materials shall be:
(1) Kept clean;
(2) Cleaned with dustless methods of cleaning, including but not
limited to vacuum cleaning or wet cleaning; and
(3) Except for emergency cleaning, cleaned during periods when the
least amount of food is exposed, including but not limited to after
closing or between meals.
H. In new or remodeled establishments, all construction of walls and
ceilings in the vicinity of high heat and/or steam producing equipment,
including but not limited to grills and hot water sanitizing dishwashers,
shall be constructed of materials resistant to such heat and/or steam.
I. Concrete or pumice blocks used for interior wall construction in food
preparation areas, equipment and utensil washing areas, toilet rooms
and vestibules shall be finished and sealed to provide a smooth and
easily cleanable surface.
J. Ventilation hoods and devices shall be designed to prevent grease or
condensation from collecting on walls and ceilings and from dripping
into food or onto food-contact surfaces.
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:213
K. Filters or other grease-extracting equipment shall be installed and
readily removable for cleaning and replacement if not designed to be
cleaned in place.
§ 270-41 SALEM CODE § 270-41
1:214
ARTICLE XVI
Lighting
§ 270-42. Lighting intensity.
A. The light intensity in food service establishments and retail food stores
shall be:
(1) At least 110 lux, 10 footcandles, at a distance of 75 centimeters (30
inches) above the floor at all times in walk-in refrigeration units
and dry food storage areas, and in other areas and rooms during
periods of cleaning;
(2) At least 220 lux, 20 footcandles:
(a) At a surface where food is provided for consumer self-service,
including but not limited to buffets and salad bars, or where
fresh produce or packaged foods are sold or offered for
consumption;
(b) Inside equipment, including but not limited to reach-in and
under-counter refrigerators; and
(c) At a distance of 75 centimeters (30 inches) above the floor in
areas used for handwashing, dishwashing, and equipment and
utensil storage, and in toilet rooms; and
(3) At least 540 lux, 50 footcandles, at a surface where a food employee
is working with food or working with utensils or equipment,
including but not limited to knives, slicers, grinders, or saws,
where employee safety is a factor.
B. Light bulbs shall be shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant in
areas where there is:
(1) Exposed food;
(2) Clean equipment, utensils, and linens;
(3) Unwrapped single-service and single-use articles; and
(4) Food stored in unopened packages, except when:
(a) The integrity of the packages cannot be affected by broken
glass falling onto them; and
(b) The packages are capable of being cleaned of debris from
broken bulbs before being opened.
C. Infrared or other heat lamps shall be protected against breakage by a
shield surrounding and extending beyond the bulb, leaving only the
face of the bulb exposed.
§ 270-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-42
1:215

ARTICLE XVII
Ventilation
§ 270-43. Adequate ventilation.
A. All rooms in food service establishments or retail food stores shall have
sufficient ventilation to keep them free of steam, condensation, vapors,
obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes.
B. Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be maintained to prevent the
entrance of dust, dirt, and other contaminating materials.
C. In new or remodeled food service establishments or retail food stores,
all rooms from which obnoxious odors, vapors or fumes originate shall
be mechanically vented to the outside.
§ 270-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-43
1:217

ARTICLE XVIII
Dressing Rooms
§ 270-44. Provision and use of dressing rooms.
A. If employees routinely change clothes within the establishment:
(1) Rooms or areas shall be designated as dressing rooms and used for
that purpose; and
(2) These designated rooms or areas shall not be used for food
preparation, food service, utensil washing or storage, or for food
storage, except as provided in Subsection B(1) below.
B. Lockers or other suitable facilities shall be:
(1) Located in the designated dressing rooms, or in food storage rooms
or areas containing only completely packaged food or packaged
single-service articles; and
(2) Provided and used for the orderly storage of employee clothing and
other belongings.
§ 270-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-44
1:219

ARTICLE XIX
Toxic Materials; Property Maintenance
§ 270-45. Toxic materials.
A. Toxic materials stored.
(1) No toxic materials shall be kept in food service establishments or
retail food stores except those:
(a) Offered for retail sale; or
(b) Necessary to maintain the premises, clean and sanitize
equipment and utensils, and control insects and rodents.
(2) Containers of toxic materials used in food service establishments or
retail food stores shall be prominently and distinctly labeled for
easy identification of contents.
(3) All toxic materials shall be stored in cabinets or in similar
physically separated compartments or facilities used for no other
purpose.
(4) Toxic materials shall not be stored above food, food equipment,
utensils, or single-service articles, except that this requirement
shall not prohibit the convenient availability of detergent or
sanitizers at utensil or dishwashing stations.
(5) Bactericides, cleaning compounds or other compounds intended
for use on food-contact surfaces shall not be used so as to leave a
toxic residue on such surfaces, nor in a way which constitutes a
hazard to employees or other persons.
(6) Toxic materials shall be used:
(a) In full compliance with the manufacturer's labeling;
(b) In a manner which precludes contaminating food, equipment,
or utensils; and
(c) In a manner which protects against hazards to employees or
other persons.
(7) Personal medications shall not be stored in food storage,
preparation or service areas.
(8) First-aid supplies shall be stored so as to prevent them from
contaminating food and food-contact surfaces.
B. Prohibitions.
(1) Prohibition against use of food containers for storage of toxic
materials. Food containers shall not be used to store, transport, or
dispense poisonous or toxic materials.
§ 270-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-45
1:221
§ 270-46. Maintaining premises.
(2) Prohibition against use of poisonous or toxic material containers.
Containers previously used to store poisonous or toxic materials
shall not be used to store, transport, or dispense food.
A. Litter. Food service establishments and retail food stores and all parts
of the property used in connection with operation of them shall be kept
free of litter.
B. Walking and driving surfaces.
(1) The walking and driving surfaces of all exterior areas of food
service establishments and retail food stores shall be surfaced
with:
(a) Concrete;
(b) Asphalt;
(c) Gravel; or
(d) Similar material effectively treated to facilitate maintenance
and minimize dust.
(2) These surfaces shall be graded to prevent pooling of water.
C. Storage on the premises. Only articles necessary to the operation and
maintenance of the food service establishment or retail food store shall
be stored on the premises.
D. Traffic in food preparation and utensil washing areas. The traffic of
unnecessary persons through the food preparation and utensil washing
areas shall be prohibited.
E. Storage and maintenance of tools and cleaning equipment. Tools and
cleaning equipment, including but not limited to brooms, mops, and
vacuum cleaners, shall be:
(1) Maintained and stored so as to prevent contamination of food,
utensils, equipment or linens; and
(2) Stored in an orderly manner which facilitates the cleaning of the
storage location.
§ 270-45 SALEM CODE § 270-46
1:222
ARTICLE XX
Living Quarters
§ 270-47. Living quarters; laundry facilities.
A. Food service establishment or retail food store operations shall:
(1) Not be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters;
and
(2) Be separated from any living or sleeping quarters by complete
partitioning and solid, self-closing doors.
B. Use of laundry facilities.
(1) Laundry facilities in food service establishments or retail food
stores shall be restricted to the washing and drying of linens,
cloths, uniforms and aprons necessary to the operation.
(2) If the items included under Subsection B(1) above are laundered on
the premises, an electric or gas dryer shall be provided and used.
C. If only wiping cloths are laundered on the premises, Subsection B above
shall not apply.
D. Location of laundry facilities. Laundry facilities shall be located in
rooms separate from the food preparation area or in storage rooms
containing only packaged foods or packaged single-service articles.
§ 270-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-47
1:223

ARTICLE XXI
Linens and Clothing
§ 270-48. Clean clothes and linens.
A. Clean clothes and linens shall be stored in a clean place and protected
from contamination until used.
B. Soiled clothes and linens. Soiled clothes and linens shall be stored in
nonabsorbent containers or washable laundry bags until removed for
laundering.
§ 270-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-48
1:225

ARTICLE XXII
Mobile Food Units and Pushcarts
§ 270-49. Mobile food and pushcart requirements.
A. Requirements based on type of food served.
(1) Mobile food units shall display their Health Division license
numbers, in numerals no less than two inches in height, on the
driver's side door no lower than two inches above the bottom of the
door.
(2) Mobile food units and pushcarts licensed prior to January 1, 1998,
shall meet the requirements of this section no later than December
31, 1998.
B. Mobile food units shall be required to meet only the following
requirements, based on the type of food served:
(1) Mobile food units serving unwrapped, potentially hazardous food
shall:
(a) Comply with §§ 270-5 to 270-8, 270-18, 270-40, 270-41 and
270-50; and
(b) Provide:
[1] Water which complies with § 270-31, if from a private
source;
[2] Hot and cold water under pressure;
[3] Protection against contamination, as required by
§ 270-11A(1);
[4] A handwash sink which complies with § 270-35B;
[5] A three-compartment sink or a licensed commissary at
which utensils can be washed daily; and
[6] Protection for all outer openings against the entrance of
insects, as required by § 270-39A(4)
(2) Mobile food units serving unwrapped, nonpotentially hazardous
food shall comply with §§ 270-5 to 270-8, 270-40, 270-50 and
270-53 and Subsection B of this section.
(3) Mobile food units serving only wrapped, potentially hazardous food
shall:
(a) Meet the temperature requirements of § 270-6B; and
(b) Comply with §§ 270-17, 270-18 and 270-40.
§ 270-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-49
1:227
§ 270-50. Commissary requirement.
§ 270-51. Mobile unit servicing area.
(4) Mobile food units serving only steamed hot dogs and wrapped,
potentially hazardous food shall:
(a) Meet the temperature requirements of § 270-6B; and
(b) Comply with §§ 270-14, 270-15, 270-17, 270-18, 270-40,
270-52 and 270-53 and Subsection B(1)(b)[1], [2] and [4] of
this section.
(5) Mobile food units and pushcarts shall provide only single-service
articles for use by the consumer.
(6) Registered mobile food units and pushcarts shall provide the
following:
(a) Vehicle identification number; and
(b) The registration number from the state in which it is
registered.
A. Mobile food units and pushcarts that do not have the sink requirements
of § 270-49B(1)(b)[4] and [5] shall:
(1) Operate from a licensed commissary or other fixed food service
establishment; and
(2) Report at least daily to such location for all supplies and for all
cleaning and servicing operations.
B. The commissary or other fixed food service establishment used as a
base of operation for mobile food units shall be constructed and
operated in compliance with the requirements of these rules or shall be
licensed by the jurisdiction in which it is located.
A. Except as noted in Subsection C below, servicing areas for mobile food
units and pushcarts shall:
(1) Be provided at the commissary or other fixed food service
establishment location.
(2) Have a surface which is:
(a) Constructed of a smooth, nonabsorbent material, including but
not limited to concrete or machine-laid asphalt; and
(b) Maintained in good repair, kept clean, and graded so as to
drain.
(3) Include at least overhead protection for any supplying, cleaning, or
servicing operation.
§ 270-49 SALEM CODE § 270-51
1:228
§ 270-52. Mobile food unit water systems.
B. Within the servicing area required under Subsection A above, there
shall be a location provided for the flushing and drainage of liquid
wastes which is separate from the location provided for water servicing
and loading and unloading of food and related supplies.
C. Potable water servicing equipment shall be installed, stored and
handled so as to protect the water and equipment from contamination.
D. If a mobile food unit uses a liquid waste retention tank, it shall be
thoroughly flushed and drained during the servicing operation.
E. A servicing area shall not be required if:
(1) Only packaged food is placed on the mobile food unit or pushcart;
or
(2) A mobile food unit does not contain waste retention tanks.
A. Water systems, including water tanks and their appurtenances, used in
mobile food units shall:
(1) Be constructed of materials which meet the requirements of
§ 270-17A(1)(c)[1], [2] and [4];
(2) Be enclosed from the filling inlet to the discharge outlet;
(3) Be sloped to an outlet which allows complete drainage of the tank;
and
(4) If designed with an access port for inspection and cleaning, have an
opening in the top of the tank which is:
(a) Flanged upward at least 13 millimeters (1/2 inch); and
(b) Equipped with a port cover assembly which is:
[1] Provided with a gasket and a device for securing the cover
in place; and
[2] Flanged to overlap the opening and sloped to drain.
B. A fitting with V-type threads on a water tank inlet or outlet shall be used
only when a hose is permanently attached.
C. If provided, a water tank vent shall terminate in a downward direction
and be covered with:
(1) Screen of 16 mesh to 25.4 millimeters (16 mesh to one inch) or
equivalent, when the vent is in a protected area; or
(2) A protective filter, when the vent is in an area that is not protected
from windblown dirt and debris.
§ 270-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-52
1:229
§ 270-53. Mobile food unit wastewater systems.
Wastewater systems in mobile food units shall comply with the following:
D. A water tank and its inlet and outlet shall be sloped to drain.
E. A water tank inlet shall be positioned so that it is protected from
contaminants, including but not limited to waste discharges, road dust,
oil, or grease.
F. Hoses used for conveying drinking water from a water tank shall:
(1) Be composed of food-grade material, durable, corrosion-resistant
and nonabsorbent;
(2) Be resistant to pitting, chipping, crazing, scratching, scoring,
distortion, and decomposition;
(3) Have a smooth interior surface; and
(4) If not permanently attached, be clearly and durably identified as to
their use.
G. When compressed air is used to pressurize the water tank system, a
filter which does not pass oil or oil vapors shall be installed in the air
supply line between the compressor and the drinking water system.
H. A cap and keeper chain, closed cabinet, closed storage tube, or other
protective cover or device shall be provided for a water tank's inlet,
outlet, and hose.
I. A mobile food unit's water tank inlet shall:
(1) Have an inner diameter of 19.1 millimeters (3/4 inch) or less; and
(2) Be provided with a hose connection of a size and type which will
prevent its use for any other service.
J. Water tanks, pumps, and hoses shall be flushed and sanitized before
being placed in service after construction, repair, modification and
periods of nonuse longer than 24 hours.
K. Water tanks, pumps, and hoses shall be operated to prevent backflow
and other contamination of the water supply.
L. If not in use, water tanks and hose inlet and outlet fittings shall be
protected as specified under Subsection H above.
M. Except as specified in Subsection N below, water tanks, pumps, and
hoses used for conveying drinking water shall be used for no other
purpose.
N. Water tanks, pumps, and hoses approved for liquid foods shall be used
for conveying drinking water only if they are cleaned and sanitized after
each use.
§ 270-52 SALEM CODE § 270-53
1:230
A. Wastewater holding tanks in mobile food units shall:
(1) Have a capacity which is 15% larger than the water supply tank
capacity.
(2) Be sloped to a drain which is 25 millimeters (one inch) or larger in
inner diameter and equipped with a shutoff valve.
B. Wastewater shall be disposed of by assuring that:
(1) It is removed from mobile food units without spillage and in a
manner which prevents creating a public health hazard or
nuisance; and
(2) It is conveyed to either:
(a) A public or private wastewater system which holds either a
valid state surface water discharge permit or groundwater
discharge permit issued by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services under RSA 485-A; or
(b) A sewage or waste disposal system holding a valid permit from
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
under RSA 485-A:29 and Env-Wq 1000.50
C. Whenever tanks for liquid waste retention are serviced they shall be
thoroughly flushed and drained in a sanitary manner.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-53
1:231

ARTICLE XXIII
Commercial Food Processing
§ 270-54. Processing authorities.51
Whenever a commercially produced or processed food requires a food
processing authority, the information shall be sent to one of the food
processing authorities on the current list available from the Health Division
and on the Town of Salem website.
§ 270-55. Special requirements for food service establishments
processing food in commercial kitchen.
A. Basic requirements. Food service establishments commercially
processing food shall comply with:
(1) All of the requirements of §§ 270-4 through 270-48.
(2) All of the requirements of §§ 270-54 through 270-63.
B. Products approved for processing in a commercial kitchen. Only the
following food products shall be produced in food service
establishments commercially processing food:
(1) Acidified foods, including but not limited to pickles, pickled
products, relishes, salsas and sauces;
(2) Potentially hazardous foods;
(3) Foods processed under reduced oxygen packaging methods;
(4) Foods which undergo aseptic processing and packaging;
(5) Jams and jellies; and
(6) Baked goods, pies, candy and dry products such as spices and
herbs.
C. Processing requirements. Food service establishments processing food
in a commercial kitchen shall comply with the following:
(1) Develop and implement HACCP plans containing the information
required under Subsections K and L;
(2) A review of a scheduled process shall be conducted by a food
processing authority on each product listed in Subsection B(1), (3)
and (4) above prior to its being produced by the license holder. If
the food processing authority declares, in writing, that there are no
biological concerns with the food after evaluating the scheduled
process, the food shall be allowed to be produced;
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-55
1:233
(3) In order for the review required under Subsection C(2) above to be
conducted, the following shall be submitted to the food processing
authority:
(a) Recipe(s) with all the ingredients and quantities listed;
(b) Processing times and procedures; and
(c) Sample(s) of prepared and processed product as ready for sale
and distribution;
(4) The natural pH and equilibrium pH shall be recorded for each
batch of product produced;
(5) License holders shall keep records of all pHs on file and available
for review by the regulatory authority upon request;
(6) Another scheduled process review shall be conducted for a product
that has been previously tested if the ingredients are altered or the
process changes;
(7) License holders shall keep all scheduled process review
information on file and available for review by the regulatory
authority upon request; and
(8) License applicants shall submit process review information with
license applications pursuant to § 270-56.
D. Labeling.
(1) Labeling of all packaged foods. All packaged food, unless exempt
under Subsection D(1)(b) below, shall bear a label showing:
(a) The common or usual name of the product;
(b) The name and address of the manufacturer's, packer's, or
distributor's business which shall:
[1] In the case of an individual, partnership, or association be
the name under which the business is conducted;
[2] In the case of a corporation, be the name of the parent
corporation; or
[3] Where the food is not processed by the person whose
name appears on the label, the name on the label shall be
qualified by a phrase which reveals the connection such a
person has with the food, including but not limited to
"Manufactured for _______________", "Distributed by
_______________", or any other wording which expresses the
facts;
(c) The ingredients in descending order of predominance by
weight;
§ 270-55 SALEM CODE § 270-55
1:234
(d) The net weight or numerical count in both U.S. customary and
metric; and
(e) A product code which includes date of manufacture, container
size, and product lot or batch number to aid in a recall of
product in case of a public health hazard.
E. Production and process controls.
(1) License holders shall ensure that finished foods do not present a
health hazard.
(2) Food service establishments commercially processing foods shall
process such foods in accordance with the scheduled process
evaluated under Subsection C above.
(3) Acidified foods shall be manufactured, processed, and packaged so
that a finished equilibrium pH value of 4.6 or lower is achieved
within the time designated in the scheduled process and
maintained in all finished foods, by imposing controls, including but
not limited to frequent testing and recording of results, to ensure
that the finished equilibrium pH values for acidified foods are not
higher than 4.6.
(4) If the finished equilibrium pH of the food is above 4.0, the
measurement of the finished equilibrium pH shall be performed by
a potentiometric method, and the in-process measurements by
titration or colorimetry shall be related to the finished equilibrium
pH, or if the finished equilibrium pH is 4.0 or below, then the
measurement of acidity of the final product shall be permitted to be
made by any suitable method.
(5) Acidified foods shall be thermally processed to an extent that is
sufficient to destroy vegetative cells of microorganisms of public
health significance and those of nonhealth significance capable of
reproducing in food under the conditions in which the food is
stored, distributed, retailed and held by the user.
(6) Containers of acidified foods shall be tested and examined often to
ensure that the container suitably protects the food from leakage
or contamination.
(7) Each hermetically sealed container of acidified food shall be
marked with an identifying code visible to the naked eye which
shall:
(a) Specify in code the establishment where packed, the product
contained therein, and the year, day, and period during which it
was packed; and
(b) Be changed with sufficient frequency to enable ready
identification of lots during their sale and distribution.
§ 270-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-55
1:235
F. Deviations from scheduled processes. Whenever any process operation
deviates from the scheduled process for any acidified food and/or the
equilibrium pH of the finished product is higher than 4.6, the
commercial processor of the acidified food shall either:
(1) Fully reprocess that portion of the food; or
(2) Discard that portion of the food.
G. Methodology for determining pH or acidity. One of the following
methods shall be used to determine pH or acidity for acidified food:
(1) Potentiometric by the use of a pH meter; or
(2) Colorimetric by the use of:
(a) Indicator solutions;
(b) Indicator papers; or
(c) Titratable acidity.
H. Records required for food service establishments processing food.
(1) License holders shall maintain written, dated records of the entire
food processing operation, including:
(a) Examinations of raw materials, packaging materials and
finished products;
(b) Processing and production records showing adherence to
scheduled processes, including records of pH measurements
and other critical factors, including but not limited to
temperature, intended to ensure a safe product;
(c) Information, including but not limited to product code, date,
container size, and product, to permit a public health hazard
evaluation of the processes applied to each lot, batch, or other
portion of production;
(d) Whenever there is a deviation under Subsection F, the details
shall be recorded and kept in a separate file delineating the
deviation, the action taken to rectify it, and the disposition of
the product involved; and
(e) Identification of the initial distribution of the finished product
to facilitate, when necessary, the segregation of specific food
lots that may have become contaminated or otherwise unfit for
their intended use.
(2) Copies of all records, except those required under Subsection
H(1)(a) above, shall be retained at the processing facility or other
reasonably accessible location for a period of three years from the
date of manufacture.
§ 270-55 SALEM CODE § 270-55
1:236
I. Special requirements for reduced oxygen packaging.
(1) Food service establishments that package food using a reduced
oxygen packaging method shall have a HACCP plan that:
(a) Contains the information specified under Subsections K and L;
(b) Identifies the food to be packaged;
(c) Limits the food packaged to a food that does not support the
growth of Clostridium botulinum because it:
[1] Has an aw of 0.91 or less;
[2] Has a pH of 4.6 or less;
[3] Is a meat product cured at a processing plant regulated by
the United States Department of Agriculture using a
combination of nitrites, nitrates, and salt that at the time
of processing consists of 120 mg/l or higher concentration
of sodium nitrite and a brine concentration of at least
3.50% and is received in an intact package; or
[4] Is a food with a high level of competing organisms such as
raw meat or raw poultry;
(d) Specifies methods for maintaining food at 5° C. (41° F.) or
below;
(e) Describes how the packages shall be prominently and
conspicuously labeled on the principal display panel in bold
type on a contrasting background, with instructions to:
[1] Maintain the food at 5° C. (41° F.) or below; or
[2] Discard the food if, within 14 calendar days of its
packaging, it is not served for on-premises consumption,
or consumed if served or sold for off-premises
consumption;
(f) Limits the shelf life to no more than 14 calendar days from
packaging to consumption or the original manufacturer's sell
by or use by date, whichever occurs first;
(g) Includes operational procedures that:
[1] Prohibit contacting food with bare hands;
[2] Identify a designated area and the method by which:
[a] Physical barriers or methods of separation of raw
foods and ready-to-eat foods minimize crosscontamination;
and
§ 270-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-55
1:237
[b] Access to the processing equipment is restricted to
responsible trained personnel familiar with the
potential hazards of the operation; and
[3] Delineate cleaning and sanitization procedures for foodcontact
surfaces; and
(h) Describes the training program that assures that the individual
responsible for the reduced oxygen packaging operation
understands the:
[1] Concepts required for a safe operation;
[2] Equipment and facilities; and
[3] Operational procedures stated above and HACCP plan
information as stated in Subsections K and L.
(2) Except for fish that is frozen before, during, and after packaging, a
processor shall not package fish using a reduced oxygen packaging
method.
(3) Food service establishments that commercially process food shall
meet all the requirements of this section regarding reduced oxygen
packaging, including the following:
(a) Only unopened packages of food products obtained from
approved sources relating to food safety shall be used to
package at retail in a reduced oxygen atmosphere; and
(b) If it is necessary to stop packaging for a period in excess of 1/2
hour, the remainder of the product shall be diverted for
another use in the food service establishment.
J. Processed fish and smoked fish. Processed fish, smoked fish and caviar
shall not be packaged in reduced oxygen packaging unless
establishments are approved for the activity and inspected by the
regulatory authority.
K. Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plans.
(1) Food service establishments processing food in a commercial
kitchen shall:
(a) Develop and follow a HACCP plan; and
(b) Keep the plan on file at the processing site for review by the
regulatory authority.
(2) The HACCP plan and specifications shall indicate:
(a) The specific foods to be produced;
(b) A flow diagram of specific food identifying critical control
points and providing information on the following:
§ 270-55 SALEM CODE § 270-55
1:238
[1] Ingredients, materials, and equipment used in the
preparation of that food; and
[2] Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and
procedural control measures that address the food safety
concerns involved;
(c) A statement of standard operating procedures for the plan
under consideration including clearly identifying:
[1] Each critical control point;
[2] The critical limits for each critical control point;
[3] The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling
each critical control point;
[4] The method and frequency to routinely verify that the
standard operating procedures and monitoring of the
critical control points are being followed;
[5] Action to be taken if the critical limits for each of the
critical control points are not met; and
[6] Records to be maintained to demonstrate that the HACCP
plan is properly operated and managed; and
(d) Additional scientific data or other information supporting the
determination that food safety is not compromised by the
proposal.
L. Special HACCP requirements for reduced oxygen packaging. All license
holders who use reduced oxygen packaging shall develop a HACCP plan
in accordance with Subsection K, including:
(1) A complete description of the processing, packaging, and storage
procedures designated as critical control points, with attendant
critical limits, corrective action plans, monitoring and verification
schemes, and records required;
(2) A list of equipment and food-contact packaging supplies used,
including compliance standards meeting ANSI certification
requirements;
(3) A description of the lot identification system;
(4) A description of the employee training program;
(5) A listing and proportion of food-grade gases used; and
(6) A standard operating procedure for method and frequency of
cleaning and sanitizing food-contact surfaces in the designated
processing area.
§ 270-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-55
1:239

ARTICLE XXIV
Application and Licensing Procedure
§ 270-56. Licensing procedure.
A. Licensing.
(1) Pre-licensure requirements. As required under RSA 143-A, no
person shall operate a food service establishment or retail food
store in New Hampshire without obtaining a license from the New
Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services or, in the
case of self-inspecting municipalities such as Salem, from the local
health department.
(2) Soup kitchens exempt from licensure. In accordance with RSA
143-A:5-a, soup kitchens shall be exempt from licensure by the
Health Division provided they do not charge for meals and provided
they submit to the Health Division a written notice which shall:
(a) Identify the name and address of the natural person or other
person operating the soup kitchen;
(b) Identify the clientele served by the soup kitchen;
(c) List the hours the soup kitchen will operate; and
(d) Provide a description of the food to be served.
B. Application requirements.
(1) In order to operate a food service establishment or retail food store
pursuant to RSA 143-A, a person shall obtain from the Salem
Health Division the application form titled "food service license
application."
(2) An applicant for a new license or renewal of an existing license
shall submit to the Health Division:
(a) A completed application form and the items required in this
Subsection B(2);
(b) A check, cash or money order for the applicable fees;
(c) If the application involves a new or remodeled food service
establishment or retail food store, plans and specifications as
required by § 270-57;
(d) If the application is for a food service establishment which
commercially processes food, scheduled process pursuant to
§ 270-55; and
(e) If the application is for a mobile food unit which uses a
commissary, the identification of the commissary and a copy of
the commissary license.
§ 270-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-56
1:241
(3) License holders shall submit the applicable items required under
Subsection B(2) above at least seven days prior to the expected
opening date for their application to be considered timely.
C. Application submission.
(1) All information entered on the application form shall be typewritten
or legibly printed in ink.
(2) An applicant shall totally complete the application form required.
D. Water system requirements.
(1) Food service establishments or retail food stores which operate
their own public water systems, as defined by RSA 485:1-a, which
are considered transient non-community water systems, as defined
by NH Env-Dw 103.61, shall submit as part of their application for a
license the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
identification number of the system which has been assigned by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.52
(2) Food service establishments or retail food stores which purchase
their water from other public water systems, as defined by RSA
485:1-a, and therefore do not fall under Subsection D(1) above,
shall submit as part of their application for a license a written
statement identifying the name of the public water system
regulated by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services which provides their water.
(3) Food service establishments or retail food stores which do not fall
under Subsection D(1) above because of their small size, or do not
fall under Subsection D(2) above, and are instead served by a water
source other than a public water system, shall submit:
(a) If applying for a new license, the written results of a laboratory
analysis of the water intended for use which tests the level of
the following:
[1] Bacteria;
[2] Nitrates; and
[3] Nitrite; or
(b) If applying to renew a license, the written results of an analysis
of the water intended for use which tests the level of the
following:
[1] Bacteria; and
[2] Nitrates.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-56 SALEM CODE § 270-56
1:242
(4) The analysis required by Subsection D(3) above shall be conducted
not more than 90 days prior to the date of the application by a
laboratory certified by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services to perform such tests in accordance with
NH Env-C 300.
(5) In order for an application to be approved:53
(a) If it is an application for a new license, the results of:
[1] The bacteria test required under Subsection D(3)(a) above
shall not exceed the acceptable limits for drinking water
prescribed by NH Env-Dw 700; and
[2] The nitrate and nitrite test required under Subsection
D(3)(a) above shall not exceed the acceptable limits for
drinking water prescribed by NH Env-Dw 700 for those
two contaminants; or
(b) If it is an application for license renewal, the results of:
[1] The bacteria test required by Subsection D(3)(b) above
shall not exceed the acceptable limits for drinking water
prescribed by NH Env-Dw 700; and
[2] The nitrate test required by Subsection D(3)(b) above shall
not exceed the acceptable limits for drinking water
prescribed by NH Env-Dw 700.
E. Wastewater system requirements.
(1) Food service establishments or retail food stores which discharge
their wastewater to either public or private wastewater systems
which hold either a state surface water discharge permit or a
groundwater discharge permit issued by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services shall submit as part of their
application a written statement identifying the name of the
municipality, private entity or state agency operating the
wastewater treatment facility which holds the permit.
(2) Food service establishments or retail food stores which do not meet
the requirements of Subsection E(1) above shall submit, as part of
their application, one of the following:
(a) Both:54
[1] A copy of the construction approval and operational
approval for the sewage or waste disposal system serving
the subject food service establishment or retail food store
issued by the New Hampshire Department of
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-56
1:243
Environmental Services in accordance with RSA 485-A:29
and Env-Wq 1000; and
[2] A written statement signed by the applicant containing the
following language: "I certify that there has been no
increase in the loading on my system which would cause
an exceedance of the capacity of the system approved by
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services under the provisions of NH Env-Wq 1000"; or
(b) A written statement signed by the applicant containing the
following language: "I certify that the private sewage or waste
disposal system serving my food service establishment or retail
food store was constructed prior to 1971 and is presently not in
failure. I further certify that I have not been notified by either
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services or
the local health officer that the system serving my food service
establishment or retail food store is in violation of any state or
local statute, administrative rule, ordinance or bylaw."
F. Processing of applications.
(1) If an application does not contain all the items required by this
section the Health Division shall:
(a) Not process that application; and
(b) Notify the applicant of which incomplete required items must
be submitted before the application can be processed.
(2) If all the items required by this section are received, the application
shall be deemed to be complete.
(3) If an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store
conducted in accordance with RSA 147 and RSA 143-A determines
compliance with RSA 147, RSA 143, RSA 143-A and this chapter, a
license shall be issued.
(4) If an inspection of a mobile food unit or other vehicle used for the
retail sale of food determines compliance with RSA 147, RSA 143,
RSA 143-A and this chapter, a license shall be issued.
G. License transfers.
(1) All licenses shall be nontransferable.
(2) All licenses shall be issued for a specific license classification.
H. Expiration of licenses.
(1) All licenses issued shall be valid for up to one year beginning on
April 1 of each year.
(2) All licenses shall expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 270-56 SALEM CODE § 270-56
1:244
(3) All licensees shall be sent an invoice for their license fees
approximately one month prior to the expiration date.
(4) If a license holder fails to timely submit a complete application for
renewal as required, the food service establishment or retail food
store shall cease operation the day after the license expires and
shall not operate until a license is obtained.
(5) Any food service establishment or retail food store whose license
has been expired in excess of 90 days shall be treated as an
applicant for a new license.
I. Change in food service establishment or retail food store ownership.
(1) When there is a change of ownership of a food service
establishment or retail food store, the new owner shall submit the
following to the Health Division prior to the change of ownership:
(a) A written request for a new license which shall contain the
following:
[1] The reason for requesting the license;
[2] The name of the food service establishment or retail food
store as it appears on the current license;
[3] The name of the legal owner of the food service
establishment or retail food store which will appear on the
new license; and
[4] The date upon which the change of ownership will take
effect;
(b) A copy of any certificate of amendment of organizational filings
issued by the New Hampshire Secretary of State, if applicable;
(c) The items required for license renewal applicants in
Subsection B; and
(d) A letter from the most recent owner containing the following
shall be submitted with the application:
[1] An acknowledgment of the impending transfer of
ownership; and
[2] An identification of the date when the change of ownership
will become final.
(2) The owner of the previously licensed food establishment or retail
food store shall return the previous license to the Health Division
within 10 days of the date the license is issued to the new owner.
J. Change in name of food service establishment or retail food store.
§ 270-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-56
1:245
(1) When a license holder intends to change the name of a food service
establishment or retail food store, that license holder shall submit a
written request to the Health Division for a new license at least 30
days prior to the intended date of change in name.
(2) The written request shall include:
(a) The reason for requesting a new license;
(b) The name of the food service establishment or retail food store
as it appears on the existing license;
(c) The name of the food service establishment or retail food store
as the license holder requests it to appear on the new license;
and
(d) An identification of the date when the change in name is
intended to occur.
(3) Following receipt of the items required in Subsection J(2) above,
the Health Officer shall issue a revised license reflecting the
change in name. The license number and expiration date shall
remain the same as they were on the immediately preceding
license.
(4) The license holder shall return the previous license to the Health
Division within 10 days of issuance of the revised license.
K. Change in license class.
(1) A license holder wishing to request an upgrade to a higher level
class of license shall:
(a) Be treated as an applicant for a new license;
(b) Apply for a new license; and
(c) Upon approval of the application under Subsection K(1)(b)
above and after an inspection in accordance with this chapter,
be issued a new license.
(2) A license holder wishing to request a downgrade to a lower level
class of license shall submit a written request for downgrade to the
Health Division which shall include:
(a) The reason for requesting a downgrade; and
(b) An identification of the date when the downgrade is requested
to take effect.
(3) Following receipt of the request in Subsection K(2) above, the
Health Officer shall issue a revised license reflecting the
downgrade in class of license. The license number and expiration
§ 270-56 SALEM CODE § 270-56
1:246
§ 270-57. Submission of plans and specifications for new or
remodeled establishments or stores.
date shall remain the same as they were on the immediately
preceding license.
(4) The license holder shall return the previous license to the Health
Division within 10 days of issuance of the revised license.
A. A license applicant or license holder shall submit in a timely manner
plans and specifications to the Health Division for review and approval
prior to:
(1) Constructing a new food service establishment or retail food store;
(2) Converting an existing structure for use as a food service
establishment or retail food store;
(3) Remodeling a food service establishment or retail food store; or
(4) Relocating a food service establishment or retail food store.
B. Plans and specifications shall:55
(1) Be submitted in duplicate to the Health Officer, 33 Geremonty
Drive, Salem, NH 03079;
(2) Be drawn to scale using a scale of less than or equal to 1/4 inch
equals one foot;
(3) Show all areas of the food service establishment or retail food
store, including food preparation areas and rest rooms;
(4) Designate all fixed and nonfixed equipment with numbers and a
legend which states what each number represents; and
(5) Contain the following information printed on the drawing:
(a) The name of the food service establishment or retail food store;
(b) The physical address, and the mailing address if different; and
(c) The name and telephone number of the primary contact person
with knowledge of the contents of the plans and specifications.
C. The following items, type written or legibly written in ink, shall be
submitted with the plans and specifications:
(1) A copy of the intended menu;
(2) A detailed explanation of the method(s) by which potentially
hazardous foods will be cooled and maintained at a temperature
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-57
1:247
§ 270-58. Denial of license applications.
below 5° C. (41° F.) or lower and how hot temperatures will be
maintained above 60° C. (140° F.);
(3) An explanation of the anticipated volume of food to be stored,
prepared, and sold or served daily;
(4) Proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction materials
and finish schedules;
(5) A list of proposed equipment, including manufacturer, model
number, location, dimension, performance capacity, and
installation specifications;
(6) A detailed description of all special operations, including but not
limited to salad bars, catering or vacuum packaging; and
(7) A list of names, mailing addresses, and phone numbers of all
persons accountable for design and construction of the
establishment.
A. The Health Division shall deny applications for any license if:
(1) The applicant has failed to pay any fees imposed or administrative
fines imposed;
(2) There remain missing or incomplete items, or items that do not
meet the requirements of § 270-56, and the applicant has been
notified of and given an opportunity to supply such items;
(3) A food service establishment or retail food store applying for a new
license does not meet all of the following:
(a) A minimum inspection score of 70;
(b) No violation of any critical items as defined in § 270-3; and
(c) No violation of any construction items as defined in § 270-3;
(4) A food service establishment or retail food store that has a change
of ownership does not meet all of the following:
(a) A minimum inspection score of 70;
(b) No violation of any critical items as defined in § 270-3; and
(c) No violation of any construction items as defined in § 270-3;
(5) A food service establishment or retail food store which has had its
previous license revoked does not meet the following upon
reapplication:
(a) A minimum inspection score of 70;
§ 270-57 SALEM CODE § 270-58
1:248
§ 270-59. Revocation of license; reinstatement.
(b) No violation of any critical items as defined in § 270-3; and
(c) No violation of any construction items as defined in § 270-3;
(6) A food service establishment or retail food store applying for a
renewal license does not meet all of the following:
(a) A minimum inspection score of 70; and
(b) No violation of any critical items as defined in § 270-3;
(7) The applicant prevents the Health Division from conducting an
inspection;
(8) The applicant has failed to comply with a compliance agreement
under § 270-62; or
(9) The applicant is found to be in violation of RSA 143-A or this
chapter.
B. Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an application may request the
right to be heard to the Board of Health.
A. Revocation.
(1) Licenses shall be revoked in accordance with RSA 147:1.
(a) Pursuant to RSA 147:1, if any establishment is found to be in
violation of the sanitary and health code it may be closed
without a hearing for a ten-day period or until the violation is
corrected and the sanitary condition is approved by the Health
Officer. Suspended licenses shall be reinstated once the
establishment is brought into compliance with all issues cited.
The establishment may close voluntarily prior to the issuance
of the closure order. Applicable administrative fines shall
remain in effect.
(b) If the sanitary or health violations are not corrected within the
ten-day period, the Health Officer may, pursuant to RSA 147:1,
revoke the license to operate the restaurant or other food
service establishment after notice and hearing before the
Board of Health. The establishment may close voluntarily prior
to the hearing. Applicable administrative fines shall remain in
effect.
(2) Any person who has had a license revoked shall be prohibited from
applying to renew his license while it remains revoked.
(3) If a revoked license expires without having been reinstated, the
former license holder shall apply for a new license in accordance
with § 270-56 before again operating a food service establishment
or retail store in Salem.
§ 270-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-59
1:249
§ 270-60. Inspections.
(4) As of September 19, 1988, any failed health inspection of any food
service establishment shall result in a published notice of violation
of this chapter and the applicable administrative fine.
B. Effect of denial of application, revocation of license or expired license.
(1) Any applicant who has been denied a license shall not operate that
food service establishment or retail food store.
(2) If a license has been revoked or has expired without timely
application for renewal having been made, operation of that food
service establishment or retail food store shall be discontinued
immediately.
A. Comprehensive inspections of food service establishments or retail food
stores, including mobile food units and vehicles used for the retail sale
of food, shall be conducted a minimum of twice per year.
B. Upon completion of an inspection, the Health Division shall provide the
person in charge of the food service establishment or retail food store
at the time of the inspection with a written inspection report including:
(1) The name and address of the food service establishment or retail
food store;
(2) The date of the inspection;
(3) The name of the person(s) conducting the inspection;
(4) The results of the inspection according to Subsection C below; and
(5) The signature of the person in charge of the food service
establishment or retail food store during the inspection, or a
notation by the person conducting the inspection indicating any
refusal to sign.
C. Documentation of inspections.
(1) The inspection report required by Subsection A above shall include
an inspection checklist containing 44 items with debit points which
are subtracted from 100 to arrive at the score of the inspection.
(2) The point values of the checklist items shall be noted on the
inspection report form.
(a) Critical items shall be worth four or five points as indicated on
the inspection report form. Critical items are depicted in red.56
(b) Noncritical items shall be worth one to three points as
indicated on the inspection report form.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-59 SALEM CODE § 270-60
1:250
§ 270-61. Administrative fines.
§ 270-62. Compliance agreement.
(3) A minimum score of 70 is required as a passing score.
A. Procedure for administrative fines.
(1) Whenever the Health Division determines that a violation of the
provisions of this chapter has occurred, the license holder shall be
provided with a written notice:
(a) Identifying each violation;
(b) Informing the license holder of the amount of the proposed fine
under this section; and
(c) Informing the license holder of the right to be heard before the
Board of Health prior to the imposition of the fine, except that
the license holder shall also be provided notice of the
opportunity to waive the right to a hearing by paying the fine
within 10 days of receipt of the Health Division notice of the
proposed administrative fine.
[1] If the license holder fails to respond to the Health Division
notice of proposed administrative fine within 10 days of
receipt of notice, the Health Officer shall schedule a
hearing before the Board of Health after providing the
license holder with reasonable notice.
[2] If the license holder fails to comply with the Board of
Health's decision, the Town may enforce that decision
through judicial proceedings.
B. Schedule of administrative fines. Fines for violation of the provisions of
this chapter, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with the
Health Division and on the Town of Salem website. Fines shall not
exceed the maximum penalty established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.57
C. Form of payment of fees and administrative fines. Whenever an
applicant or license holder makes a payment to the Health Division in
satisfaction of a fee or administrative fine, the following shall apply:
(1) Payment shall be made in the form of cash, check or money order
for the exact amount due, made payable to the Town of Salem.
(2) Cash, money order, or certified check shall be required when an
applicant or license holder has issued payment to the Health
Division by check and such check was returned for insufficient
funds.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-62
1:251
§ 270-63. License categories.
For the purpose of licensure, food service establishments and retail food
stores shall be divided in the following categories:
A. If critical violations are found and cannot be corrected immediately in
the presence of the inspector, the applicant or licensee shall complete a
compliance agreement in the presence of the inspector.
B. If construction items are found during an inspection for a new or
change of ownership license and cannot be corrected immediately in
the presence of the inspector, the applicant or licensee shall complete a
compliance agreement in the presence of the inspector.
C. The compliance agreement shall be completed on the compliance
agreement form provided by the inspector.
D. The following shall be provided on the compliance agreement:
(1) The date of the agreement;
(2) The name of the establishment;
(3) The address of the establishment;
(4) The name of the person in charge of the establishment at the time
of the inspection;
(5) The telephone number of the person in charge;
(6) Attestment to the agreement to make repairs, corrections, and/or
changes that are necessary to bring the establishment into
compliance with this chapter;
(7) A list of each repair/correction or change to be made, including the
date of intended completion and an explanation as to why the
correction cannot be made immediately;
(8) The signature of the person in charge;
(9) Title of the signee;
(10) Date;
(11) Signature of the inspector; and
(12) Establishment license number.
E. Failure to make the necessary corrections according to the specified
date shall result in the licensee being required to attend a compliance
meeting with the Health Division.
A. Class A which shall include:
§ 270-62 SALEM CODE § 270-63
1:252
(1) Food service establishments which commercially process greater
than 100,000 units of food per year.
(2) Food service establishments with more than 199 seats.
B. Class B which shall include:
(1) Retail food stores with more than two food preparation areas.
(2) Food service establishments with 100 to 199 seats.
(3) Commercial fish processors.
C. Class C which shall include:
(1) Retail food stores with one to two food preparation areas.
(2) Caterers serving off-site food.
(3) Food service establishments with 25 to 99 seats.
(4) Bars and lounges that serve alcohol with a food preparation area.
(5) Food service establishments which commercially process less than
100,000 units of food per year.
(6) Packagers of potentially hazardous foods.
D. Class D which shall include:
(1) Food service establishments with zero to 24 seats.
(2) Packagers of nonpotentially hazardous bulk food.
(3) Food service establishments which process food at home in a
commercial kitchen.
(4) Fraternities and sororities except those whose members prepare
their own food.
E. Class E which shall include:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast and other lodging facilities serving only
continental breakfast.
(2) Mobile food units which cook food.
(3) Vehicles used for retail sale of food, including but not limited to
shrimp and fish.
F. Class F which shall include:
(1) Home delivery services of packaged potentially hazardous foods,
including but not limited to pizza, ice cream, meat and poultry.
§ 270-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-63
1:253
§ 270-64. Licensing fees.
(2) Mobile food units, including but not limited to those serving
prepackaged food and nonpotentially hazardous unwrapped foods
only.
(3) Retail food stores with no food preparation areas only.
(4) Wholesaler/distributor of food.
(5) On-site vending machines which serve potentially hazardous foods.
(6) Sellers of prepackaged frozen meat or poultry.
G. Class G which shall include:
(1) Canobie Lake Park.
(2) Rockingham Park.
H. Class H which shall include:
(1) Temporary events.
A. Food service licensing fees shall be as adopted by the Salem Board of
Selectmen.
B. Licensing fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with
the Health Division and on the Town of Salem website.58
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-63 SALEM CODE § 270-64
1:254
Chapter 279
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 260. Life safety — See Ch. 314.
§ 279-1. Authority.59
This chapter is enacted under the authority of RSA 31:39, RSA 41:11 and
RSA 154.
§ 279-2. Purpose.60
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the control and containment
of hazardous materials after accident or discharge. The purpose of this
chapter is not to impose upon the Town, or any of its officers and agents,
any obligation to secure or remove any hazardous material from the Town
once safe containment of the material is made, and nothing in this chapter is
intended to relieve any owner or person in possession of hazardous material
of any obligation imposed by state or federal law, and specifically nothing
in this chapter shall be deemed to permit the possession, storage, or use of
hazardous materials, except in conformance with all state, federal or local
laws.
§ 279-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all incidents involving hazardous waste or
hazardous materials within the boundaries of the Town of Salem and to all
persons who may possess such materials found within the Town except as
prevailing state or federal laws or regulations may take precedence and
control over any such incident or person. (See RSA 146-A, RSA 147, and
RSA 265:115 to 265:118 for examples of such prevailing state law at the
time this chapter is adopted.)
§ 279-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
CLEANUP — The management, control, containment, recovery, removal
or neutralization of any released hazardous material for the purpose of
promoting or protecting public health or safety.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those substances or materials in such
quantity and form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and
safety or property, which may include, but are not limited to, explosives,
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-4
1:255
radioactive materials, etiologic agents, flammable liquids and solids,
combustible liquids or solids, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and
compressed gases which are listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau
of the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, and any amendment thereto.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, or other legal
entity.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, trust or other entity partially or solely responsible for the
release of any hazardous material within the Town.
USER — Any person who manufactures or transports or owns, uses,
handles, stores, or has the legal authority to control hazardous materials,
specifically including his or its officers, directors, employees, and agents.
§ 279-5. Duty to report.
Any person who causes or has knowledge of any discharge or release
of hazardous materials from their safe container, in any manner which
poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife, vegetation,
property, or the environment, shall immediately report the incident to the
Salem Fire Department.
§ 279-6. Cleanup.
The user or transporter of a hazardous material which is intentionally or
accidentally discharged or released within the Town shall, in addition to
reporting the accident as required by § 279-5, take immediate action to
cause the discharge or release to be cleaned up in an environmentally safe
and scientifically sound manner and to restore the site and the surrounding
environment.
§ 279-7. Intentional discharge or release.
The intentional discharge or release of a hazardous material within the
Town of Salem is strictly prohibited.
§ 279-8. Cost recovery.
A. Upon the completion of any cleanup in which Town employees
participated, all costs of the cleanup shall be itemized by each Town
department involved, including the Fire Department. Such costs shall
include, but are not limited to, the cost of cleaning, repair, restoration
or replacement of any Town material or equipment used in the cleanup,
the costs of any illness or injury sustained by any employee who
participated in the cleanup and the costs of all contracted services
utilized in the cleanup.
B. Upon receipt of these itemizations (including its own), but in no event
later than 60 days from the date of the release, the Fire Department
§ 279-4 SALEM CODE § 279-8
1:256
§ 279-9. Violations and penalties.62
§ 279-10. Remedy not exclusive.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any other remedy the
Town may have to collect from a responsible party the cost of control and
containment of hazardous materials incidents.
§ 279-11. Use of costs and penalties.
All costs and penalties collected under this chapter shall be placed in the
general fund.
shall bill the full cost of the cleanup to the responsible party or parties.
The bill shall include a description of costs incurred. Bills for less
than the full amount of these costs shall be allowed, provided that the
responsible party is advised of the reason therefor and the approximate
date by which it can expect to receive a complete bill.
C. Each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable to the Town
for costs of the cleanup for which it is responsible. Such costs may be
collected by any lawful means, including but not limited to appropriate
court proceedings. All funds received from responsible parties shall be
forwarded to the Finance Director for deposit in the Town treasury.61
D. Any and all costs recovered from a responsible party shall be separate
from and in addition to any penalty that may be assessed for any
violation of any provision of this chapter.
A. Any person who fails to report, as required by § 279-5, shall be assessed
a penalty. Each twenty-four-hour period that the incident is not
reported shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Any person who intentionally discharges or releases or causes another
to discharge or release any hazardous materials from their safe
container, in any manner which poses an actual or potential threat to
people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property, or the environment, shall
be assessed a penalty.
C. Any person who fails to take the action required by § 279-6 shall be
assessed a penalty. Each twenty-four-hour period that a person fails to
take action to cause the discharge or release of a hazardous material to
be cleaned up shall constitute a separate violation.
D. Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town
of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty
established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 279-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-12
1:257
§ 279-12. Emergency operations.
The Fire Chief of the Town of Salem or his designated representative(s)
shall take, and be in control of, any actions necessary to mitigate a
hazardous materials incident within the Town of Salem, except where state
or federal agencies have jurisdiction by law.
§ 279-13. Enforcement.
The Fire Chief of the Town of Salem shall be responsible for enforcing this
chapter.
Chapter 284
HISTORICAL DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District Commission — See Ch. 54.
§ 284-1. Designation of area.
The Town hereby designates the following area as an Historical District:
commencing at the westerly side of Bridge Street and the southerly bank
of the Spicket River, thence following the southerly and/or easterly bank
of the river to its intersection with Route 97; thence in a westerly and
southerly direction by Route 97 to the southerly boundary of land of Sylvia
Dunkley; thence crossing Main Street to the northeasterly boundary of
the Methodist Parsonage; thence following the parsonage boundary in a
northwesterly direction 350 feet, more or less, to the westerly line of
said parsonage property; thence following the westerly boundary of the
parsonage land and land of Earl Woodbury 605 feet, more or less, to land of
James Brown; thence in a southwesterly direction 140 feet, more or less, to
the northeasterly corner of land of John Cotter; thence in a southwesterly
direction by the northerly boundary of land of said Cotter 120 feet, more
or less to land of Stanley Morgan; thence in a northwesterly direction by
said Morgan property 55 feet, more or less; thence in a southerly direction
by the boundary of said Morgan property 120 feet, more or less; thence in
a southwesterly direction by said Morgan property 85 feet, more or less,
to School Street; thence crossing School Street at the northeast corner
to land of William Brown; thence in a westerly direction by land of said
Brown and land formerly of Vivian Runnells 170 feet, more or less; thence
in a northwesterly direction across land of Domonic Pono 60 feet, more
or less, to the northeasterly boundary of land of Florence Kelly; thence in
a westerly direction by said Kelly land and land of Walter Hunt 235 feet,
more or less, to land of LMD, Inc.; thence southerly 280 feet, more or less,
to the northerly boundary of Main Street; thence crossing Main Street to
the northwesterly corner of land on the Hannah Tenney Methodist Church;
thence in a southerly direction by the westerly boundary of said church land
§ 279-12 SALEM CODE § 284-1
1:258
135 feet, more or less; thence in an easterly direction by said church land 75
feet, more or less, to land of Mary Fisk; thence in a southeasterly direction
by said Fisk land and other land of the Hannah Tenney Methodist Church
160 feet, more or less; thence in an easterly direction by the southerly
boundary of said church land 113 feet, more or less, to land of Bernice
Martin; thence in a southeasterly direction by said Martin land 220 feet,
to the Spicket River; thence crossing the Spicket River by a prolongation
of the last course to the southerly bank of said river; thence following the
southerly bank of said river in a northeasterly direction to the point of
beginning.
Chapter 288
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 58.
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 260, Art. II.
Life safety — See Ch. 314.
§ 284-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-1
1:259

ARTICLE I
Residential Premises
§ 288-1. Title; designation of enforcement agency.
§ 288-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The public agency referred to in § 288-1B.
BASEMENT — A portion of any dwelling located partly underground but
having less than 1/2 its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of this Town.64
CELLAR — A portion of any dwelling having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building, structure, camp, trailer, mobile home, dwelling
unit, rooming house or rooming unit, or any part thereof used for human
habitation or intended to be so used, including any appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, foyers, pantries, communicating corridors,
stairways, closets, basement recreation rooms and storage spaces.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling or part thereof containing three
or more dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, living and
sleeping in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — The part of window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
A. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Housing Code," and this article shall be known as the "Housing
Standards Applicable to Residential Premises."
B. Pursuant to RSA 48-A, the Town of Salem Health Officer is hereby
designated by the Board of Selectmen as the public agency authorized
to enforce RSA 48-A and the Housing Code.63
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Building Construction.
§ 288-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-2
1:261
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control of
any dwelling or part of it in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, holds
legal or equitable title to any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PLUMBING — Water-heating facilities, water pipes, garbage-disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents and other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water or sewer lines.
PLUMBING CODE — The New Hampshire State Building Code as adopted
pursuant to RSA 155-A.65
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings and
structures thereon.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part thereof containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let to three or more persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator at
his expense.
TEMPORARY DWELLING — A seasonal dwelling that is intended for use
eight or fewer months per year.
TOWN — The Town of Salem.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling containing two dwelling units.
YARD — All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space
constituting part of the same premises as the dwelling.
§ 288-3. Basic equipment and facilities required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for basic
equipment and facilities:
A. Dwelling units.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls and/or meet the
following requirements:
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 288-2 SALEM CODE § 288-3
1:262
(a) Lavatory facilities. A room, separate from the habitable rooms,
which affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water
closet and a lavatory basin.
(b) Bathtub or shower. A room, separate from the habitable rooms,
which affords privacy to a person in the room and which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower.
(c) Kitchen sink.
(2) Sharing by dwelling units in same building. The occupants of not
more than two dwelling units which are located in the same
dwelling may share sanitation facilities, including a water closet,
lavatory and tub or shower, provided that:
(a) Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two
rooms; however, for the purposes of this subsection, a kitchen
with not more than 60 square feet of floor area is not counted
as a room.
(b) The habitable room area of each of such dwelling units
aggregates not more than 350 square feet, exclusive of
sanitation area.
B. Water line connections. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub
or shower required by this chapter shall be properly connected with
both hot and cold water lines. The hot water lines shall be connected
with supplied water heating facilities which are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water
to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin and tub or
shower at a temperature of not less than 120° F. All plumbing fixtures
required by this section shall be properly connected to an approved
water system and to an approved sewerage system.
C. Rubbish collection. Every multifamily dwelling shall have approved
common garbage and rubbish storage or disposal facilities.
D. Egress. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall have a safe and
unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at
ground level.
E. Rooming house; additional sanitation standards.
(1) Lavatories. Every rooming house shall be equipped with at least
one flush water closet, one lavatory basin and one bathtub or
shower for each six persons or fraction thereof living within the
rooming house, including members of the family of the owner or
operator if they share the use of the facilities. In a rooming house in
which rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted
for not more than 1/2 the required number of water closets. All
such facilities shall be properly connected to approved water and
sewerage systems. No such facility located in a basement or cellar
§ 288-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-3
1:263
§ 288-4. Ventilation, lighting, heating and screens.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for
ventilation, light and heating:
shall count in computing the number of facilities required by this
subsection, except when approved by the Building Inspector. Every
flush water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by this subsection shall be located within the
rooming house in a room or rooms which:66
(a) Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms.
(b) Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside
the rooming house.
(c) Are not more than one story removed from the rooming unit of
any occupant intended to share the facilities.
(2) Bedding and towels. When bedding, bed linen or towels are
supplied, the owner or operator shall maintain the bedding in a
clean and sanitary manner, and he shall furnish clean bed linen and
towels at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room
to any occupant.
A. Windows and openable space.
(1) Total window area. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window which faces directly to the outdoors. The minimum total
window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room
shall be 10% of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or
other portions of structures face a window of any such room and
such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area.
(2) Openable window area. Every habitable room shall have a least one
window or skylight which can be easily opened, or such other
device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable
window area in every habitable room shall equal at least 45% of the
minimum area size or the minimum skylight-type window size, as
required by this chapter, except where there is supplied some other
device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Building
Inspector.67
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 288-3 SALEM CODE § 288-4
1:264
(3) Glass-fronted porch. For the purpose of this section, where a living
room faces onto a glass-fronted porch, the porch shall be
considered as a part of the living room if the total window and open
space area between the porch and the living room is at least 15% of
the floor area of the living room.
(4) Bathroom. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the window area and openable area requirements for
habitable rooms, except where there is supplied some other device
approved by the Building Inspector as affording adequate
ventilation.68
(5) Laundry rooms. Every laundry room shall have a minimum
openable area of at least three square feet, except where there is
some other device approved by the Building Inspector as affording
adequate ventilation.69
(6) Public hallway and stairways. Every public hallway and stairway
within every two-family or multifamily dwelling and rooming house
shall be adequately ventilated and equipped with handrails
required by the Building Code.
B. Lighting. Every dwelling within 300 feet of a power line shall be
supplied with electricity as follows:
(1) Habitable room. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
separate floor- or wall-type electric convenience outlets and one
supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture or a switch-controlled
outlet.
(2) Bathrooms; utility rooms. Every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture.
(3) Public halls. Every public hall in a dwelling shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture. Every public
hall and stairway in every two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling
and rooming house shall be adequately lighted at all times, except
that in a two-family dwelling an adequate lighting system which
may be turned on when needed by conveniently located light
switches shall be permitted instead of a full-time lighting system.
(4) Standards for installation. Every outlet and fixture shall be properly
installed and maintained in good and safe working condition. All
electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the
National Electrical Code.
C. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are capable of safely
and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 288-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-4
1:265
§ 288-5. Space requirements.
No person shall occupy or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling,
rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit which does not comply with
the following minimum standards for space and occupancy:
closet compartments within their walls to a temperature of at least 70°
F. when the outside temperature is -10° F. This subsection does not
apply to a temporary dwelling.
D. Portable heating equipment employing a flame and using gasoline or
kerosene does not meet the standards of this chapter and is prohibited.
E. During the portion of each year extending from May 15 to September
15 and as protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space and used
for ventilation shall be supplied with screens and a self-closing device,
and every window or other device capable of being opened to outdoor
space and used for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with screens.
Every basement or cellar window used for ventilation, and every
opening which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied
with screens or such other device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.
A. Habitable floor area. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150
square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant and at least 100
square feet for each additional occupant. Exception for children under
one year of age: For the purposes of this section, a person under one
year of age shall not be counted as an occupant.
B. Sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 80 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 40 square
feet of floor area for each occupant.
C. Arrangement of sleeping room; bathroom. No dwelling or dwelling unit
containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such arrangements
that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for
use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by
going through another sleeping room, nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through
another sleeping room or bathroom or water closet compartment.
D. Calculation of floor area. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and hall area within the
dwelling unit, where provided, may count for not more than 10% of the
required habitable floor area. At least 75% of the floor area of a room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of
any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall
§ 288-4 SALEM CODE § 288-5
1:266
§ 288-6. Maintenance of structure.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit
which does not comply with the following minimum standards for safe and
sanitary maintenance:
not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area
of the room.
E. Basements and cellars. No basement or cellar shall be used for living
purposes unless:
(1) The floors and walls are substantially watertight.
(2) The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area,
not including stairwells or accessways.
A. Foundations, exterior walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall
and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and
rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall
be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may
cause to be placed thereon.
B. Floors, interior walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling
shall be substantially rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and
good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
as specified by the Building Code.
C. Windows and exterior doors. Every window, exterior door and basement
or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in working condition and
good repair.
D. Stairways and porches. Every inside and outside stair and porch, and
any appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load of 80 pounds per square foot and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
E. Plumbing fixtures. Every plumbing fixture shall be properly installed
and maintained in sound mechanical condition, free from defects, leaks
and obstructions, and in accordance with the Plumbing Code.
F. Bathroom floor surfaces. Every water closet compartment floor surface
and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as
to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to
be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 288-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-6
1:267
§ 288-7. Structural defects deemed sufficient to make structure
unfit.
Any dwelling which has any or all of the following defects of structural
elements shall be deemed unfit for human habitation:
§ 288-8. Nonstructural substandard conditions.
Any dwelling which has any or all of the following general substandard
conditions shall be deemed unfit for human habitation:
G. Maintenance of required equipment and utilities. Every supplied
facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required under this
chapter and every chimney and smoke pipe shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in sound working condition.
A. Structural walls and vertical members. Any dwelling whose structural
walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an
extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls
outside of the middle third of its base shall be deemed unfit for human
habitation.
B. Supporting members and nonsupporting walls. Any dwelling which,
exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more of damage or
deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50% of damage
or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering, shall be deemed unfit for human habitation.
C. Floor and roof loads. Any dwelling which has improperly distributed
loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or
which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used shall be deemed unfit for human habitation.
D. Damage by fire, wind or other causes. Any dwelling which has been
damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous
to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the
people of the Town of Salem shall be deemed unfit for human
habitation.
A. Dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary. Any dwelling which has
become or is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or unsanitary or which
utterly fails to provide the amenities essential to decent living or which
is likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein shall be
deemed unfit for human habitation.
B. Inadequate light, air and sanitation. Any dwelling having light, air and
sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety
or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein shall be
deemed unfit for human habitation.
§ 288-6 SALEM CODE § 288-8
1:268
§ 288-9. Standards for cooking equipment.
No owner, operator or occupant shall furnish or use any cooking equipment
which does not comply with the following minimum standards:
§ 288-10. Responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants.
C. Inadequate egress. Any dwelling having inadequate facilities for egress
in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators,
fire escapes or other means of communication shall be deemed unfit for
human habitation.
D. Insecure parts. Any dwelling which has parts thereof which are so
attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or
property shall be deemed unfit for human habitation.
E. Unsafe, insanitary or dangerous to public. Any dwelling which, because
of its condition, is unsafe, insanitary or dangerous to the health, safety
or general welfare of the people of this Town shall be deemed unfit for
human habitation.
F. Violation of ordinances. Any dwelling existing in violation of any
provision of the Building Code of this Town or other ordinances of this
Town shall be deemed unfit for human habitation.
A. Construction, installation and maintenance. Every piece of cooking
equipment shall be so constructed and installed that it will function
safety and effectively and shall be maintained in sound working
condition.
B. Prohibited equipment. Portable cooking equipment employing flame
and using gasoline or kerosene as fuel is prohibited.
A. Sanitation.
(1) Cleanliness by occupant. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and yard which he
occupies and controls and shall be responsible for his own misuse
of areas and facilities available in common.
(2) Cleanliness by owner or operator. Every owner or operator of a
two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling or rooming house shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public
areas of the dwelling and yard.
(3) Use and operation of supplied facilities. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit shall keep all supplied facilities, including plumbing
fixtures and cooking equipment, in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their
proper use and operation.
B. Removal of water matter.
§ 288-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-10
1:269
(1) Storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit shall dispose of all rubbish, ashes, garbage and other
organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
approved storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary.
Every occupant shall provide such facilities for and within his
dwelling unit and shall maintain them in a clean and sanitary
manner. The owner or operator of a multifamily dwelling shall be
responsible further for placing out for collection all common
garbage and refuse containers, except where such facilities are for
the sole use of an occupant, under which circumstance it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant to place these containers out for
collection.
(2) Rooming house rubbish storage and disposal. Every owner or
operator of every rooming house shall dispose of all rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in supplied and approved
storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary.
C. Extermination.
(1) Extermination of pests by occupant. Every occupant of a dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests in it or in the yard. Exception: When,
however, infestation is caused by failure of the owner or operator to
maintain a dwelling in a rodent-proof or substantially insect-proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner or
operator.
(2) Extermination of pests by owner or operator. Every owner or
operator shall be responsible for extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units of any dwelling or in the shared or public areas
of any two-family dwelling or any multifamily dwelling.
(3) Extermination of pests in rooming houses. Every owner or operator
of a rooming house shall be responsible for the extermination of
any insects, rodents or other pests in it or in the yard.
D. Heat. During the time of the year when it is necessary, as determined by
the agency, every owner or operator of every two-family dwelling,
multifamily dwelling and rooming house shall supply adequate heat to
every habitable room therein, except where there are separate heating
facilities for each dwelling unit, whose facilities are under the sole
control of the occupant of such dwelling unit.
E. Utilities. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service
equipment or utility which is required by this chapter to be removed,
shut off or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary
emergencies.
§ 288-10 SALEM CODE § 288-10
1:270
§ 288-11. Standards in determining remedial action.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the agency in
ordering repair, vacating, closure, demolition or removal:
§ 288-12. Compliance with order for remedial action.
All dwellings deemed unfit for human habitation within the terms §§ 288-7
and 288-8 of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be repaired, vacated and closed or demolished or removed as
hereinbefore and hereinafter provided.
§ 288-13. Inspections.
F. Janitorial service. Every dwelling of five or more dwelling units, in
which the owner or operator does not reside, shall have a janitor as
found necessary by the agency.
G. Transfer of responsibility. A contract effective as between owner and
operator, operator and occupant or owner and occupant, with regard to
compliance hereunder, shall not relieve any party of his direct
responsibility under this chapter.
H. Notice of maximum occupancy. Every owner or operator shall advise
the occupant in writing, either by insertion in the lease between the
parties or otherwise, of the maximum number of occupants permitted in
the occupied premises under this chapter.
A. Repair. If a dwelling deemed unfit for human habitation can reasonably
be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this
chapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
B. Vacating and closing. If a dwelling deemed unfit for human habitation is
in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety or
general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and
closed.
C. Demolition or removal. In any case where a dwelling deemed unfit for
human habitation is 50% damaged or decayed or deteriorated from its
original value or structure, it shall be demolished or removed, and in all
cases where a dwelling cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist
in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be demolished or
removed. In all cases where a dwelling unfit for human habitation is a
fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of any ordinance
of the Town or statute of the State of New Hampshire, it shall be
demolished or removed. For the purposes of this chapter, removal of a
dwelling unfit for human habitation shall mean removal from the Town
of Salem.
A. Inspection by agency. The agency, upon complaint of 10 or more
citizens or officers of the Town of Salem, shall cause to be inspected
§ 288-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-13
1:271
§ 288-14. Enforcement procedure.
dwellings or mobile homes located within the Town of Salem and not
otherwise.
B. Access by the agency. To carry out the purposes and provisions of this
chapter, the agency or any subordinate acting under its direction and
supervision is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times, and in an emergency at any time, all dwellings, and
the owner or occupant of the same or the person in charge thereof shall
grant free access for the purpose of such examination and survey.
C. Access by owner or operator. Every occupant of a dwelling, rooming
house, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner or operator
thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling,
rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or its premises, at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. The agency's powers and duties.
(1) The agency shall have the power to administer affirmation,
examine witnesses and receive evidence in the course of its
hearings.
(2) The agency shall appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents
and employees as deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of
this chapter.
(3) The agency may delegate any of its functions under this chapter to
such officers as it may designate.
B. Inspection by agency. Whenever the agency, upon complaint of 10 or
more citizens or officers of the Town of Salem, shall cause to be
inspected dwellings or mobile homes located within the Town of Salem,
it shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner, every mortgagee
of record and all parties in interest in such dwelling, including persons
in possession, a written complaint stating the grounds thereof. If the
person to be served resides outside the state, service may be made by
registered mail, and if there are any unascertained persons having an
interest in said dwelling, notice may be given to them by publication in
a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, such publication to
be at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing. Such complaint
shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the agency, at a
place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of said complaint. The owner, mortagee and parties in
interest may file an answer to the complaint and appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
§ 288-13 SALEM CODE § 288-14
1:272
complaint. Rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in said hearing.
C. Whenever the agency, after notice and hearing, determines that,
according to the minimum standards imposed by this chapter, a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation, it shall state in writing its
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order which, if the repair,
alteration or improvement of said dwelling can be made at a reasonable
cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and the ability of the owner
to assume such cost, requires the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling to render it fit for human
habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation, of
if the repair, alteration, or improvement of said dwelling cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and
the ability of the owner to assume such costs, requires the owner,
within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such
dwelling.
D. Whenever the owner of a dwelling is aggrieved by order of the agency,
he may file an appeal with the Board of Selectmen, which will hold a
hearing thereon, due notice of the same first being given to the agency
and to said owner. The Board of Selectmen, after hearing and in
accordance with its findings, may affirm, revoke or modify the order of
the agency. Where the order is affirmed or modified, the agency shall
proceed to enforce the same as affirmed or modified. When the order is
revoked, proceedings shall be terminated.
E. Whenever the owner of any dwelling fails to comply with an order of the
agency, a petition shall be filed with the Superior Court by said agency
in accordance with the provisions of RSA 48-A as it may be amended
from time to time.
F. Whenever the agency finds that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation
and has issued an order to the person responsible therefor, the agency
shall post, in a conspicuous place thereon, a placard or placards which
shall include the following words: "Condemned as Unfit for Human
Habitation."
G. Any dwelling which has been determined unfit for human habitation
and which has been posted as such by the agency shall be vacated
within the time required by the agency. No owner or operator shall let
to any person and no person shall occupy any dwelling which has been
found unfit for human habitation and which has been posted as such by
the agency.
H. No dwelling which has been found unfit for human habitation and which
has been posted as such shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval has been furnished by the agency. Upon receipt of
such order, the owner may remove the placard.
§ 288-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-14
1:273
§ 288-15. Standards applicable to rooming houses.
I. Except in accordance with the provisions of Subsection H, no person
shall deface, cover or remove any placard lawfully placed upon any
dwelling by the agency.
J. The agency shall make such exceptions as it deems proper for
residences that are used for temporary dwellings only.
A. No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except
in compliance with the provisions of every applicable section of this
chapter.
B. Rooming house permit. No person shall operate a rooming house unless
he holds a valid rooming house permit issued by the agency in the name
of the operator and for the specific dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house or rooming unit. The operator shall apply to the agency for such
permit, which shall be issued by the agency upon compliance by the
operator with the applicable provisions of this chapter. This permit shall
be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all
times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such
permit shall give notice in writing to the agency within 24 hours after
having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of
ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming house. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming house
permit shall expire at the end of one year following its date of issuance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided.
C. Any person whose application for a rooming house permit has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing in accordance with
the procedures required under § 288-14 of this chapter.
D. Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the agency finds that
there may exist a violation of the minimum housing standards
established by this chapter, it shall, after giving notice to the owner and
holding a public hearing as provided in § 288-14, revoke the owner's
permit where violations are found and may make such further orders as
are authorized by the provisions of this chapter.
E. Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall
also apply to hotels and motels, except to the extent that they may
conflict with the laws of the state or with the lawful regulations of any
state board or agency.
F. Space- and water-heating units shall be of an approved type for
installation in a mobile home. Fuel-burning water heaters and furnaces,
other than those having a sealed combustion space, shall not be located
in sleeping rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
§ 288-14 SALEM CODE § 288-15
1:274
G. Space-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a
minimum inside temperature of 70° F., based on the average of the
recorded annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality, and
shall be provided with manual or automatic temperature control
devices.
H. Water-heating units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each hot
water outlet an ample supply of water at a minimum temperature of
120° F., and such units shall be provided with safety devices arranged
to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
I. Electrical space and water-heating equipment shall be of an approved
type and shall have adequate circuit protection devices.
J. Gas- and liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically designed
for the type of fuel used. Flues and vents shall be suitable for the types
of fuel used and shall be installed so that the surface of adjacent
combustible material will not exceed a safe temperature.
K. Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas
shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to the
main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
L. Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using liquefied
petroleum gas shall have a valve that will automatically shut off the flow
of gas to the pilot light and main burner when the pilot flame is
extinguished.
M. Fuel-burning space- and water-heating units shall be vented. Other
fuel-burning equipment shall be vented where the discharge of
products of combustion into the space where the equipment is installed
would be unsafe.
N. Liquid-fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be provided
with means to prevent spilling of fuel.
O. Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside the
mobile home or in a space that is vented to the outside and is vaportight
to the inside.
P. Warm air supply ducts and fittings shall be of noncombustible
materials.
Q. Return air ducts shall be of noncombustible material where exposed to
temperatures which are unsafe for combustible materials.
R. Return air grilles in doors and partitions shall be of a permanent
nonclosable type. Openings for return air shall not be located in
bathrooms, toilet rooms or kitchenettes.
S. Mechanical ventilation, where required, shall exhaust air at rates not
less than the following:
§ 288-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-15
1:275
(1) For habitable space: two air changes per hour.
(2) For bathrooms and toilet rooms: 25 cubic feet per minute.
(3) For kitchenettes: 100 cubic feet per minute.
T. Air conditioning for habitable space provided in lieu of mechanical
ventilation shall supply an amount of air not less than that set forth in
Subsection S, with at least 25% of the required quantity taken from the
outside.
§ 288-15 SALEM CODE § 288-15
1:276
ARTICLE II
Mobile Homes
§ 288-16. Title; purpose.
§ 288-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental to
that of the mobile home and which is attached thereto or located on the
same mobile home lot. Accessory structures include but are not limited
to portable, demountable or permanent enclosures, shade structures and
carports.
APPROVED — Approved by the administrative officer under the regulations
of this article or approved by an authority designated by law or this article.
COMMUNITY AREA — An area or space within a mobile home court,
including fences, walls and other minor constructions, which is designed for
joint use of occupants or restricted to nonresidential use.
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE — A structure within a mobile home court
providing laundry, toilet, recreation, parking or other common facilities,
including management office and storage buildings.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED STANDARD — A specification, code, rule, guide
or procedure in the field of construction of mobile homes or mobile home
courts, or related thereto, recognized and accepted as authoritative.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking
purposes, excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage spaces
and enclosures for equipment installations.
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT — Mobile home electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems and equipment
used for living purposes, including cooking and refrigeration equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A movable living unit equipped with a chassis and
provided with the following mechanical systems and equipment: plumbing,
heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. (See definition of "trailer.")
MOBILE HOME COURT — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A designated site within a mobile home court for
the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
A. This article shall be known as the "Housing Standards Applicable to
Mobile Homes."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform
standards in terms of performance objectives implemented by specific
requirements governing the construction, occupancy and maintenance
of mobile homes.
§ 288-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-17
1:277
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual mobile home lot which
has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
PATIO — A paved outdoor living space designed to supplement the mobile
home living area.
STORAGE LOCKER — An enclosed space designed to provide auxiliary
general storage space for an individual mobile home.
TRAILER (TRAVEL OR VACATION) — A moveable living unit equipped
with a chassis but lacking any of the following mechanical systems and
equipment: plumbing, heating, electrical, cooking and refrigeration. (See
definition of "mobile home.")
§ 288-18. General standards.
§ 288-19. Design and construction.
A. Mobile home design and construction shall conform to generally
accepted standards of the mobile home industry.
B. Materials, assemblies and equipment shall conform to generally
accepted standards with respect to strength, durability, corrosion and
fire resistance, and other qualities recognized under such standards.
C. Habitable and nonhabitable space shall be arranged, located, lighted
and ventilated so as to be appropriate for the intended use.
D. Mechanical systems and equipment shall be designed, installed and
located so that, under normal conditions of use, such systems and
equipment shall be capable of functioning safely and efficiently without
being forced to operate beyond the designed capacity.
E. Equipment requiring operation, inspection or maintenance shall be
located so that easy access is provided.
F. Plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall be properly connected to
approved sources of supply when a mobile home is in a fixed location
and occupied for living purposes.
G. Mobile home units, including mechanical systems and equipment, shall
be maintained and operated so as to be free of conditions conducive to
personal injury or detrimental to health or welfare.
A. Mobile homes shall be structurally sound, effectively insulated and
capable of sustaining designed dynamic loading.
B. Body and body framing.
(1) Body frames shall be designed and constructed as complete units.
Wall and floor surfaces shall be firmly attached to body framing
members. Doors and windows shall be securely framed in place.
Framing and exterior skin shall be surface treated or painted to
prevent deterioration.
§ 288-17 SALEM CODE § 288-19
1:278
§ 288-20. Space requirements.
(2) Roofs shall be pitched for proper drainage and shall be
weathertight. Roof decks shall be of metal or noncombustible
materials.
(3) Wood body framing shall be of seasoned lumber and shall provide
adequate support and rigidity. Members shall be joined so as to
ensure permanent attachment to each other.
(4) Metal body framing shall be of structural formed sections, riveted,
bolted or welded together. Where different metals are joined,
precautions shall be taken to prevent electrostatic action.
(5) Insulation of floors, roofs and exterior walls shall consist of
noncombustible materials.
(6) Ventilation shall be provided to minimize deterioration of structural
members from condensation or other causes.
C. Chassis.
(1) The chassis shall extend substantially the length of the body and
shall be capable of supporting the live and dead loads to which
subjected.
(2) A tongue or drawbar shall be secured to the chassis and shall be
capable of supporting the weight of the forward end of the mobile
home. If designed to support gas cylinders, the tongue shall be of
sufficient strength and shall permit secure attachment.
(3) A hitch shall be securely attached to the tongue so as to become an
integral part of the tongue.
(4) Axles, spring assemblies and wheels shall be capable of supporting
the calculated loads.
D. Placement. Placement of a mobile home on a mobile home stand by
jacks or supports shall be such as to ensure the retention of the mobile
home in a fixed position.
A. Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of occupants of a mobile
home shall be limited to the number determined on the basis of the
square feet of floor area of habitable space, exclusive of habitable space
used for cooking purposes, in accordance with the following:
(1) One hundred fifty square feet for one or two occupants.
(2) Two hundred fifty square feet for three occupants.
(3) Eighty square feet for each occupant thereafter.
B. Height of habitable space. Habitable space shall have a minimum
ceiling height of seven feet over 50% of the floor area, and the floor
§ 288-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-20
1:279
§ 288-21. Light and ventilation.
§ 288-22. Mechanical systems and equipment.
area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered in computing gross floor area.70
C. Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall have
provisions for privacy and shall be provided with floors of moistureresistant
materials.
D. Prohibited uses. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
E. Exits. A mobile home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit
and an emergency exit located remote from the primary exit.
A. Habitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with natural light and
ventilation adequate for the intended use of each habitable space in
accordance with the following:
(1) The window area shall equal at least 10% of the floor area for each
habitable space.
(2) The openable area of windows and other openings used for natural
ventilation of each habitable space shall equal at least 45% of the
required window area, or mechanical ventilation shall be provided
as set forth in § 288-15S.
B. Nonhabitable space. A mobile home shall be provided with light and
ventilation adequate for the intended use of nonhabitable space in
accordance with the following:
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the space
and the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
(2) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
natural ventilation consisting of openable areas of not less than 1 1/
2 square feet for bathrooms and toilet rooms and not less than
three square feet for kitchenettes, or mechanical ventilation shall
be provided as set forth in § 288-15S.
A. Plumbing.
(1) A mobile home shall contain:
(a) A kitchen sink.
(b) A flush-type water closet.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 288-20 SALEM CODE § 288-22
1:280
(c) A bathtub or shower.
(d) A lavatory.
(2) Hot and cold water supply shall be provided at the kitchen sink,
bathtub or shower, and lavatory. Cold water shall be supplied to the
water closet.
(3) The plumbing system shall be designed and arranged so as to
facilitate connecting to an approved exterior water supply and
sewage disposal system and provide adequate water supply to all
plumbing fixtures and dispose of all liquid wastes therefrom.
B. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.
(1) A mobile home shall contain:
(a) Space-heating equipment.
(b) Water-heating equipment.
(2) Areas allocated for installation of space-heating and water-heating
equipment shall provide adequate clearance so that the surface of
adjacent combustible materials will not exceed a safe temperature.
Curtains and draperies shall not be used in such areas.
C. Electrical.
(1) A mobile home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service
equipment.
(2) Electrical wiring shall have adequate capacity for designed lighting
and appliance equipment. Individual circuits shall contain overload
protection devices.
(3) At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple of
12 linear feet of wall space or major fraction thereof in each
habitable space and kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall
have permanently installed lighting fixtures and switches located
so as not to be an electrical hazard.
(4) Exterior equipment shall be weatherproofed to ensure protection
of equipment from the elements. Service equipment shall have
means for quick disconnection from the source of supply.
(5) Provision shall be made for grounding non-current-carrying
metallic parts of the electrical system. Such grounding shall be
common to one external supply point. Provision shall be made for
exterior source grounding of the electrical system.
D. Cooking and refrigeration.
(1) A mobile home shall contain:
(a) Cooking equipment.
§ 288-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-22
1:281
§ 288-23. Maintenance standards.
(b) Refrigeration equipment.
(2) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for installation in a mobile home and shall have
adequate circuit protection devices.
(3) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an
approved type for mobile home installation, and connections to
rigid pipe shall be made with approved flexible metal gas appliance
connectors.
(4) Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for
heating.
A. A mobile home shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
B. Interior. Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall be maintained
free of obstructions.
C. Garbage and refuse. Suitable containers shall be provided for the
temporary storage of garbage and refuse within the mobile home.
D. Screening. From May 15 to September 15, entrances to the mobile
home shall be provided with self-closing-type devices or screens, and
windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately
screened.
E. Extermination. Mobile homes shall be maintained free of insects,
vermin and rodents. Extermination shall be effected in conformance
with generally accepted practice.
F. Flammable materials. Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable
materials shall be stored in a safe, approved manner.
§ 288-22 SALEM CODE § 288-23
1:282
ARTICLE III
Interpretation and Enforcement
§ 288-24. Effect on other regulations.
This chapter shall not interfere with or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation
or permit, provided that, unless specifically excepted, where this chapter is
more stringent, it shall control.
§ 288-25. Violations and penalties.71
In addition to other remedies provided in this chapter, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum
allowed pursuant to RSA 48-A. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
71.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 288-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 288-25
1:283
Chapter 310
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment establishments — See Ch. 247.
§ 310-1. Licenses required for certain activities.
§ 310-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter has been enacted pursuant to the authority granted the Town
by RSA 31:39 (regulation of dance halls and skating rinks), RSA 31:41
(outdoor movie theaters), RSA 31:41-d and 31:42 (coin-operated
amusement devices), RSA 286 (pool tables for hire and bowling alleys), and
RSA 31:41-a (motor vehicle racetracks).
§ 310-3. Operation without license prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to operate a dance hall, roller-skating rink, motor
vehicle racetrack, outdoor movie theater, bowling alley, pool table for hire
or penny arcade in the Town of Salem without having first obtained a license
therefor from the Board of Selectmen.
§ 310-4. Standards.
A. The Selectmen are authorized and empowered to issue licenses to and
collect the prescribed fees from persons engaged in the following
businesses:
(1) Dance halls.
(2) Roller-skating rinks.
(3) Pool tables for hire.
(4) Bowling alleys.
(5) Outdoor movie theaters.
(6) Motor vehicle racetracks.
(7) Penny arcades.
B. The Selectmen shall adopt written regulations and/or guidelines
consistent with this chapter governing the terms and conditions under
which licenses may be issued hereunder.
C. All of the above licenses must be renewed annually by April 1.
§ 288-25 SALEM CODE § 310-4
1:284
A. Before issuing a license, the Selectmen shall determine that the
proposed activity does not violate any zoning, building, health or other
Town regulation or ordinance and that the licensed activity will not be
conducted in such a way as to create a public nuisance by excessive
noise, congregation of patrons, parking or traffic congestion or
otherwise.
B. To receive a license, all penny arcades must conform to the following
standards:
(1) All areas of the establishment to which the public is admitted
(excluding rest rooms) shall be open to view from the common
areas of the premises. No booths, cubicles, rooms, or stalls shall be
constructed such that visibility into the interior is obscured or
blocked by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever.
(2) Overhead lighting shall be used to illuminate all areas to which the
public is permitted access.
C. Dance halls or public dances.
(1) To receive a license, no dance hall or establishment where public
dances are held shall permit the following acts to occur:
(a) No employee of any person conducting public dances shall be
unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire,
costume or clothing so as to appear in a state of nudity.
(b) No employee mingling with patrons of an establishment
conducting public dances shall be unclothed or in such attire,
costume or clothing as is described in Subsection C(1)(a)
above.
(c) No employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person
upon the premises to engage in sexual conduct as defined by
RSA 650:1, VI.
(d) No employee shall perform acts of or acts which simulate
sexual conduct as defined by RSA 650:1, VI.
(e) No employee shall use artificial devices or inanimate objects to
depict any of the prohibited activities described in this section.
(2) For purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including entertainers,
dancers, or independent contractors, who work in or at or render
any services directly related to the operation of a public dance hall.
STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance or display of male or female
genitals, buttocks or the female breast.
§ 310-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-5
1:285
§ 310-5. Revocation of license.
Upon proper notice to the licensee, the Selectmen may conduct a public
hearing to determine whether or not the licensee has violated the
requirements and/or standards of this chapter. Upon a finding by the
Selectmen that the licensee has violated the requirements and/or standards
of this chapter, the Board of Selectmen may revoke any license issued under
this chapter.
§ 310-6. Violations and penalties.72
Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town of Salem
website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established pursuant
to RSA 31:39, III.
§ 310-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCE HALL — Any commercial establishment where dancing, whether
to live or recorded music, by the patrons is permitted without regard
to whether admission is by membership or otherwise or to whether the
primary business of the commercial establishment is to provide a place for
public dancing.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Such sound that is of a volume and/or intensity above
the normal level prevailing in an area where a commercial establishment is
located, when the establishment is not in operation, as to have a significant
adverse impact on abutting neighbors or the general public.
PENNY ARCADE — A place where there are more than three coin- or slugoperated
machines for amusement. This shall also include machines that
have been altered to eliminate the use of coins or tokens by prepayment.
Chapter 314
LIFE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210. Fires and fire prevention — See Ch. 260.
§ 314-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Salem Life Safety Code."
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 310-5 SALEM CODE § 314-2
1:286
§ 314-2. Adoption of standards. [Amended by the 3-18-2017 Town
Meeting]
The Town of Salem hereby adopts, pursuant to RSA 155-A, RSA 674:51 and
RSA 674:51-a, for the purpose of establishing standards to safeguard life
from fire occurring in buildings and structures, that certain code known
as the "NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2015 edition," adopted as part of the
New Hampshire State Fire Code, as amended, as fully as if set out herein,
except for the amendments set forth below and designated as § 314-3, and
from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling for the maintenance and construction of all buildings
and structures therein contained within the Town of Salem.
§ 314-3. Amendments to code.
§ 314-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, or organization who or which shall violate
a provision of the Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) or this chapter or fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install,
alter, repair or do work in violation of approved construction documents
or directives of the code official or of a permit or certificate issued under
provisions of this code shall be guilty of a violation for the first offense,
punishable by a fine as authorized pursuant to RSA 676:17. Any person
A. The Life Safety Code is amended by providing that the authority having
jurisdiction under this code shall be the Chief of the Fire Department or
in his absence the Chief assigned to direct and control the Fire
Prevention Bureau as required in § 260-4B.
B. As defined in the Life Safety Code, Section 3.3.36.3, "apartment
buildings" includes apartment-type buildings in whatever legal form of
ownership they exist, including condominiums. [Amended by the
3-18-2017 Town Meeting]
C. Townhouse-type condominium units with their own exit directly to
grade level shall be considered one- and two-family dwellings in
determining the requirements imposed by the Life Safety Code only
when each unit is separated by a two-hour fire barrier, as defined in the
International Building Code, and extending from the floor of the lowest
level to the underside of the roof.
D. When in the opinion of the code official additional exit or emergency
lighting is necessary to safeguard the public and occupants of a
structure, signs and lights shall be installed as directed.
E. 73Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, sprinklers shall
not be required in any single-family or two-family dwelling or
manufactured housing unit.
73.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, which provided amendments to specific sections of
the Life Safety Code, was repealed by the 3-18-2017 Town Meeting.
§ 314-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-4
1:287
convicted of a violation of this section shall be upon second and subsequent
violations guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as
authorized pursuant to RSA 676:17. Each day that a violation or
misdemeanor continues after notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 318
LITTERING AND DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 279. Solid waste — See Ch. 409.
§ 314-4 SALEM CODE § 314-4
1:288
ARTICLE I
Dumping Beside Road
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-24-1959 (Ch. 218, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 318-1. Dumping prohibited; penalty. [Amended by the Town
Meeting 3-23-199174]
There is hereby imposed a fine for dumping rubbish beside the road. The
fine shall be adopted by the Board of Selectmen and on file with the Town
Manager and on the Town of Salem website. The fine shall not exceed the
maximum penalty established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-1
1:289

ARTICLE II
Litter from Vehicles
[Adopted by the 1963 Town Meeting (Ch. 218, Art. I, of the 1995
Code)]
§ 318-2. Vehicles to be loaded to prevent litter.
No trash, refuse or rubbish shall be transported over the public highways
in motor vehicles or trailers of any type unless covered or secured in such a
manner that said trash, refuse or rubbish will not fall from or be blown from
the motor vehicles or trailers.
§ 318-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended by the Town Meeting
3-23-199175]
Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town of Salem
website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established pursuant
to RSA 31:39, III.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 318-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-3
1:291
Chapter 329
MASSAGES, SAUNAS AND OTHER TYPES OF BATHS
§ 318-3 SALEM CODE § 318-3
1:292
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 329-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person who has submitted to the Salem Health Division an
application for license pursuant to this chapter.[Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 11-2-2015]
ATHLETIC TRAINER — An allied health professional who has successfully
completed and met the athletic training curriculum requirements of an
approved college or university and is able to provide proof of graduation.
The athletic trainer carries out the practice of prevention, physical
rehabilitation, or both, of injuries incurred by participating athletes at his
educational institution, professional athletic organization or other bona fide
athletic organization. The athletic trainer shall meet any present or future
qualification requirements established by the Town of Salem and State of
New Hampshire.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Salem Board of Health or its duly appointed
agent.
COMPENSATION — The receipt of:
LICENSEE — A person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
MASSAGE — To instill a system of activity in the muscular structure of
the human body by applying, to the human body, pressure, friction, rolling,
stroking, tapping, kneading, cupping, petrissage, rubbing, effleurage,
tapotement, or vibration, by manual or mechanical means, and with or
without appliances or external baths, for any purpose, including but not
limited to improving muscle tone and circulation, body contouring, or
maintaining good health or physical condition. The term includes but is not
limited to oil rubs, salt glows, hot or cold packs, steam baths, cabinet baths,
sauna baths, and sitz baths. The term shall not include colon irrigation.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A place licensed by the Salem Board of
Health under this chapter and RSA 328-B and RSA 328-H where massage
is performed for compensation. A massage practitioner may visit a client's
private residence for the purpose of conducting a massage so long as no
more than one client is serviced during the visit at any one time.[Amended
by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER — A licensed individual who performs massage
for compensation in a licensed massage establishment or a client's
residence as provided in this chapter and RSA 328-B and RSA 328-H and
A. Money, goods, services, or other things of value; or
B. A promise to deliver money, goods, services or other things of value.
§ 329-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-1
1:293
who has certified proof of completion of massage training in a recognized
school.[Amended by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
MASSEUR and MASSEUSE — A person who massages or teaches other
persons how to massage. Must meet all the requirements of this chapter
and RSA 328-B and RSA 328-H.[Amended by the Board of Selectmen
5-21-2018]
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Any school or institution of learning which has
for its purpose the teaching of the theory and practice, the method or work
of massage, including anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and professional ethics,
and which is either licensed by the agency designated in RSA 21-N:8-a or
certified by the American Massage Therapy Association.[Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
§ 329-2. Statutory authority; purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to RSA 31:39 for the purpose of preserving
the health, morals and general welfare of the Town of Salem and
particularly to prevent an influx of patrons at massage establishments
which would be detrimental to the public order, property values, commerce,
reputation, atmosphere and land use planning goals of the Town of Salem.
§ 329-3. Exceptions.
§ 329-4. License required.
A. This chapter shall not be construed so as to require a person who is
licensed by this state pursuant to any Revised Statutes Annotated other
than RSA 328-B and RSA 328-H, or any person employed by such a
licensee to assist that licensee in the performance or pursuit of the
occupation so licensed, to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter to
do any act authorized to such a licensee, or such licensee's assistant, by
those other chapters, or to subject such licensees to regulations under
this chapter by reason of the doing of any such act. [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
B. This chapter shall not apply to athletic trainers as defined in this
chapter, to the extent that they are performing bona fide training
services for an athletic team located or training within the Town of
Salem.
C. This chapter shall not apply to bona fide schools, hospitals, nursing
homes, convalescent homes and other similar institutions and
employees thereof.
A. No firm, corporation or person shall maintain or conduct an
establishment for the giving of massages or vapor, pool, shower, or
other baths for compensation or advertise or hold the establishment out
as being engaged in the business of massage or giving of such baths
without applying for and receiving a license from the Salem Board of
Health.
§ 329-1 SALEM CODE § 329-4
1:294
§ 329-5. Application procedure; information required.
The license application shall be made to the Salem Board of Health on
an application furnished by the Board. The application shall set forth the
following information and such other information as the Board of Health
deems necessary in order to maintain the public health:
§ 329-6. Conditions of license.
B. No firm, corporation or person shall maintain an establishment for the
giving of massages or vapor, pool, shower or other baths for
compensation or advertise or hold the establishment out as being
engaged in the business of massage or giving of such baths without
meeting all the provisions of this chapter and of RSA 328-B and RSA
328-H and any subsequent changes made to any of these chapters and
regulations. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
A. The number of persons employed by the owner at the establishment.
B. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the manager of the
establishment and persons giving massages or baths.
C. Such evidence of training and/or experience on the part of the owner or
manager in giving massages or baths as the Board of Health deems
necessary. No license shall be granted to any individual without a copy
of a successful completion certificate from a recognized school of
massage therapy as defined by this chapter. No license shall be granted
to any establishment without a licensed massage practitioner on site to
administer such massage therapy.
D. The names, dates of birth, and addresses of all corporate stockholders,
officers, and directors, if the applicant is a corporation, and the names,
ages and addresses of owners if the applicant is not a corporation. If
changes in the above occur prior to the expiration of the license, such
changes, together with the requisite information, shall be reported in
written form to the Board of Health within 14 days. If ownership of 50%
or more of the application is transferred, the license will terminate at
such time.
E. Other information as requested on the application form.
A. Each license shall be in effect April 1 to March 31. Applicants will be
notified of renewal within 30 days prior to due date.
B. No license will be issued to an applicant if the applicant or, where the
applicant is a corporation, if any of the directors or officers of the
corporation or, if the applicant is a partnership or other business entity,
if any of the principals or officers of the applicant have been convicted
in this or any other state of a felony, or a sexually related crime, or a
crime involving moral turpitude within 10 years immediately preceding
the date of application, the record of which has not been annulled by a
court.
§ 329-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-6
1:295
§ 329-7. Required facilities and equipment; restrictions on
operation.
Any firm, corporation, or person maintaining an establishment for giving
massages or vapor, pool, shower or other baths for compensation must
maintain and operate such establishment as follows:
C. No license is transferable.
D. The license must be displayed in a conspicuous location on the
premises.
E. No firm, corporation or person shall operate under any name or
conduct business under any designation except that specified in the
license.
F. A licensee must notify the Board of Health prior to any change of
address.
G. The annual establishment license fee shall be as provided in § 329-11.
[Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
A. The total massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus,
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
B. All employees and massage practitioners shall be modestly attired.
C. Individual clean sheets and towels shall be provided for each patron to
lie on during massage, and the patron's body shall be covered
appropriately except for the portion being subject to massage.
D. Single-service disposal items shall be utilized if washable sheets and
towels are not used.
E. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall
be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
F. Massage as defined in this chapter and in RSA 328-B and RSA 328-B:1
shall be performed in a private one-room cubicle, booth or area within
the establishment.
G. No alcoholic beverage or drugs shall be displayed, served, ingested, or
sold on the premises of a massage establishment. No food shall be sold
on the premises.
H. A supply of hot and cold running water shall be available at all times
during hours of operation. The waste disposal system shall be in
compliance with Chapter 391, Sewage Disposal, Article I, or Chapter
398, Sewer Use, of this Code and all applicable New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services regulations.76
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-6 SALEM CODE § 329-7
1:296
I. Massage practitioners shall thoroughly cleanse their hands by washing
them immediately before and after each massage.
J. Mechanical apparatus, such as heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tubs,
special showers, cabinet baths, steam or dry heat baths, shall be
utilized only by and under the constant, direct personal supervision of a
licensed massage practitioner.
K. All equipment and materials utilized by massage practitioners shall be
in safe and sanitary condition and maintained and operated to eliminate
any danger or hazard to patron or practitioner.
L. No part of a precusser, vibrator, or other device (mechanical or
otherwise) which cannot be sterilized or sanitized shall be applied
directly to the skin of the patron, and the part of the body administered
to shall be covered with a clean towel or napkin or else the device shall
be covered in a similar manner.
M. Each massage establishment shall maintain a daily register identifying
all patrons, hours of arrival, and the massage practitioner rendering
services. The register shall be available at all times during business
hours and subject to inspection by the Health Officer, Police Chief or
their duly appointed agents and shall be kept on file for a minimum of
one year.
N. Adverse reactions and accidents shall be recorded in the daily register
and the Health Division shall be notified.77
O. No patron who may be suspected of possibly having an infectious or
contagious or communicable disease particularly of the body surfaces
shall be provided with any service unless such patron shall have
furnished a certificate from a licensed physician that the disease is not
of transmissible nature.
P. Massage practitioners shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases,
practice spinal manipulation, or prescribe medications of any kind.
Q. Colon irrigation and/or hydrotherapy shall be prohibited.
R. Temperatures of water baths, of any type, shall not exceed 105° F., and
patrons shall not be subjected to exposures of more than 30 minutes at
any one treatment period.
S. Dry heat cabinet shall not exceed 185° F., and patrons shall not be
subjected to exposures of more than 30 minutes at any one treatment
period.
T. Steam cabinet temperature shall not exceed 110° F., and patrons shall
not be subjected to exposures of more than 30 minutes' duration at any
one treatment period.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-7
1:297
§ 329-8. License required for personnel.78
No person shall practice massage or give baths in an establishment for
giving massages or vapor, pool, shower or other baths unless such person
meets the following requirements and is issued a license by the Board of
Health for such purposes. Such person shall:
U. Each treatment room shall be properly lighted so that visual
observation of the room is permitted, well ventilated and properly
heated. At least one artificial light of not less than 580 lumens shall be
lighted in each room at all times that the establishment is open.
V. Toilet and washing facilities shall be readily available to patrons and
afford sufficient privacy. Male and female facilities shall be separate.
W. The building in which the establishment is located must meet all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, ordinances and
regulations.
X. No establishment shall operate earlier than 9:00 a.m. or later than
11:00 p.m.
Y. All main entrance doors and doors to all treatment rooms shall remain
unlocked during normal business hours.
A. Have a successful certification of completion from a recognized school
of massage therapy which is either licensed under the provisions of RSA
21-N:8-a or certified by the American Massage Therapy Association.
B. Be licensed as a massage practitioner by the State of New Hampshire
under RSA 328-B:6.
C. Not have been convicted in this or any other state of a felony, or a
sexually related crime, or a crime involving moral turpitude within 10
years immediately preceding the date of application, the record of
which has not been annulled by a court.
D. Be at least 18 years of age.
E. Complete an application setting forth such other information as the
Board of Health deems necessary.
F. Pay an annual license fee as provided in § 329-11, which license shall
expire on March 31 of each year.
G. Submit to additional physical examination, including serological
examinations, when the Board of Health deems that such examinations
are necessary.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-7 SALEM CODE § 329-9
1:298
§ 329-9. Inspections.
The Board of Health or its agents may inspect an establishment at any time
that the establishment is open for business or at any other reasonable time
without prior notification to the establishment.
§ 329-10. Rescission or suspension of license.
The Board of Health or its duly appointed agent may suspend or rescind
any license granted hereunder for violation of any provision of this chapter
or for any other good cause. Any firm, corporation or person whose license
has been suspended or revoked may request, in writing, a hearing within
10 days of such suspension or rescission. In such event, the Board of Health
shall schedule a hearing which, if the licensee requests, shall be held not
later than three days after receipt of the request in writing for such hearing.
§ 329-11. License fees.79
License fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with the
Health Division and on the Town of Salem website.80
§ 329-12. Violations and penalties.81
The Board of Health may seek whatever legal redress it deems appropriate
in the courts of the State of New Hampshire in the enforcement of this
chapter. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine equal to the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to RSA 31:39, III,
for each offense, to inure to the general fund of the Town of Salem, and in
addition may be enjoined from violating the provisions of this chapter. Each
day on which a violation of this chapter exists shall be considered a separate
offense.
79.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
80.Editor's Note: Original § 221-10, Actions for enforcement; violations and penalties, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-12
1:299

ARTICLE II
Massage Establishment Restrictions
§ 329-13. Statutory authority; purpose.
This article is adopted pursuant to RSA 31:39 for the purpose of preserving
the health, morals and general welfare of the Town of Salem and
particularly to prevent an influx of patrons at massage parlors which would
be detrimental to the public order, property values, commerce, reputation,
atmosphere and land use planning goals of the Town of Salem.
§ 329-14. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 329-15. Prohibited acts.
No firm, corporation, or person shall maintain or conduct an establishment
for the giving of massages for hire or reward or advertise or hold the
establishment out as being engaged in the business of massage in the Town
of Salem.82
§ 329-16. Effect on other regulations.
This chapter shall not be construed as repealing any other ordinance, bylaw
or regulation of the Town of Salem. In the event that any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be deemed invalid, either
in general or as applied to a particular case, all other ordinances, bylaws
or regulations of the Town of Salem, including the remaining provisions of
this chapter, and particularly the Salem Board of Health regulations for the
operation of massage parlors, shall be applicable and shall be enforced.
A. Physicians, physical therapists, chiropodists, podiatrists and
chiropractors, if registered or licensed under the statutes of the State of
New Hampshire.
B. Barbers, hairdressers, beauticians and apprentices, operators and
students in such occupations, if registered or licensed under the
statutes of the State of New Hampshire, insofar as such persons
perform facial or scalp massages.
C. Bona fide schools, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes and
other similar institutions, and employees thereof.
D. Licensed massage practitioners licensed by the State of New
Hampshire and the Town of Salem who meet all the requirements of
Article I of this chapter and any future revisions to this chapter,
effective date July 1, 1991.
82.Editor's Note: Original § 221-15, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
See now § 329-12.
§ 329-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 329-16
1:301
Chapter 340
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS AND CONDOMINIUMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210. Zoning — See Ch. 490.
§ 340-1. Approval authority granted.83
The Planning Board shall have, in addition to powers previously granted
to it to review and approve or disapprove site plans for the development
of tracts for nonresidential and nonagricultural uses, whether or not such
development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site, the
additional power to review and approve or disapprove site plans for the
development of tracts for multifamily dwelling units (including
condominiums), other than one- or two-family dwellings, whether or not
such development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site. In
so doing, the Planning Board shall exercise all of the powers and duties
permitted by RSA 673 and RSA 356-B:5.
§ 340-2. Special use permit required for condominium conversions.
No proposed conversion condominium shall become a conversion
condominium unless a special use permit has been granted by the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall not grant such special use permit unless
such conversion condominium conforms to the zoning, land use and site
plan regulations of the Town or unless a special exception or variance from
the applicable zoning, land use and site plan regulations has been obtained
from the Board of Adjustment. In the event of an approved conversion
to condominiums, the Selectmen shall compute and impose such charges
and fees on the owners of the condominiums as are authorized under the
provisions of RSA 356-B:5.
Chapter 359
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Advisory Committee — See Ch.
131.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 181.
Animals — See Ch. 189.
Athletic exhibitions — See Ch. 194.
Commons, playgrounds and cemeteries — See
Ch. 226.
Off-highway recreational vehicles — See Ch.
374.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 329-16 SALEM CODE § 340-2
1:302
ARTICLE I
Leisure-Time Services
[Adopted by the 1981 Town Meeting (Ch. 63 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 359-1. Designation of responsible board.
The Town, under the provisions of RSA 35-B:3, hereby designates the
Selectmen as the board responsible for providing leisure-time services to
the Town of Salem and authorizes the Selectmen to exercise the powers
listed in RSA 35-B:1 and RSA 35-B:3.
§ 359-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-1
1:303

ARTICLE II
Park Regulations
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-27-1976; last amended
5-3-2010 (Ch. 235, Art. I, of the 1995 Code)]
§ 359-2. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Recreation Ordinance" for the Town of
Salem, New Hampshire.
§ 359-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to preserve the public peace and good
order on lands operated as public parks by the Town of Salem and to
contribute to the safety and enjoyment of the users of such park land
by regulating the hours of use and the use of motorized vehicles and by
prohibiting certain activities inimical to customary park recreation use.
§ 359-4. Jurisdiction and administration.
The Department of Recreation and/or the Department of Public Works,
Division of Parks and Property, of the Town of Salem is charged with the
administration of this article and the posting of signs designating park lands
within the Town of Salem. The rules and regulations set forth herein shall
apply to and be in effect in all parks, athletic fields, and other recreation
areas under the control, supervision and jurisdiction of the Department of
Recreation of the Town of Salem.
§ 359-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, terms used herein are defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Shall have the same meaning as "beverage" as
defined in RSA 175:1.
CONTROLLED DRUGS — Shall have the same meaning as defined in RSA
318-B.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Recreation of the Town of
Salem or his/her duly authorized agents.
LIQUOR — Shall have the meaning as defined in RSA 175:1
PARKS — The grounds, buildings thereon, waters therein and any other
property necessary for the operation thereof and constituting a part thereof
which are now or hereafter maintained, operated and controlled by the
Town of Salem for public recreation purposes. Such areas shall include
but not be limited to athletic fields, playgrounds, neighborhood parks,
community parks, beaches, skateboard park and other areas used for
recreation purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons, and the singular number shall include the plural.
§ 359-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-5
1:305
RECREATIONAL WATERWAY — Any area where water exists, whether in a
park or not, designated by the Director for recreation use.
SKATING AREA — Any pond, flooded area, designated portion of a lake or
other area, whether in a park or not, designated by the Director as an area
where skating is allowed.
SWIMMING AREA — Any water area, beach or pool, whether in a park
or not, designated by the Director as an area where public swimming is
allowed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is
or may be transported. "Vehicle" shall include but not be limited to
automobiles, motorcycles, minibikes, bicycles, snowmobiles, mopeds,
trucks, jeeps, trail bikes, scooters, segways, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and
skateboards. This definition does not include devices needed to assist
disabled persons.
§ 359-6. Hours of operation and closing.84
No person shall be permitted to remain, stop, park or be within the confines
of any park between the hours of sunrise and sunset, except in emergency
cases, as otherwise posted or with a special permit from the Director. In
case of any emergency or when, in the judgment of the Director, the public
interest demands it, any portion of a park may be closed to the public until
permission is given to reopen.
§ 359-7. Permits required; conditions of permits.
A. A permit must be obtained from the Recreation Director for the
following uses and activities:
(1) The use of any park buildings, pavilions, or playing fields or
picnicking on park grounds or the use of other facilities by any
association, organization or group.
(2) Camping within a park.
(3) Vending of food or drink.
(4) Those acts prohibited without a written permit as set forth in this
article.
B. Permits shall be issued by the Director. The Director may deny an
application for a permit on any of the following grounds:
(1) If the proposed use or activity will interfere with the general use of
the park by individual members of the public;
(2) The application for permit (including any required attachments and
submissions) is not fully completed and executed;
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-5 SALEM CODE § 359-7
1:306
(3) The applicant has not tendered the required application fee with
the application or has not tendered the required user fee,
indemnification agreement, insurance certificate, or security
deposit within the times prescribed by the Director;
(4) The application for permit contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
(5) The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be
sued;
(6) The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for
permit was made has on prior occasions damaged park property
and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding
and unpaid debts to the park;
(7) A fully executed prior application for a permit for the same time
and place has been received and a permit has been or will be
granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do
not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the particular park or
part hereof;
(8) The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with
previously planned programs organized and conducted by the park
and previously scheduled for the same time and place;
(9) The proposed use or activity is prohibited by or inconsistent with
the classifications and uses of the park or designated area;
(10) The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an
unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant or
other users of the park, Town employees or the public;
(11) The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable
licensure requirements, ordinances or regulations concerning the
sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; or
(12) The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law,
regulation or by this article.
C. All requests to use the park must be submitted to the Director two
weeks prior to the date of requested use. All permit applicants must be
18 years of age or older. All permits must be signed by the applicant
prior to their issuance. The applicant shall be responsible for all
damages to park facilities or contents thereof and shall agree to
indemnify the Town of Salem, New Hampshire, for such damages to
park facilities or contents thereof. At the discretion of the Director, a
cash security deposit may be required and/or an insurance policy
required for the duration of the permit.
D. All permits shall be issued in writing by the Director and shall be
subject to park rules and regulations and the provisions of this article. A
permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be
§ 359-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-7
1:307
§ 359-8. Recreational waterway usage.
§ 359-9. Vehicles.
§ 359-10. Fires, firearms and other explosives.
performed in strict accordance with the written terms and conditions of
the permit and not in violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
Any violation of any term or condition of the permit or any law or
ordinance or rule or regulation shall constitute grounds for revocation
of the permit by the Director, Town Manager or Chief of Police, whose
action therein shall be final.
E. Upon obtaining a permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee, if any, to
the Town of Salem in an amount according to a fee schedule established
by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Salem, the Town Manager and
the Director. Such fee schedule shall be established according to, but
not limited to, the activity permitted, the facility used, maintaining
orderly cleanup, utilities used and police required.
F. Revocation of a permit for violation of this article shall result in
forfeiture of any permit fee paid.
A. Swimming. Swimming or wading is prohibited except in areas
designated as swimming areas.
B. Boating. No boats of any kind shall be operated or docked by any
person in any water in any park, except where designated as a boating
area and then only for those types of boats specified. Where boating is
allowed, signs will be posted.
A. No person shall operate any vehicle in any part of a park except on
roadways established for the operation of vehicles, nor shall any person
park any vehicle in any area except those specifically designated for
parking purposes.
B. No person shall in any park clean, polish, grease, lubricate or make
repairs to any vehicle except those of a minor nature and then only in
cases of emergency.
A. No person shall build a fire for any purpose except in the barbecue pits
provided or in a barbecue grill that has been authorized by a permit
issued by the Fire Department and Director. No barbecue grill shall be
used without a permit.85
B. No person shall discharge any firearm in any park.
C. Hunting is prohibited in all parks.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-7 SALEM CODE § 359-10
1:308
§ 359-11. Disorderly conduct.
§ 359-12. Treatment of park property and animals.
D. No person shall fire, discharge or set off any explosives device as
defined in RSA 158:29 and 158:30, any fireworks, including permissible
fireworks as defined in RSA 160-C:1, including but not limited to
rockets, squibs, or firecrackers, grenades, or any preparation of
gunpowder.
E. No rockets or fuel-powered model planes are allowed in any park
except by written permission of the Town of Salem's Board of
Selectmen.
A. Disorderly conduct or obscene or indecent language or behavior is
prohibited.
B. No person shall interfere with, encumber, obstruct or render dangerous
any park or part thereof.
C. No person shall emit, eject, or cause to be deposited in any park any
excreta of the human body, except in proper receptacles designated for
such purposes.
D. No person shall in any park disobey a proper order of any park
employee designated by the Director to give orders, nor shall any
person in any park disobey, disregard or fail to comply with any rule or
regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction or direction posted or
displayed by signs, notices, bulletin card, or posters or when notified or
informed as to its existence by a park employee or other authorized
person.
A. No person shall remove, disturb, cut, break, deface, defile, or damage
any building, structure, headstone, fence, tree, brush, plant, turf or
other property.
B. No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or leave in any
body of water in any park or in any storm sewer or drain flowing into
said water or in any gutter, sewer or basin any substance, matter or
thing whatsoever.
C. No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw or leave any papers, bottles,
debris, waste matter, refuse, rubbish, garbage, trash, dead animals or
other discarded materials of every kind and description in any park or
part thereof except in such receptacles as may be provided for that
purpose.
D. No person shall bring a cat or dog or other animals into a park unless on
a leash no more than six feet in length, and they are only allowed into
parks or areas of parks that are not otherwise posted, with the
exception of service animals as defined by the Americans with
§ 359-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-12
1:309
§ 359-13. Public meetings, performances, commercial activities and
advertising.
§ 359-14. Liquor, alcoholic beverages and controlled drugs.
§ 359-15. Smoking.
For safety, fire protection and sanitation, smoking is permitted only in
designated smoking areas at the parks. The designated smoking areas are
identified by posted signs.
Disabilities Act. Removal of animal feces is the responsibility of the
animal handler.86
E. No person shall within any park molest, frighten, injure, kill, remove or
have in his possession any feral animal, bird, bird's nest or squirrel's
nest or remove the young of any such animal or the eggs of any such
animal or bird.
F. No person shall feed any wild animals, wild birds, or wildlife as defined
in RSA 207:1 in the body of water or on land in any park.
A. No person shall carry on any business or commercial calling; or trade,
sell or otherwise deal in commodities or merchandise of any
description; or solicit patronage of any sort; or advertise any business
or calling for the sale of such commodities or merchandise; or hold any
public meeting, unless said person has received a written permit to do
so by the Director.
B. No person shall conduct, operate, present or manage in any park a drill,
parade, maneuver, public meeting, ceremony, speech, address,
harangue, public contest, exhibit, dramatic performance, spectacle,
play, motion picture, fair, circus, or show of any kind or nature, band,
choir, glee club, or orchestra without a permit from the Director.
C. No person shall in any park exhibit, sell, or offer for sale, hire, lease, or
let out any objects, service or merchandise or anything whatsoever,
except under a permit by the Director.
D. No person shall advertise in any park in any manner whatsoever, for
any reason whatsoever, except by a permit from the Director.
A. No liquor or alcoholic beverages as defined in RSA 175:1 are allowed
within any park.
B. No controlled drugs are allowed within any park.
C. No person shall be under the influence of liquor, alcoholic beverages or
controlled drugs in any park.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-12 SALEM CODE § 359-16
1:310
§ 359-16. Camping.
Overnight camping is prohibited except by a permit issued by the Director.
§ 359-17. Metal detectors.
Metal detectors and similar devices may not be used in any park or on Town
property unless authorized by the Town Manager.
§ 359-18. Children.
Children under the age of 12 years must be accompanied by an adult (18
years of age or older) except when the child is participating in a supervised
Recreation Department program.
§ 359-19. Glass.
No glass containers shall be taken into or used in any part of any park,
including sports facilities and beaches. Only metal, paper or plastic
containers are allowed.
§ 359-20. Games in designated areas.
No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick, play with or strike any game ball
whatsoever or engage in any sport, game or competition except in places
and during the times designated therefor. No person shall engage in or
play any game or sport which is different from the one for which the
designated area was created, except in such areas as are officially set aside
for diversified games.
§ 359-21. Observation of rules and directions.
Persons using the park do so at their own risk and must observe any rules,
regulations or requests of the attendant on duty for a particular area.
§ 359-22. Authority of Recreation Director.
In order to provide the equitable use of park facilities, preserve park
areas and facilities and protect the safety of users of the parks and their
facilities, the Recreation Director shall have the following authority, the
enumeration of which shall not restrict the general authority and control of
the Recreation Director over parks:
A. To fix times. To fix times when the parks or parts thereof shall be open
to public use.
B. Restrict use. To designate parks, sports facilities and parts thereof as
restricted to the use of certain portions of the public at certain times as
the Director or designee sees fit.
§ 359-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-22
1:311
§ 359-23. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
C. To issue permits. Under uniform conditions to be prescribed by the
Director, to issue permits for regulated use as hereinbefore
enumerated.
D. To fix, charge and collect fees. To fix, charge and collect such fees and
deposits for the use of park areas or facilities or privileges as the
Director deems advisable to help defray the expense of the parks and
their facilities. Said fees and charges shall be reviewed and approved
by the Town Manager and the Board of Selectmen prior to
implementation.
E. To enforce this article. To issue notice of violation and/or complaint
summons to court for infraction of this article.
A. Enforcement.
(1) This article shall be enforced by the Director and Salem Police
Department.
(2) Any person alleged to have violated the rules and regulations as set
forth in this article or as posted within such park or sports facility
may be ordered to appear in the Salem District Court to answer
said charges.
B. Penalties.
(1) In addition to any other remedies authorized by law, any person
who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to a fine up to the maximum allowed per RSA 31:39, III.
Fines for specific violations, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen,
are on file at Town Hall and on the Town of Salem website.87
(2) Any person altering or damaging any Town property shall be liable
for any damages incurred.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-22 SALEM CODE § 359-23
1:312
ARTICLE III
Michele Memorial Park
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 9-18-2000 (Ch. 235, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 359-24. Rules and regulations for lights.
§ 359-25. Rules and regulations for sound system.
A. Spring season (March through second week in June). Lights shall be
used on Friday and Saturday nights only; lights at the park must be shut
off no later than 10:15 p.m. No new innings shall begin after 9:45 p.m.
B. Summer season (June through August). Lights may be used daily but
must be off no later than 10:15 p.m. No new innings shall begin after
9:45 p.m. Practice session lights are to be shut off by 10:00 p.m.
C. Fall season (September 5 through October). Lights shall be shut off no
later than 8:30 p.m., except on Friday nights when lights are shut off no
later than 10:00 p.m. No new innings shall begin after 8:00 p.m. Sunday
games shall begin no earlier than 11:00 a.m.88
D. No teams are to arrive at the sports facility before 8:00 a.m.
E. There shall be no Sunday morning games or practices until 11:00 a.m.,
except tournament play.
(1) Tournament play.
(a) No teams shall arrive before 8:00 a.m. on weekends.
(b) Games start no earlier than 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays.
(c) No new innings shall begin after 9:45 p.m.
(d) Lights shall be shut off no later than 10:15 p.m.
A. The sound system cannot be used after 9:00 p.m., with the exception of
state tournaments. The sound system can be used for five games for
state tournaments but must be shut off by 10:00 p.m. The volume of the
sound system shall be set at the level in which the testing took place (70
dBA level for testing).
B. The sound system can be used for no more than 25 games per season
and must be off by 10:00 p.m. The list of the 25 games must be
submitted to the Recreation Director.
C. Conflict with church events is prohibited.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-25
1:313
§ 359-26. Rules and regulations for batting cages. [Added by the
Board of Selectmen 10-27-200389]
D. The sound system can be used for announcing names, the number of
the player batting, the National Anthem, the starting lineup, safety
announcements and substitutions.
A. Batting cages must meet all safety regulations.
B. Batting cages will have a set time schedule, and the schedule must be
submitted to the Recreation Director.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-25 SALEM CODE § 359-26
1:314
ARTICLE IV
Skate Park
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 5-3-2010 (Ch. 235, Art. III, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 359-27. Rules and regulations.90
Rules and regulations for use of the Hedgehog Park Skate Park shall be
established by the Board of Selectmen and posted at the Skate Park.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 359-27
1:315
Chapter 374
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 359. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 466.
§ 374-1. Definition.91
For purposes of this chapter, "off-highway recreational vehicle" shall have
the meaning provided in RSA 215-A:1, VI.
§ 374-2. Restrictions on operation.
A. It is unlawful to operate any off-highway recreational vehicle:
(1) During the period from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before
sunrise without displaying at least one lighted headlight and one
lighted taillight.
(2) So as to endanger any person or damage any property.
B. No person shall operate an off-highway recreational vehicle:
(1) In excess of 25 miles per hour during night hours within the Town
of Salem, New Hampshire. As used in this subsection, "night hours"
means the hours between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before
sunrise.
(2) Upon any portion of the right-of-way of any public way, including
the traveled portion of a maintained public way, except as provided
in this chapter.
(3) Within the limits of any railroad right-of-way where the rails are
still intact unless otherwise posted, except in any emergency
pursuant to the provisions of RSA 215-A:9, VII; provided, however,
that an off-highway recreational vehicle may be driven upon the
right-of-way of any railroad for a crossing of the tracks at their
intersection with an authorized trail, road or highway where an offhighway
recreational vehicle is not otherwise prohibited. Any
person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a
violation for the first offense and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
for any subsequent offense.
(4) Upon any airport runway or landing field, or within cemeteries,
except in an emergency pursuant to the provisions of RSA 215-A:9,
VII. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be
91.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 359-27 SALEM CODE § 374-2
1:316
§ 374-3. Speed limit.
guilty of a violation for the first offense and shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor for any subsequent offense.
(5) On the right-of-way of any public way classified as a Class I
highway and designated as an interstate highway, toll road or
limited access highway.
C. When meeting, the operators of off-highway recreational vehicles shall
reasonably turn to the right and reduce speed to avoid collision.
A. No person shall operate an off-highway recreational vehicle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions
and without regard for actual and potential hazards. In all cases speed
shall be controlled so that the operator will be able to avoid colliding
with any person, vehicle, or object.
B. Where no hazards exist which would require a lower speed to comply
with Subsection A, the speed of any off-highway recreational vehicle in
excess of the limit specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
(1) Ten miles per hour within 150 feet of any so-called bob-house,
fishing shanty or occupied fishing hole of another.
(2) Ten miles per hour on Class I through VI highways when the offhighway
recreational vehicle is being operated within the rights-ofway
adjacent to such highways; town or city sidewalks; Class IV, V,
and VI highways approved for off-highway recreational vehicle
operation; and bridges open for off-highway recreational vehicle
operation.
(3) Ten miles per hour at trail junctions or parking lots or when passing
trail grooming equipment.
(4) Ten miles per hour within 150 feet of any person unless operating
in a designated area.
(5) Fifteen miles per hour on plowed roads on Department of
Resources and Economic Development property open to offhighway
recreational vehicle operation.
(6) Thirty-five miles per hour on all trail connectors.
(7) Forty-five miles per hour when operating an off-highway
recreational vehicle on any approved off-highway recreational
vehicle trail.
C. The prima facie speed limits set forth in Subsection B may be altered
for a specific hazard.
§ 374-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-3
1:317
§ 374-4. Use of sidewalks and certain highways.92
Pursuant to RSA 215-A:15, towns and cities may authorize the use of
sidewalks and Class IV, Class V or Class VI highways and bridges, or
portions thereof, for use by off-highway recreational vehicles. The operation
of off-highway recreational vehicles may also be allowed on sidewalks
adjacent to Class I, Class II, Class III, or Class III-a highways pursuant to
RSA 236:56, II(e). Operators of off-highway recreational vehicles using said
roads, or portions thereof, shall keep to the extreme right and shall yield to
all conventional motor vehicle traffic. The Bureau of Trails, or its designee,
shall so post such highways where authorized.
§ 374-5. Crossing public ways.
A person may operate an off-highway recreational vehicle across any public
way where the operation of said off-highway recreational vehicle is not
otherwise prohibited by law, but said person shall comply with the following
provisions:
§ 374-6. Frozen surfaces.
Only all-terrain vehicles as defined by RSA 215-A:1, I-b, trail bikes as
defined by RSA 215-A:1, XIV, and snow traveling vehicles as defined by RSA
259:102 may be operated on any frozen surface of any public body of water
within the Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
D. The driver of every off-highway recreational vehicle shall, consistent
with the requirements of Subsection A, drive at an appropriate reduced
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade
crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when
approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
trail, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic by reason of weather or trail conditions.
A. The crossing shall be made at an angle of approximately 90° to the
direction of the public way and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
B. The operator shall bring the off-highway recreational vehicle to a
complete stop before crossing the shoulder or, if none, the public way,
before proceeding;
C. The operator shall yield the right-of-way to all motor vehicle traffic on
such public way which constitutes an immediate hazard to such
crossing; and
D. The operator shall possess a valid motor vehicle driver's license or shall
have successfully completed the approved off-highway recreational
vehicle safety training course.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 374-3 SALEM CODE § 374-7
1:318
§ 374-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine as authorized under RSA 215-A, Off Highway Recreational Vehicles and
Trails.
Chapter 382
SALES, CASUAL
§ 382-1. Findings.
The Board of Selectmen, in an effort to recognize contemporary conditions
and in full recognition of the standards imposed by Chapter 490, Zoning,
of this Code, recognizes that certain casual uses of property within the
residential and rural zoning districts are not incompatible with the overall
intent as set forth in Chapter 490, Zoning, especially as that intent applies
to the conduct of business within those districts. Namely the Board of
Selectmen is of the opinion that the defined casual uses and activities may
be carried on in such districts by the resident/owner and not generally be
construed as incompatible with the applicable zoning of the district.
§ 382-2. Permitted sales.
Casual sales shall include:
A. The casual sale of household and personal items of the resident/owner
at his/her place of domicile. Any such sale shall be limited to a total
period of 36 hours covering not more than three calendar days in a
calendar year.93
B. Rummage sales and similar fund-raising efforts conducted by nonprofit
corporations registered with the New Hampshire Secretary of State, or
other organizations as in Subsection B(1) below.
(1) Organizations generally considered in this context are churches,
church-related organizations, local and national service clubs and
recognized service-oriented organizations.
(2) The conditions of § 382-3 shall apply.
C. Casual sales of automobiles, trailers, boats and similar items of
personal property.
(1) Such personal property must be personally owned by the resident/
owner or be of immediate family ownership, as evidenced by a title
or registration.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 374-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 382-2
1:319
§ 382-3. Permit required.
Such casual sales shall be subject to a permit.
§ 382-4. Restrictions on advertising signs.
Signs for display to advertise the specific sale are limited to two singlefaced
or -sided signs or one two-faced or -sided sign; signs shall be of
reasonable size and in good taste. The size and locations are to be a part of
the application and must be acceptable to the Building Inspector.
§ 382-5. Appeals.
Functions not herein defined, organizations not detailed and conditions or
stipulations felt excessive may be appealed to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 382-6. Fees. [Added by the Board of Selectmen 4-21-197594]
Permit fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Town
Manager and on the Town of Salem website.
Chapter 387
SECONDHAND DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS
(a) A continuous offer for sale of different such items shall be
inconsistent with the intent of casual sale and will not be
permitted (being contrary to the zoning requirements).
(b) Agents, dealers, brokers and salesmen are specifically
excluded from carrying out casual sales in their business
capacity under these regulations.
(2) Only one unregistered vehicle may be on the premises and offered
for such casual sale at one time. (The laws relating to unregistered
vehicles, junkyards, licensed dealers, etc., shall apply in all
instances.)
(3) The conditions of § 382-3 shall apply.
A. The fee for handling and filing, if any, shall be determined and
established by the Board of Selectmen.
B. The permit is nonrenewable and nontransferable to another person or
another address.
C. The permit shall be issued by the office of the Building Inspector upon
the payment of the fee, if any, and evidence of conditions satisfied.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 382-2 SALEM CODE § 387-1
1:320
§ 387-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter has been enacted pursuant to the authority granted the Town
by RSA 322 and RSA 398.
§ 387-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a system which fairly and
impartially regulates retail transactions of a pawn or secondhand nature for
the purpose of:
§ 387-3. Definitions.
§ 387-4. Licensing procedure.
A. Identifying stolen property unintentionally received by the regulated
parties; and
B. Detection of regulated parties intentionally transacting business in
stolen property.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any transaction wherein there is the lending of
money secured by taking possession of jewelry, wearing apparel,
household goods or other personal property, with interest charged
thereon, shall be regulated according to RSA 398.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership or
corporation whose business is the retail buying, selling, buyback,
exchanging, dealing in or dealing with secondhand articles, including
but not limited to jewelry, watches, diamonds or other precious stones
or gems, gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals, musical
instruments and equipment, cameras, furs, small collectible antiques,
home and auto stereo equipment, televisions, VCRs, tools, computers
and computer equipment, firearms, auto accessories and collectibles.
B. Mail order transactions or retail stores that exchange or provide cash
or credit for returned articles shall not be included within these
definitions.
A. No person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall operate, conduct, or
engage in business as a secondhand dealer/pawnbroker unless such
person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall first obtain a license
from the Board of Selectmen or its designee, i.e., the Chief of Police.
B. Applications for new licenses and renewal licenses for a secondhand
dealer/pawnbroker shall be made in writing to the Police Department
on forms provided for this purpose by the Town of Salem. Each issued
license and applicable licensing requirements shall be issued on a
location-specific basis. Refusal of a license shall be based on just cause.
§ 387-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-4
1:321
§ 387-5. Purchasing from minors.
No secondhand dealer/pawnbroker, nor any person employed by a
secondhand dealer/pawnbroker, shall directly or indirectly purchase any
aforementioned article from anyone under 18 years old, knowing or having
reason to believe him or her to be such, except when said minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, who shall sign the transaction
record in person before said dealer.
§ 387-6. Records and reporting; alterations.
C. Upon approval, a license shall be issued and continue in force until
April 1 next following, unless sooner revoked. Said license may not be
assigned or transferred and will be clearly and prominently displayed.
Licensing fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen, are on file with
the Police Department and on the Town of Salem website.95
A. Every secondhand dealer/pawnbroker, upon the acquisition of any
aforementioned article, shall electronically report all transaction
records through an electronic reporting system determined and
approved by the Town, stating the full name, ID number and address of
the seller, date of the transaction, and a full, accurate and detailed
description (to include make, model and serial number) of each article.
Dealer shall include photos of the identification of seller and articles
being sold. This information should be uploaded to the designated
electronic reporting system within 48 hours of the end of said dealer's
business day.
B. Positive identification in the form of a government photo ID shall be
required of the seller, and the type of identification used shall be noted
on the dealer's records. This shall not apply to a transaction between
secondhand dealers/pawnbrokers as herein defined.
C. All electronic transaction records, together with any article listed
therein, may be inspected at any time by any duly authorized police
officer during regular business hours while making all reasonable
efforts not to disrupt the normal course of business.
D. No article shall be sold, encumbered by sales contract, or otherwise
disposed of or altered in its appearance within 30 days of purchase,
unless the secondhand dealer is granted permission in writing from the
Chief of Police, but in any case not within 48 hours of time of purchase.
Pawnbrokers shall retain nonperishable articles for at least four months
and perishable articles for one month. See Subsection E for
exemptions.
E. Exceptions to Subsections A and D are as follows. Any person accepting
a secondhand good as a trade in for a similar item of the same or
greater value is exempt from the reporting and holding requirements of
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 387-4 SALEM CODE § 387-6
1:322
§ 387-7. Removal of articles by police officers.
§ 387-8. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
license.
this chapter. Secondhand goods do not include used office furniture,
used books, pianos, used clothing, or motor vehicles.
F. All items purchase or pawned shall remain on the premises during the
waiting period; items will not be placed on the sales floor until the
waiting period has expired, unless the item is clearly marked as to the
sales release date based on the time frames outline in Subsection D.
G. Any pawned item repurchased by the original seller shall be recorded
and marked "buyback" using the same electronic transaction reporting
procedures and will be submitted and electronically reported within 48
hours of the transaction.
A. If the Police Department determines that an article is needed for
evidence in a criminal investigation, the Police Department shall seize
that evidence pursuant to applicable criminal procedures. The
secondhand dealer/pawnbroker shall be issued a receipt for the article.
B. Pursuant to RSA 595-A:6, the Police Department shall keep seized
articles under the court's direction as long as necessary to permit the
article to be used as evidence. At the conclusion of all court proceedings
or closure of the police investigation the Police Department shall notify
the original owner, the secondhand dealer/pawnbroker, and any person
who may have a lawful interest that the property will be released in 30
calendar days to the original owner if no other claim is placed on the
property.
A. Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Police Department and on the
Town of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty
established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.96
B. The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke said license for just cause.
Said action will be stayed if an appeal is filed.
C. Any suspension or license revocation by the Chief of Police may be
appealed by the licensee to the Board of Selectmen. That appeal must
be made within 10 business days of the date of action by the Chief of
Police.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 387-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 387-8
1:323
Chapter 391
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 398. Water — See Ch. 477.
§ 387-8 SALEM CODE § 387-8
1:324
ARTICLE I
Sewage Disposal Systems and Wells
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-8-1966; last amended
1-12-2009 (Ch. 253 of the 1995 Code)]
§ 391-1. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of RSA 147:1, the following regulations for governing
the installation, alteration, inspection and maintenance of sewage disposal
systems and wells for the health and safety of the people of Salem are
hereby adopted.
§ 391-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
§ 391-3. State rules and regulations.97
The rules and regulations established by the State of New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, Subsurface Systems Bureau and
Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau, form a part of this article to
the extent that said state regulations are accepted to and added to by the
provisions of this entire article.
§ 391-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABSORPTION BED — A rectangular area created by placing all the main
system elements in one place.
ABSORPTION FIELD — A series of leaching trenches.
AGENT(S) — The individual(s) authorized by the Board of Selectmen to
perform all administrative and inspection responsibilities of this article.
A. Provide regulations for adequate and safe subsurface sewage disposal
installations, hereafter referred to as the "system(s)," which are to be
located and constructed so as to avoid contaminating any existing or
future water source or water supply;
B. Provide regulations for adequate and safe construction of wells, which
are to be located and constructed so as to avoid contamination; and
C. Provide for the efficient, effective administration of those regulations.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Throughout this chapter, references to the "Subsurface Bureau" were amended to
"Subsurface Systems Bureau" and references to the "Water Resource Management
Bureau" were amended to "Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau" at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-4
1:325
DESIGNER — New Hampshire licensed designer of subsurface disposal
systems.
DRINKING WATER AND GROUNDWATER BUREAU — The New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services division which monitors and
regulates wells.
INSTALLER — New Hampshire licensed installer of subsurface disposal
systems.
OWNER — The person in whose name the ownership of the property is
legally recorded. The authority to perform any of the duties as herein
described may not be transferred to any other person, with the exception of
a New Hampshire licensed designer and New Hampshire licensed installer
of subsurface sewage system(s).
SUBSURFACE SYSTEMS BUREAU — The New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services division which monitors and regulates subsurface
disposal systems.
TOWN — The Board of Selectmen acting as the Board of Health of the Town
of Salem or its designated agent(s). Appeals from administrative decisions
shall be made directly to the Board of Selectmen.
WELL — Municipal or private subsurface water supply.
§ 391-5. Responsibility for accuracy of technical data and
compliance with design criteria.
The designer shall be responsible for the accuracy of all technical data and
compliance with all design criteria.
§ 391-6. Design, construction and capacity requirements for sewage
disposal systems.
§ 391-7. Additional local design, construction and capacity
requirements for sewage disposal systems.
A. The system shall be designed, constructed and satisfy all requirements
set forth in pertinent State of New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services Subsurface Systems Bureau regulations as
they exist, may be established or may be amended. These regulations
currently include but may not in the future be limited and referred to as
Chapter Env-Wq 1000, Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal
System Design Rules.98
B. The system shall be designed, constructed and satisfy all additional
requirements set forth in this article that are more stringent than state
regulations.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-4 SALEM CODE § 391-7
1:326
A. Filter fabric. An effective barrier of a minimum of five ounces per
square yard of nonwoven, polyester filter fabric shall be placed over the
top of the system to prevent infiltration of the backfill.
B. Dry wells. Dry wells shall be prohibited for use in new or replacement
systems for the disposal of domestic or commercial sanitary waste.
Laundry washing machines shall be construed as discharging sanitary
waste.
C. Septic system tank replacement.
(1) The tank of an existing septic system may be replaced, when
necessary, when done in compliance with this article and New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Chapter Env-
Wq 1000, Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System
Design Rules.99
(2) The property owner or licensed New Hampshire installer and/or
designer shall submit a sketch of the property, including the house,
septic system tank replacement site and known property lines,
prior to the issuing of a local permit.
D. All septic system tanks installed or replaced shall have an outlet filter.
E. Holding tanks.
(1) Holding tanks shall be prohibited in all cases of new building
construction and expanded use, including the conversion of a
property from seasonal to year-round use.
(2) Holding tanks may be permitted as a replacement system in case of
failure of an original system, but only when no other conventional
system can be properly constructed.
(3) The minimum size of a holding tank shall be 2,500 gallons.
(4) A suitable audio/visual alarm system shall be installed. The alarm
shall warn the residents when the liquid level in the holding tank
reaches 80% of the tank's capacity. The alarm control panel shall be
located within the living quarters of the home which it serves. The
panel shall be unobstructed and remain within full view at all times.
(5) All joints and concrete surfaces shall be properly sealed to maintain
a one-hundred-percent leakproof condition.
(6) When installed, but prior to backfilling, the holding tank shall be
filled with water 24 hours prior to inspection by the Town Engineer
or his delegated representative. The alarm system shall be
inspected at this time.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-7
1:327
F. Hydric B soils. Chapter 490, Zoning, § 490-706, Wetlands conservation,
requires all septic systems to be 75 feet from all wetlands regardless of
soil types. No approval for septic system design shall be granted if it is
less than 75 feet from Hydric B soils unless a variance has been granted
by the Board of Adjustment.
G. Percolation tests and test pits.
(1) Percolation tests and test pits must be witnessed by an agent of the
Town of Salem.
(2) A minimum notice of 48 hours shall be given prior to the start of
work and request for inspection.
H. Pipe specifications.
(1) Pipe used for lines between the septic tank and the absorption field
shall be Standard Dimension Ratio (SDR) 35 or equivalent as
approved by the Health Division. Pipes used under driveways or
other areas subject to heavy loads shall be installed to withstand
the imposed loads and shall be cast iron.100
(2) Pipe used in the absorption field shall be perforated SDR 35 or
equivalent. All joints shall be tight and all ends connected.
I. Public surface water supply.
(1) The distance from a septic tank to a public surface water supply
shall be 75 feet.
(2) The distance from an absorption field or bed to a public water
supply shall be 100 feet.
J. Seasonal conversions. All seasonal conversions to year-round use will
be required to have a septic system design approved by the Town of
Salem and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services,
Subsurface Systems Bureau, prior to allowing a certificate of occupancy
on conversions; there will be no exceptions.
K. Portable toilets.
(1) The placement of a portable toilet on a property, for a period longer
than 30 days, shall require a Health Division registration that shall
be valid for temporary use only. The portable toilet shall not be
used as a replacement for a failed septic system. A sketch of the
house, placement site, duration of length of time to be used and
name and phone number of the supplier shall be required.101
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-7 SALEM CODE § 391-7
1:328
§ 391-8. Construction requirements for wells.
(2) The portable toilet shall be placed at least 50 feet from any body of
water. If this setback distance cannot be met, a waiver may be
requested from the Health Officer or her/his designee.
L. Site assessments.
(1) A septic system site assessment shall be required prior to the sale
of all properties within 200 feet of the following bodies of water in
Salem:
(a) Canobie Lake.
(b) Millville Lake.
(c) Arlington Pond.
(d) Shadow Lake.
(e) World's End Pond.
(f) Captain's Pond.
(g) Hedgehog Pond.
(h) Taylor Reservoir.
(i) Bodwell Pond.
(2) The septic system site assessment shall meet the requirements of
RSA 485-A:39 and Part Env-Wq 1025.102
A. All wells to be used as a water source shall be designed, constructed,
and satisfy all requirements set forth in pertinent State of New
Hampshire, Department of Environmental Services, Drinking Water
and Groundwater Bureau regulations as they exist, may be established
or may be amended in the future.
B. These New Hampshire Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau
regulations include but are not limited to:
(1) New Hampshire Water Well Board Chapters We 100 to We 900.
(2) Well Siting, Chapter Env-Dw 300.103
(3) Design Standards for Small Community Water Systems, Part Env-
Dw 405.104
(4) Any other applicable state and/or local requirements.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-9
1:329
§ 391-9. Additional local construction requirements for wells.
§ 391-10. Compliance; permits; fees; inspections.
A. Community wells.105
(1) The system shall be designed by a professional engineer and
reviewed by the Salem Health Division.
(2) The system shall be designed to meet Town of Salem standards for
water systems.
(3) All work shall be inspected by the Health Division prior to
backfilling.
A. No well or sewage disposal system shall be installed, altered, or
maintained in the Town of Salem unless it is in conformity with these
regulations as well as the pertinent regulations of the State of New
Hampshire, as may exist, be established or amended.
B. A permit for the installation and/or alteration of wells and sewage
disposal systems must be obtained from the Health Division prior to the
commencement of any work on a system.
C. Septic systems.
(1) The applicable fee as established by the Board of Health made
payable to the Town of Salem shall accompany every application for
a permit for the installation and/or alteration of a sewage disposal
system. The applicant must also submit five sets of plans for the
requested system permit (four for NHDES Subsurface Systems
Bureau and one for the Town of Salem). Plans must be submitted
for the Town of Salem's review prior to submission to NHDES
Subsurface Systems Bureau.
(2) All local waivers, if necessary, must be obtained prior to submitting
the plans to NHDES Subsurface Systems Bureau for approval.
(3) The Town will require inspections during the course of work at the
following intervals:
(a) Test pit observation.
(b) Bed bottom and prior to placing sand.
(c) Final inspection.
(4) Minimum notice of 48 hours shall be given prior to the start of work
and to request inspections of any above-listed stages.
D. Wells.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-9 SALEM CODE § 391-10
1:330
§ 391-11. Designation of responsibilities.
(1) A permit must be obtained before any drinking well is installed and
must be accompanied by a scaled diagram of the location. Diagram
must show existing or proposed subsurface disposal system on that
and adjacent lots. The applicable fee as established by the Board of
Health shall accompany the application.
(2) In all new construction prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy and in all well replacements, a State of New Hampshire
certified testing lab shall do a well water analysis of the following
parameters:
(a) Bacteria.
(b) Chloride.
(c) Sodium.
(d) Iron.
(e) Manganese.
(f) pH.
(g) Hardness.
(h) Fluoride.
(i) Nitrate/nitrite.
(j) Lead.
(k) Arsenic.
(l) Volatile organic compound screen (VOC). If the VOC screen is
positive, further testing shall be done to determine the type of
contaminant and concentration.
(3) All test results shall be submitted to the Health Division and shall
meet EPA Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) Standards prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.106
A. The New Hampshire licensed designer of subsurface disposal systems
shall be responsible for:
(1) The collection of all necessary technical data relative to any
proposed system or alteration.
(2) The design and layout of said systems.
(3) The submitting of all prints and applications as required by the
state and local authorities.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-11
1:331
§ 391-12. Licenses required.
All designers and installers must maintain current State of New Hampshire
licensure.
(4) Obtaining copies of applicable regulations from the New
Hampshire Subsurface Systems Bureau and Drinking Water and
Groundwater Bureau and remaining apprised of regulation
changes.
B. The property owner shall:
(1) Provide to the installer all approved plans and specifications
necessary for the compliance with state and local requirements.
(2) Not allow the disposal of system leach fields by stockpiling above
ground or by the subsurface disposal below the high-water table.
C. The New Hampshire licensed installer of subsurface disposal systems
shall:
(1) Secure an installation permit;
(2) Construct the system or alter any existing system in accordance
with all regulations and laws; and
(3) Notify the inspector for all inspections before backfilling.
D. The agent(s) shall:
(1) Maintain files of all approvals issued by the NHDES Subsurface
Systems Bureau and Drinking Water and Groundwater Bureau.
(2) Issue permits in accordance with the regulations.
(3) Perform any inspections as may be deemed necessary in
accordance with the same.
(4) Return, within 10 working days, a copy of the application receipt.
(5) Perform any other duties relative to individual waste disposal
systems as specified by the Board of Health.
(6) Provide copies of this article to residents upon request.
(7) Provide a reference copy of state regulations in the Health Division.
Copies of state regulations will not be available locally for
individual use; they must be obtained from the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services.107
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-11 SALEM CODE § 391-13
1:332
§ 391-13. Violations and penalties.
A penalty not to exceed the amount permitted by statute shall be imposed
on the applicant for failure to comply with these regulations. Each day of
continuing failure to comply, after written notice of the violation(s), shall
constitute a new offense. Repeated violations of regulations may be cause
for the agent(s) to refuse to issue further permits for a period of one year.
§ 391-14. Waiver.
Request for waivers from the provisions of this article must be sought
and approved by a two-thirds vote of the Board of Selectmen acting in its
capacity as the Board of Health. In no case shall a waiver be granted that
would create a health hazard.
§ 391-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-14
1:333

ARTICLE II
Land Application of Septage, Sludge and Biosolids
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-15-1995 (Ch. 212 of the
1995 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 391-15. Statutory authority and purpose.
This article is enacted under the authority of RSA 147:1, I. The purpose of
this article is to protect the safety, health and welfare of the general public
and the aquifer, watershed and wellhead areas in the Town of Salem.
§ 391-16. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases when used
herein shall be construed as follows:
BIOSOLIDS — Any solid, semisolid or liquid residue removed during the
treatment of municipal wastewater. May be referred to as "sewage sludge"
or "sludge."
CLASS A — Exceptional quality biosolids as defined in 40 CFR 503 (Code
of Federal Regulations). Biosolids that meet stringent heavy metal and
pathogen reduction guidelines.
CLASS B — Biosolids as defined in 40 CFR 503. Includes all biosolids that
do not meet Class A requirements.
LAND APPLICATION — The spraying or spreading of all classes of sewage
sludge onto the land surface, the injection of all classes of sewage sludge
below the land surface, or the incorporation of all classes of sewage sludge
into the soil.
SEPTAGE — The liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank,
cesspool, portable toilet, Type III marine sanitation device, or similar
system. "Septage" does not include sewage sludge from public wastewater
treatment facilities, industrial wastes or grease removed from a restaurant
grease trap. "Septage" includes domestic septage, as well as septage from
industrial and commercial sources.
SEWAGE SLUDGE — Any solid, semisolid or liquid residue removed during
the treatment of municipal wastewater. May be referred to as "biosolids" or
"sewage biosolids." "Sewage sludge" includes but is not limited to domestic
septage, scum or solids removed from wastewater treatment processes.
SLUDGE — The solid or semisolid material produced by water and
wastewater treatment processes. May be referred to as "sewage sludge" or
"biosolids."
§ 391-17. Land application prohibited.
The storage, stockpiling and land application of Class B industrial and
domestic biosolids, septage, sewage sludge and sludge shall be prohibited
in the Town of Salem.
§ 391-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-18
1:335
§ 391-18. Land application allowed.
§ 391-19. Violations and penalties.108
A. Bagged or bulked exceptional quality Class A biosolids as defined in 40
CFR 503 may be applied in permitted zones.
B. The application of Class A biosolids shall be according to all federal,
state, and local health and zoning regulations.
C. Documentation of the Class A biosolids classification shall be available
for inspection.
A. Any person(s) who violates or fail to comply with this article shall be
liable to fines and penalties provided in RSA 147:1 et seq. as they exist
and may be amended in the future.
B. The Town may pursue the injunctive relief as provided in RSA 147:1 et
seq. together with reimbursement of costs and legal fees as provided by
law.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 391-18 SALEM CODE § 391-19
1:336
Chapter 398
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 391.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 417.
Utility demand and benefit
assessments — See Ch. 455.
Water — See Ch. 477.
§ 391-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 391-19
1:337

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 398-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated; "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter, using standard laboratory procedures
as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from sanitary waste pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal; also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer system designed to receive both
wastewater and stormwater or surface water; such system as it exists in the
Town shall be separated.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Engineering for the Town of Salem, New
Hampshire, or his designee.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER or SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried
household and toilet wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences, excluding
groundwater, surface water or stormwater.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FEDERAL — The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
GLSD — The Greater Lawrence Sanitary District located in North Andover,
Massachusetts, which will receive Salem wastewater for treatment.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
§ 398-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-1
1:339
INTERFERENCE — A discharge by an industrial user which, alone or
in conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal and which is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge disposal by the POTW
in accordance with Groundwater Protection Rules, Chapter Env-Or 700;
Solid Waste Rules, Chapters Env-Sw 100 to 2100; Hazardous Waste Rules,
Chapters Env-Hw 100 to 1100; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act [see
40 CFR 403.3(k)].109
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulations containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply
to a specific category of industrial users.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface water or groundwater.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the public owned
treatment works (POTW) into navigable waters in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of applicable water
quality criteria [see 40 CFR 403.3(p)].
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
partnership, trust or group.
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration, in
grams per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7
and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 0.5 inch (1.3
centimeters).
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer controlled by the Town of Salem.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface
water that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater" (see below).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-1 SALEM CODE § 398-1
1:340
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the normal
concentration or which adversely affects the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer for
conveying stormwater, groundwater, surface runoff, subsurface water, or
unpolluted water from any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as "nonfilterable
residue."
TOWN — The Board of Selectmen for the Town of Salem, County of
Rockingham, State of New Hampshire, and/or any duly authorized deputy,
agent, or representative of the Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTE TREATMENT FACILITY — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge,
sometimes used synonymously with "waste treatment plant," "wastewater
treatment plant," "wastewater treatment works" or "water pollution control
facility."
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and dispose of the effluent.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 398-2. Use of public sewers required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the Town of Salem, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Salem, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
§ 398-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-2
1:341
§ 398-3. Private wastewater disposal.
wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter.
C. When the public sewer is available, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater, except as hereinafter
provided, within the sewer service area.
D. The owner(s) of any home, building, or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated with
the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer of the Town, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proposed public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
provided that said structure is within 200 feet (61.0 meters) of said
public sewer. Official notice shall mean receipt of a certified letter
authorizing and requiring connection, signed by the Director of
Engineering.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 398-2, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain design approval from the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and a written permit
signed by an authorized representative of the Board of Selectmen. The
application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
Town which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications,
and other information deemed necessary by the Board of Selectmen. A
permit and inspection fee established and approved by the Board of
Selectmen shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed.
Additional payments shall be made to the Town for inspection of private
wastewater facilities serving industrial and commercial users. In such
cases, the payment shall be based on the actual inspection cost
incurred by the Town.110
C. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
authorized representative of the Board of Selectmen. The authorized
representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
110. Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Water Supply and Pollution
Control Commission" were amended to the "Department of Environmental Services" at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-2 SALEM CODE § 398-3
1:342
§ 398-4. Building sewers and connections.
the Board of Selectmen when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Town.
D. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all laws and regulations of the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. No permit shall be
issued for any new private wastewater disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less
than that required by the Town's Subdivision Regulations, the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services regulations, Chapter
490, Zoning, of this Code or Town health regulations. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced
by a private wastewater disposal system and official notice is received
as provided in § 398-2, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer, and any abandoned holding tanks, cesspools, septic tanks, or
similar private wastewater disposal facilities and connections thereto
shall be filled and sealed with suitable material as defined by the
Director of Engineering.
F. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
Town. Holding tank contents and the sludge from private disposal
systems shall be removed only by licensed operators. Disposition of
such contents shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. At no time shall any quantity of industrial waste be
discharged to a private domestic wastewater disposal facility.
A. No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Town.
B. Building sewer permits.
(1) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(a) For residential and commercial service producing only sanitary
wastewater; and
(b) For service to establishments producing industrial waste.
(2) In either case, the owner(s) or agent of the owner(s) shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Town. A permit and inspection fee for residential or commercial
building sewer permits shall be paid to the Town at the time the
application is filed. The permit and inspection fee for industrial
§ 398-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-4
1:343
service shall be based on the actual cost to the Town. The Town
may stipulate special conditions and terms upon which the
industrial user permit is predicated, and this may include, but shall
not be limited to, the following:
(a) Limitation on quantity, rate of discharge and wastewater
characteristics.
(b) Installation of flow monitoring and sampling facilities.
(c) Requirements for monitoring programs, including flow
measurement, wastewater sampling and analysis, and
schedule for reporting and submission of data. The Town will
review the data furnished and has the authority to request
additional information if required.
(d) Pretreatment requirements, including schedules of compliance
and progress notification.
(e) Special fees and service charges.
(f) Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified
time period.
(g) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
(h) Information on raw materials, processes, and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality.
(i) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent,
or other materials important to sewer use control.
(j) A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
(k) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(l) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the municipal sewer.
(m) Other requirements to comply with federal, state and local
regulations.
(3) Discharge permits shall not be transferred or reassigned.
(4) Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are
being discharged into the system shall make application to the
Town for a modification of his or its permit at least 60 days prior to
the proposed change or connection. No person shall operate with
such an increase or change without first having applied for and
received a modification to his or its permit. Proposed new
discharges from residential or commercial sources involving
loading exceeding 50 population equivalents or any increase in
§ 398-4 SALEM CODE § 398-4
1:344
industrial discharge must be approved by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services.
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall
indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except upon granting of a special exception in writing by the
Town of Salem; where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway,
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer, but the Town does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and testing by the Town, to meet
all requirements of this chapter. All costs of such testing and inspection
shall be borne by the owner(s).
F. The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Town's Building and Plumbing Codes and the
appropriate sections of the Town's standard specifications thereof; the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water
Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice Number 9 shall
apply.111
G. Whenever possible, any building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow from the sanitary
facilities to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
H. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer.
I. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Town's Building and Plumbing
Codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by Town
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-4
1:345
inspection. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the Town before installation.
J. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Town when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision
of the Town or its authorized representative.
K. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town.
L. No sewer or drain shall be laid within the limits of any public street,
except by an experienced drain layer or plumber licensed and approved
by the Town. The drain layer or plumber shall be held liable for any
expense to the Town on account of any imperfect work within the street
limits done by him or his employees.
M. The Town may issue licenses to drain layers or plumbers who apply for
a permit for making excavation within the limits of the public streets of
the Town for the purpose of laying sewers.
(1) Parties so licensed shall execute a bond to the Town in the sum of
$1,000 with two or more good and sufficient sureties to be
approved by the Town and be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Such parties shall comply to the satisfaction of the Town with
the ordinances of the Town and the rules of the Planning
Board;
(b) Such parties will cause the excavation to be properly guarded
at all times for the protection of the public; and
(c) Such parties will properly make all connections and joints in
every sewer and they will indemnify and hold harmless the
Town of Salem from any damage or cost for which it may be
liable by reason of injuries resulting from neglect,
carelessness, or incompetence in construction, repairing or
connecting of any sewer, or properly fencing or lighting any
excavating or obstruction, or in performing any other work
connected therewith.
(2) Said license(s) shall be good during the calendar year unless
sooner revoked for failure to perform in an expeditious,
workmanlike manner.112
112. Editor's Note: Original § 265-4N, which immediately followed this subsection and
contained an excerpt from regulations of the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control Commission, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-4 SALEM CODE § 398-4
1:346
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers
§ 398-5. General requirements.
§ 398-6. Discharge limitations.
The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be
limited in discharge to the municipal sewerage system to concentrations
or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
processes or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream, and will not otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or
constitute a nuisance. The Board of Selectmen may set more restrictive
A. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or cooling water to any sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Town and other
regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process
waters require a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) Permit, approval of the Town, and approval of other regulatory
agencies prior to discharge to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure, interfere with or pass through any waste treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving water of the
wastewater treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides,
heavy metals, strong acids, basic waste, etc. Other hazardous,
toxic, or reactive pollutants, including but not limited to
halogenated hydrocarbons, organic solvents, and organochlorine
insecticides, are also prohibited from the municipal sewer system.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
(4) Strong acid pickling waste and concentrated plating solutions,
whether neutralized or not.
§ 398-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:347
limitations that those established herein to meet the above objectives. In
forming an opinion as to acceptability, the Board of Selectmen will give
consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to
flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
the wastewater treatment processes employed, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions
on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Board of
Selectmen include but are not limited to the following:
A. Wastewater sufficiently hot to cause the influent at the wastewater
treatment facilities to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
B. Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradeable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin.
C. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see the definition of
"properly shredded garbage" in § 398-1). Garbage grinders may be
connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
E. Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, solvents, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits established by the
Board of Selectmen, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services or the United States Environmental Protection Agency for
such materials.
F. Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Board of Selectmen as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the
state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such a
discharge.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Board of Selectmen in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
H. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
§ 398-6 SALEM CODE § 398-6
1:348
(2) Excessive discoloration and dyes which cannot be removed by the
treatment facility.
(3) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slug discharges. Any unusual concentrations, spills, or slugs (see
the definition of "slug" in § 398-1) shall be reported immediately to
the Director of Public Works. A written report shall be sent by the
user to the Board of Selectmen within five days of the incident
describing the reason for the spill and remedial action taken and
the steps taken to prevent its recurrence.
I. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
J. Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes
in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structure and treatment processes.
K. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 or lower than 5.5.
L. Any waters or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
greater than 250 milligrams per liter.
M. Any waters or wastes containing more than 300 milligrams per liter
suspended solids.
N. Any waters or wastes containing floatable oils, fats or grease.
O. Any waters or wastes containing in excess of the following local limits:
Arsenic 0.10 mg/l
Cadmium 0.69 mg/l
Chromium (total) 2.77 mg/l
Copper 3.38 mg/l
Cyanide Total 1.20 mg/l
Fluoride 20.00 mg/l
Lead 0.69 mg/l
Mercury 0.01 mg/l
Nickel 3.98 mg/l
Oil and grease 200.00 mg/l
pH 5.5 to 9 units
Sulfates 250.00 mg/l
Sulfides 1.00 mg/l
§ 398-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-6
1:349
§ 398-7. Rejection of discharge.
§ 398-8. Interceptors.
Silver 0.43 mg/l
Zinc 2.61 mg/l
Total toxic
organics(TTO)
5.00 mg/l
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 398-6 of this
article, or which in the judgment of the Town may have a deleterious
effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Town may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes.
B. If the Board of Selectmen or federal effluent limitations require
pretreatment of waste flows, the design and installation of such
facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the Board of
Selectmen and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services. Such facilities shall not be connected until said approval is
obtained in writing. Plans and specifications for proposed pretreatment
facilities shall be the result of the design of a professional engineer
registered in New Hampshire. Such approval shall not relieve the
owner of the responsibility of discharging treated wastes meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
C. To determine compliance with user discharge permits with respect to
prohibited discharges and categorical limitations on wastewater
discharges, prohibitions and limitations may be made on the basis of
either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of the
wastewater. Sampling of industrial wastewaters for the purpose of
compliance determination will be performed at such frequency as the
Town designates and may be on either a scheduled or random basis to
ensure compliance.
A. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Town, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable oil or grease in excessive amounts as
specified in § 398-6 of this article or any flammable wastes, sand, or
§ 398-6 SALEM CODE § 398-8
1:350
§ 398-9. Industrial waste.
All industrial waste shall be pretreated in accordance with federal and
state regulations and this chapter to the extent required by applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, state pretreatment standards
or standards established by the Board of Selectmen, whichever are more
stringent. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by and at the expense of the owner(s).
§ 398-10. Quantity of waste.
The Town shall determine the quantity and quality of all industrial wastes
which can be properly taken into the sewerage system in addition to the
sanitary sewage from the Town, and the Town may regulate the flow of
industrial wastes into the sewerage system by separate industrial user
agreement(s) approved by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 398-11. Metering of waste.
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Board of Selectmen
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
changes in temperature; they shall be of substantial construction,
watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when
bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.
B. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means
of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and
means of disposal which are subject to review by the Town. Any removal
and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's
personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal
firms.
A. When required by the Town, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall
be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Town. The structure shall be installed by
and at the expense of the owner(s) and shall be maintained by the
owner(s) so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring as the Department of Public Works or duly authorized
employees or agents of the Town may reasonably require, including
§ 398-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-11
1:351
§ 398-12. Measurements and testing of waste.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, or with the EPA-approved methods published in the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (40 CFR 136). Sampling methods,
locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an
individual basis subject to approval by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 398-13. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be constructed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Town, provided that such agreements do not contravene
any requirements of existing federal or state laws, and/or regulations
promulgated thereunder, are compatible with any user charge system in
effect, and do not waive applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
§ 398-14. Reporting.
§ 398-15. Salem waste collection system.
Neither domestic septic tank waste (septage) nor industrial septic tank
waste (industrial septage) will be accepted into the Salem waste collection
system. Septage and industrial septage may be discharged at the GLSD
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Department
of Public Works. Such records shall be made available upon request by
the Department of Public Works to other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharges to the receiving waters.
A. Each industrial user shall be required to submit to the Town a
semiannual report on the first of May and November of each year, or
such other time as designated by the Town, containing information as to
the minimum, average and peak flows of industrial wastewater
discharges during the previous year and, at a time or times designated,
analyses and wastewater samplings taken in an acceptable manner at
approved times during the flow measuring periods.
B. When required by the permit, each industrial permittee shall submit a
duly signed report to the Town containing all information required by
the Town. This report shall include, if appropriate, schedules for
industrial compliance with applicable pretreatment regulations,
including but not limited to implementation schedules for installation of
pretreatment facilities. If insufficient data has been furnished,
additional information may be required.
§ 398-11 SALEM CODE § 398-15
1:352
treatment facility in North Andover, Massachusetts, subject to prior
approval by and specific regulations of the GLSD. Holding tank wastes may
be accepted into the Salem collection system provided that such wastes do
not contain toxic pollutants or materials and provided that such discharge
does not result in violation of this chapter or other agreements entered
into by the Town. Fees for dumping holding tank wastes will be established
as part of the user charge system. Authorized Town employees, acting on
behalf of the Town and its Department of Public Works, shall have authority
to limit the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with
proper operation of collection and disposal facilities. Procedures for the
disposal of such wastes shall be in conformance with the operating policy
of the Town's Public Works Department, and disposal shall be accomplished
under its supervision unless specifically permitted otherwise. Permits for
discharge of holding tank wastes shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Public Works and subject to prior review and approval by the
GLSD. Such review by GLSD shall be made on the basis of this chapter. It
shall be illegal to meet requirements of this chapter by diluting wastes in
lieu of proper pretreatment.
§ 398-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-15
1:353

ARTICLE III
Industrial Pretreatment
§ 398-16. Applicability.
All persons discharging industrial process wastes accepted into the Town's
wastewater collection system shall comply with applicable requirements
of federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations (as amended), in
addition to the requirements of this article.
§ 398-17. Industrial discharge agreement (IDA).
A. Industrial discharge agreement required. Effective 120 calendar days
after this provision is adopted by the Town, the discharge of any
industrial process waste to the Town's wastewater facilities or to a
public or private sewer connected to the Town's wastewater facilities is
prohibited without a valid Industrial Discharge Agreement (IDA).
B. Industrial discharge agreement application. Within 60 days after the
effective date of these industrial pretreatment rules, persons subject to
these rules shall submit an application for an IDA containing
information required under applicable federal and state industrial
pretreatment reporting regulations. Such information, as a minimum,
shall include:
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
(2) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
(3) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
Standard Industrial Classification number of all the operations
carried out at such facility.
(4) An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
(5) An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge.
(6) Information showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer from each
regulated process stream and from other streams.
(7) A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge
limitations.
(8) Additional information as determined by the Town may also be
required.
C. Provisions. The IDA will outline the general and specific conditions
under which the industrial process waste is acceptable into the Town's
§ 398-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-17
1:355
wastewater collection system. Specifically, included in the agreement
are the following:
(1) Pretreatment and self-monitoring facility required.
(2) Type and number of samples and sampling frequency required.
(3) Effluent limitation on the industrial process waste.
(4) Reporting requirements.
(a) Industrial users shall submit periodic reports as required
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated processes governed by
pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units. The reports shall state whether
the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and effluent
limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance practices and/or
pretreatment is necessary. Additional requirements for such
reports may be imposed by the Town.
(b) Signature for reports. Reports submitted under this section
shall be signed by an authorized representative. An authorized
representative may be:
[1] A principal executive officer of at least a level of vice
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
[2] A general partner or the proprietor, if the industrial user is
a partnership or sole proprietorship; or
[3] A duly authorized representative of either of the
individuals designated above, if such representative is
responsible for the overall operation of the subject facility.
(c) Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment
standard or, in the case of a new source, after commencement
of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the Town on the
first of May and November, unless required more frequently in
the pretreatment standard or by the Town, a report indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which
are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this
report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the
reporting period exceeded the average daily flow. At the
discretion of the Town and in consideration of such factors as
local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycle, etc., the
Town may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.
(d) The Town may impose mass limitations on industrial users
wherever dilution may be a significant factor in meeting
§ 398-17 SALEM CODE § 398-17
1:356
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
In such cases, the reports required shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent
of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling
and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and nature
and concentration, or production and mass where required by
the Town, of pollutants contained therein which are limited
by the applicable pretreatment standard. All analyses shall
be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Clean
Water Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments
thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques approved by the Administrator. Where 40 CFR
Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
EPA publication "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for
Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April
1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling
and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.
(5) Monitoring records.
(a) Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under
this section shall maintain records of information resulting
from monitoring activities required to prepare such reports.
Such records shall include for each sample:
[1] The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
the names of the person or persons taking the sample.
[2] The dates analyses were performed.
[3] The laboratory performing the analyses.
[4] The analytical techniques and methods used.
[5] The results of such analyses.
(b) Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years
and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the
Town.
(6) Additional conditions.
(a) The agreement will be in effect for one year and will be
automatically renewed for one-year periods, unless the
applicant is notified otherwise by the Town.
(b) The agreement is nontransferable and may be revoked by the
Town for noncompliance or modified so as to conform to
§ 398-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-17
1:357
§ 398-18. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
discharge limitation requirements that are enacted by federal
or state rules and/or regulations.
(c) An industry proposing a new discharge or a change in volume
or character of its existing discharge must submit a completed
IDA application to the Town at least 60 days prior to the
commencement of such discharge. The application submitted
must include plans and engineering drawings, stamped by a
registered professional engineer, of the proposed pretreatment
facilities. Upon approval of the application by the Town, a
discharge permit request shall be submitted to the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services on behalf of
the industry. Upon approval of the discharge permit request by
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services,
the industry and the Town will enter into a new or amended
IDA in accordance with the procedure outlined in this article.
(d) The GLSD shall review each IDA following New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services approval and prior to
final approval by the Town. Acceptance of the agreement by
GLSD shall be a requirement of final approval and shall be
signified by the signature of the executive director or other
designated official. Denial of approval shall be based upon the
provisions of this chapter and shall include a clear statement of
the basis of denial.
(e) Industrial users will be assessed on annual fee by the Town to
defray the administrative costs of IDA program.
A. Notification. The Town shall provide timely notification to appropriate
industries of applicable categorical pretreatment standards as they are
promulgated.
B. Compliance date for categorical standards.
(1) Compliance with categorical pretreatment standards shall be
achieved within three years of the date such standards are
effective, unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the
standards.
(2) If additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule providing such additional
pretreatment shall be adopted.113
(3) Also, the following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-17 SALEM CODE § 398-18
1:358
§ 398-19. Sewer use charges.
§ 398-20. Conflicts.
When, in a specific case, different provisions of this chapter shall conflict
with other ordinances or state or federal laws, the most restrictive
requirements shall govern.
§ 398-21. Enforcement.
The Board of Selectmen or its agent shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter. The Greater Lawrence Sanitary District, in its
capacity as POTW treatment works for the Town of Salem, shall have equal
and severable responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 398-22. Violations and penalties.
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.). No increment shall exceed nine months.
(b) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, a progress report shall be
submitted to the Town, including, as a minimum, whether or
not compliance with the increment of progress to be met on
such dates was achieved and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply, the reason for the delay, and the steps being
taken by the industrial user to return the progress to the
schedule established.114
A. Each user connected to the sewerage system shall pay a sewer use
charge. The sewer use charge shall be as established by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time to cover annual operating expenses and a
designated portion of sewer construction capital costs for the municipal
sewerage system. Sewer surcharges may be levied upon users whose
waste characteristics are above normal strength.
B. The Town will periodically sample the wastewater from industries to
determine whether the characteristics of the wastewater meet the
terms of their discharge permit. In cases where the strength of the
industrial wastewater exceeds the strength of domestic wastewater, a
surcharge will be assessed the industry by the community. Industrial
wastewater for this purpose will be considered to be any wastewater
having a BOD or suspended solids in excess of 250 mg/l and 300 mg/l,
respectively.
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-22
1:359
§ 398-23. Liability.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall become liable to the Town of Salem for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation.
§ 398-24. Public notification of significant violations.
The Town, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii), shall comply with the public
participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25, including provisions for
at least annually providing public notification of industrial users which,
during the previous 12 months, were significantly violating applicable
pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For the
purpose of this section, a significant violation is a violation which remains
uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance, which is part of
a pattern of noncompliance over a twelve-month period, which involves a
failure to accurate report noncompliance, or which resulted in the POTW
exercising its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B).
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation found to be violating or in
violation of any provision of this chapter except § 398-7 shall be served
by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit as determined by the Town for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The Town
may, after informal notice to the person discharging wastewater to the
public sewer, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge
reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the
health and welfare of persons or any discharge presenting, or which
may present, an endangerment to the environment, or which threatens
to interfere with the operation of the public sewer or wastewater
treatment facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Town include ex
parte temporary judicial injunctive relief, entry on private property to
halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge,
or demand of specific action by the person.
B. Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town
of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty
established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.115
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 398-22 SALEM CODE § 398-24
1:360
ARTICLE IV
Damaging or Tampering with System
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 398-25. Malicious, willful or negligent damage.
No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s)
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 398-26. Consent required to interfere with system.
It shall be a misdemeanor to do or cause to be done the following acts: to
uncover the public sewer for any purpose or make connection therewith;
to uncover the public sewer for inspection of or connection to branches
thereof; or to open any manhole unless and except with the written consent
and under the supervision of the Sewer Commission or its duly authorized
representative. The powers and authority of the Sewer Commission and its
duly authorized agents are set forth in Article V.
§ 398-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-26
1:361

ARTICLE V
Enforcement Agency and Inspectors
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 398-27. Right of entry.
The Sewer Commission members and other duly authorized employees of
the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the
community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Sewer Commission is responsible to and derives its authority from the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 398-28. Authorization to obtain information concerning industrial
processes.
The Sewer Commission or its duly authorized representatives are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which
have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system.
§ 398-29. Town employees performing work on private property;
liability for injuries.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in § 398-27 above, the Sewer Commission or its duly authorized
representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 398-11.
§ 398-30. Work on property on which Town holds easement.
The Sewer Commission and its duly authorized representatives bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities
lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 398-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 398-30
1:363
Chapter 409
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 279. Littering and dumping — See Ch. 318.
§ 398-30 SALEM CODE § 398-30
1:364
ARTICLE I
Regulations for Transfer Station
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-10-1989 (Ch. 302 of the 1995
Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 409-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Vehicles primarily used for transportation of
commercially generated solid waste or residential collections. Examples
of such vehicles are compactor trucks, dump trucks or commercially
registered delivery or service vehicles used by the owner to transport
commercial solid waste.
LIGHT USE COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — The words "light use" refer to
the expected number of times that the vehicles will be used to deliver
commercially generated waste to the transfer station. Examples of such
vehicles are a pickup truck with advertising on the exterior and whose
owner uses the vehicle to take his personal residential trash to the landfill
and whose business generates little, if any, commercial waste and large
construction-type vehicles that predominantly deliver material to the wood
dump.
RESIDENTIAL VEHICLES — Automobiles registered to residents of Salem,
New Hampshire, and to those summer residents who own property and pay
taxes.
§ 409-2. Statutory authority; purpose.
A. These regulations have been adopted by the Board of Selectmen
pursuant to the authority granted the Board by RSA 149-M:17, II.
B. The Town of Salem transfer station is operated and maintained in
accordance with RSA 149-M:17 solely for the disposal of authorized
residential solid waste and recyclables generated within the
geographical boundaries of the Town. These regulations are intended
to:
(1) Prevent the unauthorized entrance to and use of the transfer
station;
(2) Prohibit the deposit of illegal and/or unacceptable waste;
(3) Control the deposit of authorized solid waste to facilitate
compliance with operating standards, improve efficiency and
productivity, encourage recycling and reuse of our resources and to
maximize the life of the transfer station; and
(4) Establish equitable fees to be assessed against those who use the
transfer station.
§ 409-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-3
1:365
§ 409-3. Permit procedure.
It shall be unlawful to deposit waste at the Salem transfer station without
having first obtained from the Town of Salem a permit for such activity. The
permit shall be in the form of a license issued by the Board of Selectmen of
the Town or its designee.
§ 409-4. Fees.
The following fees are designed to defray some of the expense incurred by
the Town in administering the transfer station:
A. All permits shall expire on December 31 of the year during which the
permit was issued.
B. All permits shall be nontransferable.
C. Permits must be prominently displayed and affixed in the lower lefthand
corner of the windshield on the driver's side of vehicles bearing
waste to be deposited at the transfer station.
A. Salem residents must pay a fee as set out in the Town of Salem
Schedule of Fees for each vehicle which is to be used to carry waste to
the transfer station. Residents of the Town who are 65 years or older
and/or residents who are 100% disabled shall be exempted from the
fee. There shall be a fee for video display devices as set out in the Town
of Salem Schedule of Fees. For the purpose of this article, "video display
device" means a visual display component of a television or a computer,
whether separate or integrated with a computer central processing
unit/box, and includes a cathode ray tube, liquid crystal display, gas
plasma, digital light processing or other image projection technology,
greater than four inches when measured diagonally, and its case,
interiors wires, and circuitry.
B. Small business owners (haulers) generating solid waste in the Town of
Salem may bring said solid waste to the transfer station and shall pay
the fees as set forth in the Town of Salem Schedule of Fees.
C. Residential trash haulers shall be charged according to the Town of
Salem Schedule of Fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
(1) Billing will be on a monthly basis and will be based upon weight
records compiled by the Town.
(2) All residential trash haulers delivering waste under this section and
according to the schedule set forth above must deliver loads which
consist entirely of residential trash or recyclables generated by
residences located within the Town of Salem. Any part of a load
which is delivered under a residential trash hauler permit and
which is found to contain trash generated by commercial
establishments or trash generated by residences outside the Town
§ 409-3 SALEM CODE § 409-4
1:366
§ 409-5. Transfer station refuse.
of Salem will subject the holder of the permit to the revocation of
permit procedures set forth in § 409-9 below.
D. Commercial trash haulers hauling solid waste generated by a
commercial establishment within the Town of Salem shall bring said
waste directly to the designated private facility.
E. All persons applying for a permit must present vehicle registration with
payment tendered for the permit, and the permit shall only be displayed
on the vehicle for which the registration was presented. Permits may be
obtained and payments must be made at the Tax Collector's office
located at the Town Hall, Geremonty Drive, Salem, New Hampshire,
during normal business hours.
F. The Director of Public Works may refuse to accept waste generated
from commercial undertakings of either a temporary or permanent
nature by posting and publishing a notice of tonnage limitation.
G. The fees set forth above may be adjusted for inflation on an annual basis
by the Town of Salem Board of Selectmen.
A. Unacceptable waste. Materials which will not be accepted shall include,
but not be limited to, the following: commercial waste, pesticides,
insecticides, chemicals (when not normally in household waste),
pathological and biological waste, radioactive materials, oil sludges,
hazardous refuse of any kind or other substances which are now or are
hereafter considered harmful, inflammable, hazardous or toxic or which
would otherwise not normally be allowed under Environmental
Protection Agency regulations or which would be likely to pose a threat
to health or safety or which may cause damage to or adversely affect
the operation of the Salem transfer station.
B. Hazardous waste or materials which the Town considers to be
detrimental to the operation of the transfer station or which require
special handling or disposal procedures will not be accepted. The term
"hazardous waste" means:
(1) A solid, semisolid, liquid or contained gaseous waste, or any
combination of these wastes, which, because of either quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may:
(a) Cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase
in irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
(b) Pose a present or potential threat to humans or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of or otherwise mismanaged; or
§ 409-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-5
1:367
§ 409-6. Stumps, brush, demolition materials, yard waste and
metal.
(2) Any material which has been identified as hazardous waste by the
Bureau of Solid Waste Management of the State of New Hampshire
using the criteria established under RSA 147-A:3, I, or as listed
under RSA 147-A:3, II. Such wastes include, but are not limited to,
those which are reactive, toxic, corrosive, ignitable, irritants, or
strong sensitizers or which generate pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. Such wastes do not include
radioactive substances that are regulated by the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954, as amended.
C. Tires will not be accepted.
A. General restrictions.
(1) Stumps will not be accepted at the transfer station, and persons
carrying stumps will be directed to a facility which has agreed with
the Town to take the stumps, subject to the regulations and fees
established by that facility.
(2) Bulky metals and/or vehicles having a net legal load limit of one ton
will not be accepted. Metals must be taken directly to a commercial
scrap dealer.
(3) Logs greater than four inches in diameter or four feet in length may
not be deposited.
(4) Lumber and other demolition materials (i.e., footers and wood
sheathing with asphalt shingles attached) are not accepted.
(5) Appliances containing Freon will be placed in a separate pile from
bulk metal.
B. Commercial.
(1) No commercial and/or business use of the brush area is allowed.
(2) A small business owner (hauler) who is a resident and has a small
business permit to use the transfer station for trash will need a
separate residential permit to use the brush area for residential
use. Any such double permit holder found to be bringing in demo
and/or brush to the site from any commercial enterprise or any
source other than his Salem residence will risk losing both permits
under the provisions of this article.
C. Residential.
(1) Permit required.
(a) The residential permit may be purchased at Town Hall.
§ 409-5 SALEM CODE § 409-6
1:368
§ 409-7. Recycling.
§ 409-8. Composting.
Any items or materials that the Board of Selectmen or its designee has
designated for reuse as fertilizer or landscaping materials must be placed
by the users of the transfer station in specified areas. No other materials
shall be placed in these specified areas. Separation of leaves from other
yard waste is required when composting. Additionally, leaves must be
removed from bags.
§ 409-9. Regulatory authority and revocation of permit.
(b) Three pre-numbered bulky coupons are included with a
residential permit.
(2) Bulky coupons.
(a) Only three bulky coupons per household/residence per year
are allowed; not issued per residential permit or per vehicle.
(b) To be used to bring to the brush area any residential furniture,
mattresses and box springs.
(c) Bulky coupons are not necessary to bring in residential yard
waste and brush.
(d) Bulky coupons shall be used with a vehicle no larger than a
pickup truck or household-size trailer.
(e) Bulky coupons are not transferable and shall be completely
filled out prior to acceptance.
(f) The use of a bulky coupon is not necessary for the disposal of
metal and appliances.
A. Any items or materials that the Board of Selectmen or its designee has
designated as recyclables must be separated from normal household
trash by users of the transfer station. Items designated as recyclables
may change or new recyclables may be added. Users of the transfer
station will be made aware of changes and must conform to such
changes.
B. Recyclables must be cleaned and deposited by the users of the transfer
station in specified areas. No other items or materials shall be placed in
these specified areas.
C. Failure to recycle will result in revocation of the violator's permit.
A. Regulations. The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to
promulgate additional regulations, subject to the approval of the Board
of Selectmen, which may include but are not limited to the following
subjects:
§ 409-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-9
1:369
§ 409-10. Violations and penalties.
Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town of Salem
website. Pursuant to RSA 149-M:17, II(b), the Town is authorized to levy
a civil penalty of up to $3,000 for each act which violates this article,
notwithstanding RSA 31:39, III.
(1) Separation of solid wastes and other materials.
(2) Inspection procedure.
(3) Hours of operation.
B. Revocation of permit.
(1) The Scalehouse Operator will recommend revocation of the permit
of any holder when he makes a written finding to the Director of
Public Works that the holder of the permit or his agent has violated
any provisions of these regulations or any regulations promulgated
hereunder. Upon review of the Scalehouse Operator's
recommendation and written findings, and if in agreement with
said recommendation, the Director of Public Works will provide
written notice of the revocation to the holder of the permit by
certified mail. Any person provided with such a notice of revocation
may request a hearing before the Town Manager within 15 days of
the receipt of such notice. The Town Manager will affirm or reverse
the action of the Scalehouse Operator. The revocation of the permit
will be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. Appeals from the
decision of the Town Manager may be taken directly to court.
(2) The penalty for the first offense under this section shall be
revocation of permit for a period of six months. The penalty for a
second offense shall be revocation for a period of 12 months. The
penalty for a third offense shall be permanent revocation of permit.
The revocation of a permit pursuant to this section prohibits the
previous holder of that permit from depositing any material at the
Salem transfer station.
C. Damages. Any person who deposits unacceptable waste as that term is
defined in § 409-5 above shall be responsible for the removal of all
unacceptable waste and shall fully indemnify the Town of Salem from
any damages resulting from the deposit of unacceptable waste at the
Salem transfer station. All persons depositing unacceptable waste shall
be prosecuted to the full extent provided by law.
§ 409-9 SALEM CODE § 409-10
1:370
Chapter 417
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 398.
Utility demand and benefit
assessments — See Ch. 455.
Water — See Ch. 477.
§ 409-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-10
1:371

ARTICLE I
Connection to Storm Sewer System
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1-29-1979 (Ch. 261, Art. I, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 417-1. Procedure for requests to connect.
Any request to connect sump drains or basement drains to the municipal
storm drain system will be directed to the Town Engineer and the Public
Works Director, who, after on-site inspection and meeting with the
applicant, will submit a written recommendation to the Board of Selectmen
setting forth the nature of the application, the reason for it, potential
alternative solutions and their recommendation.
§ 417-2. Purpose.
Since drainage will undoubtedly be a matter of continuing concern, both
to the Town and to local residents, this procedure will provide for the
orderly disposition of requests as they occur, weighing the merits of each
on an individual basis rather than trying to address the matter with an
all-encompassing policy which, because of the individual nature of the
problems presented, will necessitate constant exceptions and bending of
the rules.
§ 417-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 417-2
1:373
Chapter 420
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 252.
Littering and dumping — See Ch. 318.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 466.
§ 417-2 SALEM CODE § 417-2
1:374
ARTICLE I
Standards for Acceptance
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 9-8-1975 (Ch. 275, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 420-1. Purpose.
There being a large number of streets in Town which are not accepted,
nor acceptable, for reason of right-of-way widths and lack of proper
construction, and it being that current subdivision regulation requirements
for new streets should not be applicable to this type of street, the Selectmen
hereby adopt the following as minimum standards for unaccepted streets
that were existing at the time of adoption of this article and that met
applicable Planning Board regulations at the time of construction.
§ 420-2. Minimum right-of-way.
Before any street can be considered for acceptance and improvement, a
thirty-foot right-of-way must be available for dedication to the Town. If
such right-of-way is not currently available, abutting property owners must
convey sufficient land to the Town to fulfill this requirement, at no cost to
the Town. All necessary drainage easements must be granted. The right-ofway
shall be verified on the ground by a licensed surveyor prior to any work
by the Town. All costs, including but not limited to legal and engineering,
associated with any such dedication shall be borne by the petitioner(s).
§ 420-3. Construction details.
When deemed advisable by the Director of Engineering and the Director
of Public Works, the entire width of the right-of-way shall be cleared. All
stumps, peat and other unsuitable material shall be removed from the limits
of the roadbed. The minimum roadbed width shall be 20 feet, and the
minimum pavement width shall be 16 feet. The roadbed shall be constructed
of 12 inches of bank-run gravel and four inches of crushed gravel. Adequate
drainage of the road to ensure its preservation shall be installed. The
road surface shall consist of a minimum thickness of four inches of hot
bituminous concrete, machine placed in two courses consisting of a binder
course of 2.5 inches and one-inch wearing course, or other more stringent
standard as deemed appropriate by the Engineering Department.
§ 420-4. Improvement to be to residency limits; future extension.
The street will be improved only to the limits of residency at the time of
improvement. Later improvements would be at the expense of abutters, the
work being to the above standards if done by a private contractor. In cases
where long gaps exist between residences and improvements are made
fronting vacant lots, a betterment charge per linear foot, as determined by
the Board of Selectmen, will be paid by owners of said lots before building
permits will be issued for the same. A gap exceeding the legal zoning
§ 420-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-4
1:375
frontage of one lot within the district in which the lot is located on either
side of the street shall be considered the basis for such charges.
§ 420-5. Existing substandard streets in new subdivisions.
Developers of new subdivisions which require passage over existing
substandard streets for access to the new street may be required to improve
such streets to the minimum standard specified in the Planning Board
Subdivision Regulations then in effect.
§ 420-4 SALEM CODE § 420-5
1:376
ARTICLE II
Snow Removal on Unaccepted Roads
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 12-12-1977 (Ch. 275, Art. III,
of the 1995 Code)]
§ 420-6. Statement of conditions.
Annually, the Town is faced with more miles of roads, particularly in new
subdivisions, that have not been accepted in the legal sense. In addition,
the Town has several miles of roads that have never been legally accepted
and do not meet present minimum standards that will qualify them for
consideration of acceptance.
§ 420-7. Present policy generally.116
Presently, the Town provides minimal maintenance in the interest of public
safety but is no longer able, under law, to expend any public funds on such
roads.
§ 420-8. Statement of policy.117
The Selectmen hereby reaffirm the Town's basic policy on this matter as
follows:
A. Existing unaccepted roads with or without an all-weather surface and
having year-round residents shall be plowed, sanded and salted during
the winter season for public safety purposes by the abutters of these
private roads.
B. New unaccepted roads with some all-weather surface and built to the
required Planning Board standards, having year-round occupancy and/
or use, shall be plowed, sanded and salted during the winter season for
public safety purposes by the developer thereof.
C. Any winter maintenance performed by the Town on private roads shall
be at the expense of the abutters and/or owner(s) of said private roads.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-8
1:377

ARTICLE III
Protection of Highways
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-21-1978 (Ch. 275, Art. I, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 420-9. Permit required to discharge or store material on streets
or highways.118
No person, company or corporation shall discharge or place water or
material of any nature into or on the traveled portion of any public rightof-
way, highway or street in the Town of Salem without a permit from the
Engineering Department. Any permit so issued will set forth the period of
time for which the permit shall be valid and shall ensure compliance with
MS4 requirements/regulations.
§ 420-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes all land adjacent to the traveled portion of a
public way or street that lies between the land owned by adjacent property
owners.
TRAVELED WAY — The traveled or paved roadway, sidewalks, whether
paved or not, and road shoulders.
§ 420-11. Criteria for issuance of permits.119
In the issuance of permits, the Engineering Department shall consider first
the public safety and convenience. It shall consider also:
§ 420-12. Conditions under which requirements may be waived.
The requirements of a permit hereunder may be waived if:
A. The public nuisance value and aesthetic impact of such discharge or
placement.
B. The availability to the applicant of other disposal measures.
C. The hardship to the applicant if the permit is denied.
A. Weather conditions have created an emergency in that temporary
flooding results in danger to life or property.
B. Conditions created during roadway or utility maintenance, repair,
reconstruction, or construction require discharge of water onto the
traveled way during such work.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-13
1:379
§ 420-13. Violations and penalties.120
Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the Board
of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town of Salem
website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty established pursuant
to RSA 31:39, III.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-13 SALEM CODE § 420-13
1:380
ARTICLE IV
Signs in Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 10-22-2007 (Ch. 275, Art. IV, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 420-14. Purpose and authority.
The Board of Selectmen has adopted this article in accordance with RSA
41:11, RSA 47:17 and RSA 664:17. The purpose of this article is to regulate
signs in the public right-of-way. Signs in the public way create visual blight,
interfere with maintenance, pose a safety hazard for the traveling public,
and are a financial liability for the Town.
§ 420-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following meanings shall apply:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, business, or unincorporated
association.
RIGHT OF WAY — As defined under Article III, § 420-10, of this chapter.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbol
and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or
identifying any establishment, product, goods, or service or otherwise for
the purpose of providing information.
§ 420-16. Prohibitions.
§ 420-17. Exemptions.
§ 420-18. Removal of signs.
A. No person shall place on or affix any sign to any public property,
including highway rights-of-way, or private property without the
owner's consent.
B. No person shall affix, attach, or display any sign upon any object of
nature, utility pole, or highway sign.121
A. Signs erected, maintained or approved by the Town of Salem or State of
New Hampshire are permitted.
B. Signs that do not obstruct the safe flow of traffic and placed with the
consent of the owner of the land over which the right-of-way passes are
permitted. The consent of the owner applies only to private property,
and sign advertising is absolutely prohibited in highway rights-of-way
and other public property unless allowed by the Board of Selectmen.
A. Any political advertising that is placed on or over any public right-ofway
or public property in violation of this article or state statute shall
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-18
1:381
§ 420-19. Violations and penalties.
be removed in accordance with RSA 664:17 (Placement and Removal of
Political Advertising).
B. Other signs will be removed by the Town and held for 10 days. Signs
that are not reclaimed within that ten-day period will be disposed of by
the Town.
A. Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Town Manager and on the Town
of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty
established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.122
B. Each sign constitutes a separate violation.
C. Any fine or penalty imposed under this article shall be paid to the Town
of Salem.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-18 SALEM CODE § 420-19
1:382
Chapter 433
TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, BRANDING AND PERMANENT
MAKEUP
§ 420-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-19
1:383

ARTICLE I
Authority, Purpose and Definitions
§ 433-1. Statutory authority; purpose.
§ 433-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases when used
herein shall be construed as follows:
BOARD OF HEALTH — As defined in RSA 128:3, whereas the Health Officer
shall be the Secretary and Executive Officer of and, with the Board of
Selectmen, shall constitute the local Board of Health for the Town.
BODY PIERCING — Technique whereby various body parts are pierced and
surgical steel rings or studs are inserted. Body sites may include but may
not be limited to ear, nose, cheek, tongue, navel, forehead, nipples and
genitals.
BODY PIERCING ARTIST — Any person who actually performs the work of
body piercing.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or space where body
piercing is practiced or where the business of body piercing is conducted or
any part thereof.
BODY PIERCING OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person who controls,
operates, conducts, or manages any body piercing establishment, whether
actually performing the work of body piercing or not.
BRANDING — Technique whereby a heated metal form is placed on the skin
for the purpose of inducing permanent scarring in the shape of the design
attached to the end of the branding iron handle.
A. This chapter has been enacted pursuant to the authority granted the
Town by RSA 31:39, I(m), effective July 1, 1985, which allows the Board
of Selectmen to adopt ordinances to regulate tattoo parlors and RSA
147:1 which allows the Health Officer to make regulations relating to
the public health as in his/her judgment the health and safety of the
people require. These regulations shall take effect when approved by
the Board of Selectmen, recorded by the Town Clerk, and published in
some newspaper, or when copies thereof have been posted in two or
more public places in the Town.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety, health, and welfare
of the general public and not to protect the personal or property
interests of individuals. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to be
the making of a promise or the undertaking of a special duty towards or
relationship with any person who gets a tattoo or is body pierced, nor
shall the provision of or failure to provide such licenses or to undertake
particular inspections or types of inspections be deemed to create a
special relationship or duty towards any person upon which any action
in negligence or other tort might be founded.
§ 433-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-2
1:385
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Inspection report made by the Health
Officer or his/her duly appointed agent prior to issuing a body piercing and/
or tattoo establishment license indicating that the establishment complies
with the requirements of this chapter.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Any disease caused by an infectious agent
which may be transmitted directly or indirectly from one individual to
another.
HEALTH CERTIFICATE — A card or letter valid for one year issued to a
tattoo artist or person performing body piercing by a medical physician,
licensed to practice in New Hampshire or Massachusetts, after satisfactory
tests for tuberculosis and after a satisfactory examination for apparent
communicable diseases, particularly in respect to arms and hands.
PERMANENT MAKEUP — The tattooing of permanent makeup onto the
face of a client, to include but not necessarily be limited to eyebrows,
eyeliner, lip liner, lip color, cheek blush, eye shadow and beauty marks.
TATTOO — To mark or color the skin by pricking, scratching, or cutting in
coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production
of scars.
TATTOO ARTIST — Any person who actually performs the work of tattooing.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or space where tattooing is
practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part
thereof.
TATTOO OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person who controls, operates,
conducts, or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually
performing the work of tattooing or not.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — Precautionary guidelines issued by the
National Centers for Disease Control (CDC) for use in the prevention of
transmission of infectious diseases from contact with potentially infected
body fluids. Universal precautions apply to blood and other body fluids
containing visible blood. Universal precautions also apply to semen and
vaginal secretions, tissues and body fluids such as cerebrospinal fluid and
pleural fluid. Universal precautions do not apply to feces, nasal secretions,
sputum, tears, urine and vomitus unless they contain visible blood. Requires
the use of but not limited to protective clothing, goggles, masks and latex
gloves.
§ 433-2 SALEM CODE § 433-2
1:386
ARTICLE II
Restrictions
§ 433-3. Prohibitions.
§ 433-4. Exemptions.
A. Tattooing of minors. Pursuant to RSA 639:3, II, the tattooing of any
person under the age of 18 is prohibited and constitutes endangering
the welfare of a minor. Parental consent does not constitute an
exemption to this requirement.
B. Branding shall be prohibited in the Town of Salem unless performed by
a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of New
Hampshire.
C. 123Body piercing below the waist shall be prohibited in the Town of
Salem unless performed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in
the State of New Hampshire. The body piercing of any site except ears
on minors under the age of 18 years shall be prohibited without the
presence of a parent or guardian. The parent or guardian shall sign a
permission form, at the site, at the time of piercing.
A. These regulations shall not apply to physicians licensed to practice
medicine in New Hampshire and those they directly supervise as part of
their practice.
B. These regulations shall not apply to those novelty or jewelry stores in
the business of ear piercing with the use of a piercing gun. These
establishments shall use proper procedures and sanitization practices
as required by OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration)
regulations. These establishments shall be prohibited from performing
body piercings at other sites except ears without satisfying all the
requirements of this chapter.
123. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, prohibiting permanent makeup unless performed by a
New Hampshire-licensed physician, was repealed by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection D as Subsection
C.
§ 433-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-4
1:387

ARTICLE III
Licensing Procedure
§ 433-5. Licenses required. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
§ 433-6. Term and renewal of license; fees.
A. Establishment license. No person shall own or operate a tattoo
establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing or own
or operate a body piercing establishment or engage in the practice or
business of body piercing without first obtaining an establishment
license for the location from the Health Officer or the Health Officer's
duly authorized agent.
B. Artist license. No person shall engage in the practice or business of
tattooing and/or body piercing in a licensed establishment without first
obtaining an artist license from the Health Officer or the Health
Officer's duly authorized agent.
C. Permanent makeup/cosmetic tattoo license. No person shall engage in
the practice of permanent makeup or cosmetic tattooing in a licensed
establishment without obtaining a permanent makeup/cosmetic tattoo
artist license from the Health Officer or the Health Officer's duly
authorized agent. [Added by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018124]
D. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing on a form
prescribed by the Town of Salem, wherein the applicant shall agree to
conform to all rules and regulations governing such places now in effect
or as subsequently enacted, and to authorize and permit such
examinations and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the
Health Officer.
E. No person shall be granted an establishment license to operate a tattoo
establishment or body piercing establishment or engage in the practice
or business of tattooing or body piercing in the Town of Salem without
site plan approval from the Planning Department and/or Planning
Board.
F. No person shall operate a mobile tattoo business or mobile body
piercing business in the Town of Salem.
A. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall, unless revoked as set
forth hereafter, expire on March 31 following their date of issue. The
requirements for the renewal thereof shall be the same as for new
licenses. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
(1) Establishment license. A fee as provided in Subsection D per year
per tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be charged.
124. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections C
through E as Subsections D through F, respectively.
§ 433-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-6
1:389
§ 433-7. Inspection schedule.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer or designee to cause inspections
to be made on a recurring basis at all establishments and the equipment
thereof. If said place of business is not maintained, conducted or operated
in conformity with the requirements of this chapter as now enacted or
as subsequently amended, then the Health Officer may suspend or revoke
the establishment license as described in §§ 433-24 and 433-25 until said
establishment and the operation thereof are made to conform to the
The owner(s) of the establishment shall be listed as licensee and
the license shall not be transferable.
(2) Artist license. A fee as provided in Subsection D per year per
tattooist or person engaged in body piercing shall be charged for
the issuance of a license to operate from a licensed tattoo or body
piercing establishment. Each applicant shall, upon paying the fee,
submitting a copy of the State of New Hampshire license and
meeting the requirements of this chapter, be issued a separate
license. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
(3) Permanent makeup/cosmetic tattoo license. A fee as provided in
Subsection D per tattooist engaged in permanent makeup/cosmetic
tattooing shall be charged for the issuance of a license to operate
from a licensed tattoo establishment. Each applicant shall, upon
paying the fee, submitting a copy of the State of New Hampshire
license, documentation of training and insurance and meeting the
requirements of this chapter, be issued a separate license. The
applicant shall provide documentation of training, apprenticeship
and insurance. Training must consist of a curriculum in a school or
program specifically designed for the practice of permanent
makeup/cosmetic tattooing. This training must also include an
apprenticeship in accordance with the requirements of the State of
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services. Each
individual licensee must provide proof of liability insurance. The
insurance must be specific to permanent makeup/cosmetic
tattooing. [Added by the Board of Selectmen 5-21-2018]
B. Form and transfer of permits. All licenses shall be issued in the name of
the individual person applying, shall give the location and name of the
establishment where said applicant will operate and shall not be
transferable to another owner, operator, artist, or location.
C. Public display of permit. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
establishment to display the current establishment and artist licenses
of everyone working at the site in a conspicuous place where they may
be readily observed by the public.
D. Licensing fees. Licensing fees, as adopted by the Board of Selectmen,
are on file with the Health Division and on the Town of Salem website.
[Added by the Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015]
§ 433-6 SALEM CODE § 433-7
1:390
requirements of this chapter. No owner, operator, or artist shall operate
without a valid establishment license.
§ 433-8. Records required.
A. Records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained by
the operator of each establishment. The record shall contain the name,
address, signature and form of positive identification in the form of a
government photo ID with ID number of each patron or customer. In the
case of body piercing of minors, a form signed by the parent or
guardian at the time of the piercing shall be kept as a permanent
record. All records shall be available for inspection upon request of the
Health Officer, Police Chief or their authorized representative(s).
Records shall be maintained a minimum of two years.
B. The operator and/or artist shall inquire if the patron has at any time
experienced a jaundiced condition or been infected with hepatitis.
Those indicating a history of jaundice or hepatitis shall not be tattooed
or pierced.
§ 433-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-8
1:391

ARTICLE IV
Tattoo Operating Room Facilities
§ 433-9. Separate operating room.
§ 433-10. Personal cleanliness of tattoo artists; required
equipment.
A. Each tattoo establishment shall have an operating room which shall be
separate and apart from a waiting room or public room that may be
used for other than tattooing purposes. Patrons or customers shall be
tattooed only in said operating room.
B. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running,
potable water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary.
C. Furniture and furnishings used within the operating room shall be
constructed of such material as to permit proper cleansing with hot
water and disinfecting solutions.
D. There shall be no overhead or otherwise exposed sewerage lines so as
to create a potential hazard to the sanitary environment of the
establishment.
E. All operating tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable material,
with a smooth, washable finish, and at least six inches from any
observer or waiting customers and/or separated by a panel at least four
feet high. Observers shall not be allowed in the operating room during
the tattooing process.
F. The operating room shall have proper and sufficient lighting as needed
to perform the tattooing process.
A. The practice of universal precautions shall be used during the tattooing
process as required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration's (OSHA) Blood Borne Pathogen Rule. This rule applies
to any workplace in which one or more employees are engaged in
practices that may present a risk for transmission of HIV (AIDS) or HBV
(Hepatitis B) to the worker.
B. There shall be available within said tattoo establishment adequate hot
and cold, potable, running water, soap, germicidal solution, individual
hand scrub brushes, and fingernail files or orange sticks for each tattoo
artist.
C. Each tattoo artist shall scrub his hands and forearms with soap and hot
water using individual hand brush, clean his fingernails with an
individual file or orange stick and thoroughly rinse his hands in a
germicidal solution before working on each patron or customer. An
individual disposable towel or napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo
artist's hands and arms after rinsing.
§ 433-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-10
1:393
D. Each tattoo artist shall wear clean clothes or lab coat. Surgical gloves
shall be worn during the tattooing process and shall be changed for
each patron.
E. There shall be no smoking, eating, or drinking in the operating room
during the tattooing process.
F. The following table summarizes the use of disinfectants in the tattooing
procedure:
Agent Preparation Uses
Hypochlorite Make up daily Corrodes metals
5.25% bleach
1 part bleach to 10
parts water
Use for disinfection of
needles before disposal
Excellent for other
materials
Glutaraldehyde Make up weekly using
activator
Use for pigment capsules
(Cidex)
Do not dilute Motors and damp wiping
70% spirit/
alcohol
Do not dilute Skin, table tops, metals
Clear phenolics Make up daily Table tops, damp wiping
(Hycolin) motors
Solutions of proven equivalence may be approved by the local Health
Officer.
All products shall be used according to label requirements and have
EPA approval.
§ 433-10 SALEM CODE § 433-10
1:394
ARTICLE V
Required Equipment
§ 433-11. Storage of tattooing equipment and materials.
§ 433-12. Floors, walls and ceilings.
The floor of the operating room of the tattoo establishment shall be of
impervious material and shall be, at all times, maintained in a clean
condition. The walls and ceiling of the operating room shall be a light color,
A. The needle bars and tubes shall be cleaned by use of an ultrasonic
cleaner prior to sterilization. Immersion time for all equipment shall be
at least five minutes. Ultrasonic cleaning tank detergent shall be
changed daily. The tank shall be scrubbed thoroughly with isopropyl
alcohol between detergent changes.
B. Any establishment licensed after the date of this chapter shall have an
autoclave on site for the sterilization of rods, needles, tubes, needle
bars, and other instruments used in the process. Any establishment
licensed prior to this date shall have a sterilizer on site approved by the
Health Officer. In the event of equipment replacement, an autoclave
shall be required. Boiling is not a sterilizing option.
C. Instruments used in tattooing, such as needle bars, grips and tubes,
shall be sterilized before use on each customer. Autoclaving shall be
done under 15 pounds of pressure for 15 minutes at 126° C. or for 20
minutes at 121° C. Instrument sterilization bags shall have autoclave
indicator tape and shall be dated.
D. If autoclaving is the method of sterilization, all tubes, grips, and needle
bars shall be left in the wrappers used during the autoclaving process
until use.
E. Boiling is not an approved method of sterilization.
F. If resterilizable stainless steel needles are used, they must be
ultrasonically cleaned and sterilized between clients. Chromium-plated
needles, if used, shall be used only once and discarded.
G. Under no circumstances shall needles, or any instrument to be
sterilized, be coated with petrolatum, lubricating jelly, glycerine, oil or
grease before being sterilized.
H. The "tubes" (holders for the stainless steel needle bars) shall also be
sterilized together with other instruments used.
I. The "motors" or frames cannot be sterilized and they must be dampwiped
with 70% alcohol or with freshly made 1.5% solution of clean and
soluble phenolic (carbolic acid) or with activated aqueous
gluteraldehyde (e.g., Cidex).
§ 433-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-12
1:395
shall be maintained in good repair without flaking or chipping, and shall be
of such material as to permit cleansing.
§ 433-13. Disposition of waste material.
A. The tattoo establishment shall have proper facilities for the disposition
of biomedical waste materials as now defined by state or federal
regulations and as subsequently defined. A contract with an approved,
licensed biomedical waste company is required and a copy of such
contract shall be required at time of licensing.
B. Sufficient toilet, urinal, and hand-washing facilities shall be accessible
to customers, operators, and artists within the tattoo establishment or
the building in which said tattoo establishment is located.
§ 433-12 SALEM CODE § 433-13
1:396
ARTICLE VI
Tattooing Procedure
§ 433-14. Preparation of area to be tattooed.
§ 433-15. Stencil for transferring design. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 11-2-2015]
If the stencil for transferring the design to the skin is not disposable, it
shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution approved by
the Health Division following each use and shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition.
§ 433-16. Tattooing process.
A. When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed, a new disposable
razor for each patron shall be used. The common use of shaving mugs
and shaving brushes is prohibited.
B. After shaving the area to be tattooed, or if the area does not need to be
shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be cleaned with soap and hot water,
rinsed with clean water and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary
manner before the design is placed on the skin. Only sterile, individual
towels and gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed.
These dressings shall be properly disposed of after use on each patron.
C. If vaseline or other jellies are applied, it shall be done with a sterile
swab or sterile spatula for the use of each patron. Unused portions of
jellies remaining from service on a patron shall be discarded.
D. Alum or any material used to stop the flow of blood must be used only in
the form of a powder or liquid and applied only with sterile gauze or
sterile absorbent cotton.
A. A sterile set of needles shall be used for each patron. Needles used in
tattooing shall be sterilized by a sterilization method approved by the
Health Division after each use and, if not immediately used, stored in
sterile containers. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing
machine shall be cleaned and sterilized in a similar method after each
use. The use of disinfectants does not constitute an approved
sterilization method. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
11-2-2015]
B. Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for
each patron, and any remaining ink or dye in the container following
the procedure shall be discarded.
C. Single-use containers shall be disinfected prior to use.
D. Excess dye applied to the skin shall be removed with individual sterile
gauze pads or sterile cotton only. The area tattooed shall then be
allowed to dry and the entire site covered with a piece of sterile gauze
§ 433-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-16
1:397
§ 433-17. Tattooing restrictions.
§ 433-18. Care of equipment after procedure.
§ 433-19. Infection control.
only, which may then be covered with a piece of dressing and fastened
with adhesive. Only approved surgical dressings and tapes shall be
used on patrons. The use of paper napkins, other materials, and mastic
tape for dressings is prohibited.
A. No tattooing shall be done on any person who is under the obvious
influence of alcohol or other drugs.
B. No tattooing shall be done on any person under the age of 18 (per RSA
639:3, II). A person under the age of 18 with a tattoo is prima facie
evidence that this section has been violated and that the proper
identification process did not occur.
C. 125No tattooing shall be done on skin surface that has a rash, pimples,
boils, infections, or other unhealthy skin conditions.
D. No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for
the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish,
birthmark, scar, or previous tattoo.
E. Medical history records obtained earlier shall be checked and updated
and anyone giving a history of jaundice, hepatitis, HIV infection or other
infectious or communicable diseases shall not be tattooed.
A. After each customer is tattooed, the needle bars must be disengaged,
with the tubes, from the machine and placed in an autoclavable dish.
Unless resterilizable needles are used, at the end of the session the
needles are "burned off" by flaming from the point to the soldered
junction and disposed of properly. Reusable needles must be used only
once before being cleaned and sterilized. The needle bars must be
cleaned ultrasonically, as before, then resterilized. Ultrasonic treatment
alone is not effective. All used needles shall be disinfected before
discarding. Used needles must be placed in a fresh solution of
hypochlorite for 30 minutes before disposal.
B. The pigment capsules must be disposed of after each customer.
C. Capsule holders and forceps must be sterilized between sessions.
D. Holding tubes for motors must be sterilized between sessions.
125. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, prohibiting tattooing above the neck, below the
ankles, below the wrists or on the genitalia, was repealed by the Board of Selectmen
5-21-2018. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D
through F as Subsections C through E, respectively.
§ 433-16 SALEM CODE § 433-19
1:398
A. Written instructions approved by the Health Officer shall be given to
each patron or customer on the care of the tattooed site to prevent
infection after each tattooing. A copy of these instructions shall also be
posted in a conspicuous place in the tattoo establishment, clearly
visible to the person being tattooed.
B. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become
known to the operator(s), owner(s) and/or artist(s) shall be reported to
the Health Officer by the owner of the tattoo establishment.
C. All tattooists are strongly advised to receive the Hepatitis B vaccine
which would provide them with immunity from contracting the disease
from a patron and protect patrons from contracting the disease from a
nonsymptomatic tattooist.
§ 433-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-19
1:399

ARTICLE VII
Body Piercing
§ 433-20. Body piercing operating room facilities.
§ 433-21. Body piercing procedure.
§ 433-22. Infection control.
A. Any person engaged in the process of body piercing, as described and
restricted in this chapter, shall meet the operating room facilities
requirements of Article IV as they apply to body piercing.
B. All piercing needles, stainless steel expanders, jewelry, and other
equipment used in the piercing process shall be sterilized as described
in § 433-11 as it applies to body piercing.
C. The jewelry inserted should be composed of gold, surgical stainless
steel or niobium, a composite metal formed from oxides of the stainless
steel production process.
A. When it is necessary to shave the area to be pierced, a new disposable
razor for each patron shall be used. The common use of shaving mugs
and shaving brushes is prohibited.
B. After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be
shaved, the site of the piercing shall be washed with soap and water,
rinsed with clean water and a germicidal solution applied in a sanitary
manner. Only sterile, individual towels and applicators shall be used to
prepare and cleanse the site.
C. Only instruments and equipment that have been properly cleaned and
sterilized prior to use shall be used during the piercing process.
D. The person doing the piercing shall wear clean clothes or lab coat.
Surgical gloves shall be worn during the piercing and shall be changed
for each patron.
E. There shall be no smoking, eating, or drinking in the operating room
during the piercing process.
A. Written instructions, approved by the Health Officer, shall be given to
each patron on the care of the piercing site to prevent infection after
the piercing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place in the piercing establishment, clearly visible to the
person being pierced.
B. All infections resulting from the practice of body piercing which
become known to the operator(s), owner(s) and/or artist(s) shall be
reported to the Health Officer by the owner of the piercing
establishment.
§ 433-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-22
1:401
§ 433-23. Body piercing restrictions.
C. All persons engaged in body piercing are strongly advised to receive the
Hepatitis B vaccine which would provide them with immunity from
contracting the disease from a patron and protect patrons from
contracting the disease from a nonsymptomatic person engaged in body
piercing.
A. No body piercing shall be done on any person who is under the obvious
influence of alcohol or other drugs.
B. No body piercing except ears shall be done on any person under the age
of 18 without parents/guardians on site to sign a permission form.
These forms shall be generated by the piercing establishment and
approved by the Health Officer.
C. No body piercing shall be done below the waist in the Town of Salem
unless performed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the
State of New Hampshire.
D. No piercing shall be done on skin surfaces that have a rash, pimples,
boils, infections, or other unhealthy skin conditions.
E. Medical history records obtained earlier shall be checked and updated
and anyone giving a history of jaundice, hepatitis, HIV infection or other
infectious or communicable diseases shall not be pierced.
§ 433-22 SALEM CODE § 433-23
1:402
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 433-24. Suspension of license.
Any tattoo establishment and/or body piercing establishment licensed to
operate in the Town of Salem and found to be in procedural noncompliance
with any of the requirements of this chapter may have its license suspended
by the Health Officer or his/her duly appointed agent at the time of
inspection. Reinstatement shall occur following compliance and
reinspection.
§ 433-25. Violations and penalties.
A. Any offense involving the body piercing of a minor without the parent
on site to sign a consent form or the tattooing of any person under the
age of 18 years shall result in a license suspension for a period of at
least seven business days in addition to facing any applicable court
action and fines. The Health Officer and/or Police Chief may
recommend to the Board of Health a permanent revocation for
repeated, subsequent offenses.
B. A first offense suspension, for issues other than the tattooing or body
piercing of minors, shall be for a period of at least 48 hours or until such
time as the health and procedural issues of noncompliance are brought
into compliance. A reinspection fee as adopted by the Board of
Selectmen shall be charged individually to all artists involved in the
issues of noncompliance. The Health Officer may recommend to the
Board of Health a permanent revocation for repeated, subsequent
offenses.126
C. Any licensed tattoo and/or body piercing establishment found to be in
noncompliance of this chapter and not operating under the intent of
this chapter shall have its license permanently suspended. Such
suspensions may be made by the Health Officer, the Police Chief or their
duly appointed agent(s) and/or per order of the Board of Health and
shall be the result of documentation of such noncompliance.
D. Appeals from administrative decisions to revoke or to suspend a
license(s) shall be made in writing within 10 days to the Board of Health
with a request for a public hearing. The revocation/suspension shall be
stayed pending a public hearing on the matter and final ruling by the
Board of Health.
E. Anyone operating a tattoo or body piercing establishment in an
unapproved zoning site shall face court action and fines as allowable
under RSA 676:17 for each day that such violation continues after the
violator has received written notice from the municipality that he/she is
in violation.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 433-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-25
1:403
F. Anyone found to be operating an unlicensed tattoo or body piercing
establishment in the Town of Salem shall face court action and fines as
allowable under RSA 31:39, III, per offense. The establishment shall
remain closed until all requirements of this chapter are in compliance
and a license has been issued.
§ 433-25 SALEM CODE § 433-25
1:404
Chapter 436
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Utility demand and betterment
assessments — See Ch. 455.
§ 433-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 433-25
1:405

ARTICLE I
Taxes on Unregistered Vehicles
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-13-1970 (Ch. 285, Art. I, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 436-1. Liability for taxes.
Any person allowing two or more unregistered motor vehicles to be stored
or parked upon his property will be liable for the taxes placed on said
vehicles.
§ 436-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-1
1:407

ARTICLE II
Interest
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-7-1977 (Ch. 285, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 436-2. Waiver of interest.127
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to waive interest due in an amount
less than $1 pursuant to RSA 76:13.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 436-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-2
1:409

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Property with Solar Energy System128
[At the 1979 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions of
RSA 72:62 for property tax exemption of real property equipped with
a solar energy heat or cooling system, which exemption shall be in
an amount of added costs necessary to install solar energy systems,
including material and labor. Property will be assessed as if it had
regular hot-water heat and equipment or regular air-conditioning
equipment, the difference between regular costs and solar energy
systems costs to be exempted.]
128. Editor's Note: This article appeared as Ch. 285, Art. IV, of the 1995 Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-2
1:411

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Property with Wind Energy System129
[At the 1979 Town Meeting it was voted to adopt the provisions
of RSA 72:66 for property tax exemption of real property equipped
with a wind-powered energy system, which exemption shall be in
an amount of added costs necessary to install wind-powered energy
systems, including material and labor. Property will be assessed as
if it had a public utility energy source for domestic use and electric
heat, if applicable, the difference between regular costs and windpowered
energy costs to be exempted.]
129. Editor's Note: This article appeared as Ch. 285, Art. V, of the 1995 Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-2
1:413

ARTICLE V
Reconveyance of Tax-Deed Property to Prior Owners
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-21-1980 (Ch. 285, Art. III, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 436-3. Authority.130
Pursuant to RSA 80:89, the Board of Selectmen is authorized to reconvey
tax-deeded properties to former owners.
§ 436-4. Conditions required.
The following conditions will serve as a general guideline to be employed in
cases where a request to repurchase tax-deed property is made:
§ 436-5. Appeals.
Any citizen aggrieved by action of the Board taken under these guidelines
shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of Selectmen by requesting
the same within seven days of the original action.
A. Requests will be received within five years of the date of the tax sale for
which the Tax Collector's deed was issued. All other tax-deed property
will be disposed of at public auction only.
B. The request shall be submitted in writing to the Board of Selectmen and
shall identify the property by street location and property Tax Map and
lot number.
C. Reconveyance would not result in an adverse impact on the
surrounding area.
D. There is no demonstrable benefit to the Town in retaining the property.
E. Minimum payment shall consist of all outstanding principal, interest
and taxes from the original tax sale, plus an amount equal to taxes plus
simple interest at 18% per annum, which would have accrued during
that time which the property was owned by the Town, plus any legal
fees associated with deed preparation and filing.
F. No reconveyance will be authorized unless and until any outstanding
welfare liens which existed on the property in accordance with RSA
165:28 immediately prior to the tax sale are paid in full.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 436-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-5
1:415

ARTICLE VI
Exemptions for Senior Citizens131
[The Town of Salem has adopted the provisions of RSA 72:39-a
relative to an elderly exemption for property taxation. Exemption
amounts and other information is available in the Assessing
Department and on the Town of Salem website.]
131. Editor's Note: This article appeared as Ch. 285, Art. VI, of the 1995 Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 436-5
1:417
Chapter 455
UTILITY DEMAND AND BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 398. Water — See Ch. 477.
§ 455-1. Authority.
This policy is adopted pursuant to RSA 38:28, RSA 38:27 and RSA 149-I:7
and Chapters 398 and 477 of the Town Code.
§ 455-2. Purpose.
The Board of Selectmen realizes the broad scope of the water and sewer
system projects throughout the community and the need to continually
manage, construct, enlarge, acquire, extend, and make improvements to
the systems for continued reliability and availability of the systems to
provide special benefit to those who are and may be served by such utility
systems. Further the Board recognizes the general benefit to the customers
of the municipal utility systems of sharing in the cost of extending system
services to areas of the community not yet serviced and the resulting benefit
provided to landowners by the availability of municipal water and sewer
service. Therefore the purpose of this chapter is to provide high-quality,
available and reasonably reliable water and sewer resources, to the benefit
of current and future users, as funded through the combination of the user
rate and reasonable and equitable assessments across all user types, by
assessing those creating a new demand through new connections and/or
modifying the demand of an existing connection to the Town of Salem public
water system and/or the public sanitary sewer system.
§ 455-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABILITY — The presence of a reasonably reliable and quality water
and sewer system to the extent that such system provides special benefit
and is made or can be made available to those who are or will benefit from
such systems. The obligation to provide accessibility to the water and sewer
systems shall not solely be the obligation of the Town.
BENEFIT — The advantage, enhancement, and/or facilitation of use or
development derived from the availability of sewer and water services
throughout the community and specifically to parcels that currently or in
the future will be permitted to connect to the sewer and water system.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS — The sum of all costs incurred for the utility
extension, including design, engineering, right-of-way acquisition,
§ 436-5 SALEM CODE § 455-3
1:418
construction, construction supervision, traffic control, legal and bonding
expenses, interest on debt and other reasonable ancillary expenses.
COST OF DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY — The cost of the increase in
demand and to provide reasonable availability as expressed by the projects
in the document "Town of Salem, NH Town-wide Sewer and Water Buildout
Estimated Costs and Demand Flows." This document represents the
estimated total cost of projects and the estimated increases in capacity to
allow for demand and provide for reasonable and continual availability. The
document may be amended from time to time as projects are amended,
completed, or added to the document. The document represents projects
that have been, are or will be planned as part of a Town-wide plan for
the water and sewer systems and not the sole limit of the possible use of
revenues generated by this chapter.
DEMAND — The projected flow/discharge of water or sewer to/from a
particular land use as indicated by the document titled "Town of Salem Flow
Demand and Benefit Values." Where a use is proposed that is not listed
in the document, the Town may determine that the use is similar to a use
listed in the document or the Town may use national or other reasonable
standards to make such determination.
NOT BUILDABLE — Not eligible for a building permit at the time a utility
extension occurs.
PARCEL — A parcel of land, otherwise known as a "lot," that is privately
owned and segregated by deed from adjacent properties.
SERVICE — A waterline extending from a water distribution main, or a
sewer line ("stub") extending from a sewer collector main, to a point at or
near the property line of a parcel.
SEWER DEMAND AND BENEFIT ASSESSMENT — The revenue collected
from those who derive special benefit from the sewer system to pay for
the cost of the demand on, and provide availability to, the Town of Salem's
sewer system, including the management, creation, improvement,
extension and expansion of wastewater collection and treatment, pumping,
and all other facilities that generally provide for collection and treatment of
sewage.
SYSTEM-WIDE BENEFIT — Benefit derived from projects, construction,
enhancements, expansion, utility extensions or other improvements which
can be attributed to the entire water and/or sewer system and are
distinguishable from improvements which are attributable to the planned
improvements made for the benefit of a parcel or parcels. The Town may
determine and allocate a portion of the value of improvements to a systemwide
benefit.
TOWN — The Town of Salem, Rockingham County, New Hampshire, a
municipality of the State of New Hampshire, acting by and through its
Selectmen with the Town Manager serving as their designee.
USER FEES — Fees charged to individual customers for their measured use
of a service or consumption of a product.
§ 455-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-3
1:419
UTILITY EXTENSION — Extension of an existing water or sewer main
beyond the then current extent of the system so as to make service available
to the abutters to the extension.
WATER DEMAND AND BENEFIT ASSESSMENT — The revenue collected
from those who derive special benefit from the sewer system to pay for
the cost of the demand on, and availability of, the Town of Salem's water
facilities, including the management, creation, improvement, extension and
expansion of treatment, pumping, storage, protection of supply, and
transmission facilities that generally provide water to the local distribution
networks.
§ 455-4. Policy and payment.
A. Demand and benefit assessment established. Water and sewer demand
and benefit assessments are hereby established and may be revised
from time to time by the Board of Selectmen. The application of this
chapter shall be required of all applicable properties coinciding with
the date of the adoption.
B. Assessment payment to be made. Payment is considered as made at the
time, manner and form as established by the Town Finance
Department. Payment shall include the option of a lump sum payment
or the establishment of a payment plan in accordance with the terms
and conditions established by the Town.
C. Payment options. The payment options are pursuant to the Town
procedures. In the event of the sale or transfer of the assessed premises
by the owner, the obligations established shall transfer to the successor
owner. As provided for in RSA 38:22, the Town may place a lien on the
property for nonpayment of the demand and benefit assessment.
D. Assessment allocation of demand and benefit.
(1) The cost of expanding the system to those areas of Salem where it
is economically appropriate has been estimated based on design
and economic analyses. The increase in demand for water supply
and demand on the capacity of the existing sewer system has also
been estimated. The cost of providing a unit of capacity of water
supply, or a unit of capacity of wastewater disposal, has been
determined from those capacity and cost estimates. The unit
capital cost of water supply, treatment capacity, and distribution
has been determined as a dollar value per gallon per day of water
delivery capacity. The unit capital cost for wastewater collection
and transmission facilities has been determined as a dollar value
per gallon per day of demand. Based on these values the following
is the allocation of costs as expressed by the document titled "Town
of Salem, NH Town-wide Sewer and Water Buildout Estimated
Costs and Demand Flows":
(a) Fifty percent of the capital cost for water and sewer service
will be assessed to those who are newly served by the water
§ 455-3 SALEM CODE § 455-4
1:420
§ 455-5. Charges.
and sewer system, and to those who increase their demand
on the system, based on the unit cost for providing water
supply and wastewater disposal capacity to meet the increased
demand. Each user of new or increased capacity will be
assessed a charge based on the demand required by that user,
as expressed by the document titled "Flow Demand and Benefit
Values" and the unit capital cost to provide that capacity or
meet that demand.
(b) Fifty percent of the capital cost for providing new or increased
water or sewer service will be paid by water and sewer rate
revenues that are based on the amount of water withdrawn
from or wastewater discharged to the system by all of the
customers connected to the system.
(2) Recognizing that it is not possible to exactly balance the capital
cost expenditure and assessment revenue at all times, the capital
costs and debt service not paid by the assessments will be paid
from water and sewer rate revenues. It is intended and expected
that, over the duration of the debt service period for the
construction programs, the assessments and allocations of costs
will approximate the intended ratios. Notwithstanding the
references to water and sewer rates together in this section, the
water and sewer funds are and will remain separate and the
assessments for each are determined separately.
E. Wavier for related assessments. Waivers from this chapter, whether
now or in the future, may be allowed for a property or properties with
payment agreements with the Town, as part of the overall Town-wide
water and/or sewer projects, or as an agreement between the Town, as
recognized and established through the Board of Selectmen, and
resident property owners, for construction of water and/or sewer
infrastructure. Such waiver may be granted by a vote of the Board of
Selectmen at a public meeting. The wavier shall apply to the one
agreement and/or prior payments for the specific properties which are
part of said payment agreement or other agreements and not future
extensions, expansions or changes to the property or properties. Upon
request by the Board of Selectmen, the Finance Department shall
determine applicable projects defined by a betterment and/or
agreement and shall supply a list of applicable properties to the Board
for consideration of the waiver.132
A. Assessment for new users. The owner of any land or structure which
connects to or is within an area of an available utility extension of the
Town sewer and/or water system shall pay a water and/or sewer
demand and benefit assessment as applicable at the time of application
for the certificate of occupancy pursuant to municipal codes herein.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-5
1:421
Where the new connection does not require a certificate of occupancy,
then assessment shall occur at the time that the water and/or sewer is
made available to the property. Properties served by utility extensions
conducted by private concerns without Town funds shall be charged
a demand and benefit assessment at the time of the certificate of
occupancy or connection. In all cases there shall be a minimum charge
in accordance with the document "Flow Demand and Benefit Values."133
B. Assessment for changes in use. If change in use as defined by the
document "Flow Demand and Benefit Values" is reasonably expected to
increase the demand on water consumption and sewer discharge, then
the owner of the structure shall pay an additional water and/or sewer
demand and benefit assessment based on the increase in the demand as
compared to the prior use or expansion to the new use or expansion.
The change in the use of the land and/or structure shall be determined
to occur at the time of application for the certificate of occupancy for
such change. Where the change may not require a certificate of
occupancy the change shall be considered to occur at the time of
change of use or other like permit from the Town of Salem.134
C. Assessment for change in operations/equipment. If change, alteration
or modification in equipment, area and/or operations, for a commercial
account, is reasonably expected to increase the demand on water
consumption and sewer discharge by 10% over the average flow in the
highest billing period, then the Town shall assess the owner an
additional water and/or sewer demand and benefit assessment based on
the increase in the demand as measured from the prior billing period.
For the purpose of this section, increase in demand shall not include
increase or peaks associated with accidental increase by emergency
circumstances which result in the release of water or inflow into the
sewer.
D. Credits in lieu of system improvements. Where as a condition of the
Town for making connections to the sewer and/or water system the
property owner, developer, or other representative makes
improvements to the water and/or sewer system within the public
domain, and where the improvement is determined by the Town to be of
a system-wide benefit to the water and/or sewer system and not directly
related or attributed only to the development, such improvement may
be used as a direct credit to lower the amount of the initial demand and
benefit assessment. The credit may not be applied to other projects
throughout the community and is limited to the original project from
which the system-wide improvements resulted. The amount of such
credit, as approved by the Town, shall be based on the completed
construction costs for those system-wide improvements only. Such
determination shall be reviewed and certified by the Town, which may
use reasonable standards and make modifications and amendments to
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-5 SALEM CODE § 455-5
1:422
§ 455-6. Utility extensions.
the construction costs. The Town may allow for system-wide
construction credit that may occur within five years of the first
connection where the Town requests a delay in the system-wide
construction. Such credits shall serve to lower the obligation of the
initial assessment and shall not be distributed as a payment or refund.
The Town will not provide direct payments for credits that are greater
than the demand and benefit assessment. Approval of credits shall
occur by a petition filed by the property owner or duly authorized
representative and through a public hearing before the Board of
Selectmen, with evidence in the manner and form as prescribed by the
Town. The Board of Selectmen in reaching its determination may hire
consultants at a reasonable cost to be borne by the petitioner.
E. Petition for adjustment of assessment. If within one year of the payment
of the first demand and benefit assessment charge the property owner,
of property with a commercial account, with a petition to a public
hearing of the Board of Selectmen can prove that the use of the
property is less than the demand as defined by the Town of Salem, the
Board may choose to adjust the assessment. The Board of Selectmen in
reaching its determination may hire consultants at a reasonable cost to
be borne by the petitioner.
F. Reduction refunds not issued. Notwithstanding Subsection E above, no
refund of a demand and benefit assessment will be issued by the Town
on account of reduction in the consumption of water or sewer demand.
G. Town demand review. The Town reserves the right at any time to review
demand on the water and/or sewer system placed by properties, and if
as a result of the review the Town finds increases, the Town may choose
to levy an assessment as deemed appropriate.
H. Municipal exemption. This chapter shall not apply to the facilities of the
Town of Salem, its municipal and school departments, and Towncreated
public bodies as identified on a list approved, and as may be
amended, by the Board of Selectmen at a regular meeting. (Note:
Referenced list is on file with the Board of Selectmen.)
A. Assessment regardless of connection. Except as otherwise specified in
this section, a service shall be installed to service each parcel of land
abutting newly constructed utility extensions. Each parcel so serviced
shall have a demand and benefit assessment applied regardless of a
connection status. In the case of private utility extension which is not
funded by the Town, the Board may allow demand and benefit
assessment at the time of connection where the properties are
incidental to the route and not part of the development plans.
B. Subdividable parcels. Where frontage is sufficient to support
subdivision along the street, a sufficient number of services may be
§ 455-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-6
1:423
§ 455-7. Procedure for Town utility extensions.
installed at the owner's request to service future parcels. Each service
shall constitute a separate assessment.
C. Large land tracts. Where large tracts of land abut the utility extension,
owners may be granted larger than typical services for which they shall
be required to pay the incremental difference in cost thereof prior to
installation. The Town reserves the right to reject requests it deems
inappropriate. Should the size of the service requested be unsuitable
for actual development at a later date, then the full costs of changing
the size or type of the service shall be borne by the property owner.
D. Nonbuildable parcels. A property owner may petition the Board to
request a determination that his property is impacted in such a way by
zoning, wetlands, topography, or other fundamental restrictions to
render it not buildable. The Board may act to remove the property from
requiring a demand and benefit assessment, provided that the property
owner enters onto his deed in perpetuity a development restriction
acceptable to the Board. The Town reserves the right to reject requests
it deems inappropriate. If a request for a service to a parcel originally
deemed nonbuildable is made after the utility improvement
construction has passed by the subject property, such a service shall be
installed and the full cost of the connection shall be born by the owner
who shall also pay a demand and benefit assessment.
E. Assessment term. Such parcel assessments shall be billed in equal
portions annually for a period of time equal to the term of the related
debt, but not longer than 20 years. In the event no debt is incurred, the
Board shall set a reasonable term. Such bills shall be issued in
accordance with Town policies.
F. Recording required. Demand and benefit assessments shall be recorded
in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds and shall serve as a lien on
the assessed property as provided for in RSA 38:22. The recorded
document shall stipulate that upon the transfer of a parcel bearing a
demand and benefit assessment, the unpaid portion of the assessment
shall also transfer to the new owner.
A. Notices to owners. Owners of property shall be notified by mail of the
utility extension at least 120 days prior to the availability of service.
Owner requests for correction to the property status indicated by the
Town and/or alternate service installations shall be in writing and
received by the Town not more than 30 days after receipt of such
notification. Such requests shall be subject to evaluation by the Town.
B. Utility extension extent. The Board shall determine the geographic
extent of the utility extension in which it intends to apply demand and
benefit assessments applicable to each parcel. Inclusion of a planned
utility extension in a statutory bond or budget hearing shall constitute
compliance with this section.135
§ 455-6 SALEM CODE § 455-7
1:424
Chapter 466
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Off-highway recreational vehicles — See Ch.
374.
§ 466-1. Intent; interpretation; repealer; when effective.
This chapter shall be deemed and construed to be an exercise of the police
powers of the Town of Salem in the State of New Hampshire for the
preservation and protection of public safety, and all of its provisions shall
be liberally construed with a view to the effectuation of such purposes.
Any bylaws or ordinances concerning the regulations of traffic previously
enacted are hereby repealed. The traffic rules and regulations of Salem, as
amended, shall become effective upon adoption.
§ 466-2. Police and fire vehicles excepted.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to fire apparatus or police cars officially
used in connection with any Town department or Town business, but such
vehicles shall at all times be operated and otherwise handled in a
reasonable manner under the circumstances.
§ 466-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway included within the prolongation
or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections or at any
portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines on
the road surface or by any other markings or sign.
FIRE LANE — That portion of a traveled way established on private
property or public property, devoted to public use, where the parking
of motor vehicles or other obstructions may interfere for the purpose of
protection of persons or property. This portion of the traveled way shall be
clearly marked on the road surface and/or by other signs.
INTERSECTION — Any meeting of one or more roadways with another, or
any meeting of one or more roadways with a railroad.
OPERATOR — Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle, as the
owner thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner, or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-3
1:425
PARK or PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or
unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs or
signals or an involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond
the control of the operator of the vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or roadway set aside for pedestrian
travel.
STREET — The entire width between property lines of any public street,
avenue, road, highway, alley, lane or path located in the Town of Salem and
established for the use of vehicular traffic.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a street, except a device which is operated upon
rails or tracks.
§ 466-4. Erection and maintenance of signs, markings and devices.
§ 466-5. Compliance with devices; meaning of devices; standards.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and, as to those signs and
signals required hereunder, it shall be his duty to place and maintain, or
cause to be placed or maintained, all official traffic signs, signals,
markings, and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings, and safety
zones shall conform to such standards, if any, as are prescribed by the
Commissioner of Transportation, State of New Hampshire.136
B. Traffic control signs, such as parking information signs and stop signs,
shall be placed as provided in Subsection A. A listing of all traffic
control stop signs and no parking zones, by location, shall be
maintained by the Chief of Police, and a copy shall be on file at the office
of the Town Clerk.
C. Specified prohibited parking areas shall be delineated by the Chief of
Police unless otherwise determined by the Board of Selectmen, which
may hold a public hearing at its discretion.
A. Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and
every operator of a vehicle shall comply therewith, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. In no case shall an operator enter or proceed through an intersection
without due regard to the safety of other persons within the
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 466-3 SALEM CODE § 466-5
1:426
§ 466-6. Parking prohibitions and restrictions.
No operator shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, and vehicles
found parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section may be
moved by or under the direction of a police officer of the Town of Salem to
a place where parking is permitted, at the expense of the operator:
intersection, regardless of what indications may be given by traffic
control signals.
C. Colors of traffic control signals shall mean:
(1) Green. While the green lens is illuminated, operators facing the
signal may proceed through the intersection but shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk
or the intersection at the time such signal was exhibited.
(2) Yellow; yellow and red. While the yellow lens is illuminated, or both
a yellow and red lens are illuminated, operators facing the signal
shall not proceed, and any operator approaching the intersection or
marked stop line shall stop at such points unless so close to the
intersection that a stop cannot be made in safety.
(3) Red. While the red lens is illuminated, operators facing the signal
shall stop outside of the intersection or at such point as may be
clearly marked by a sign or line; provided, however, that if a green
arrow is illuminated at the same time, operators may enter the
intersection to make the movement permitted by such arrow.
(4) Flashing yellow. The yellow lens, when illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, shall indicate the presence of a hazard, and
operators may proceed only with caution.
(5) Flashing red. The red lens, when illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, shall indicate a hazard, and operators facing
the signal shall come to a full stop outside of the intersection or at
such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line on the way.
D. Stop signs shall be of a design and color to conform to standards
prescribed by the Commissioner of Transportation, State of New
Hampshire, and/or applicable statutes of the State of New
Hampshire.137
A. General prohibited parking areas.
(1) Within 20 feet of any intersection.
(2) Upon any sidewalk.
(3) Upon any crosswalk.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 466-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-6
1:427
(4) In front of a private driveway.
(5) Within any intersection.
(6) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(7) Upon any roadway unless both wheels on the right side of the
vehicle are within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway.
(8) Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a
clear and unobstructed roadway sufficient to allow the passage of
one vehicle at a time.
(9) Within the limits of any fire lane, except as provided in Subsection
C(1).
(10) Upon any roadway following the announcement of an emergency
parking ban by the Chief of Police due to severe weather
conditions.
B. Specific prohibited parking areas.
(1) Each specific prohibited area shall be clearly posted with signs that
shall be a design and color to conform to standards prescribed by
the Commissioner of Transportation, State of New Hampshire, and/
or applicable statutes of the State of New Hampshire.138
(2) Temporary no parking zones may be established by order of the
Chief of Police for specific events that may require directed traffic
control. Posted no parking zones may also be temporarily
suspended using the same criteria.
C. Limited no parking zones.
(1) Parking of maintenance and service vehicles for loading/unloading
materials and supplies for a maximum limit of 10 minutes shall be
permitted.139
(2) Parking shall be limited within the municipally leased parking lot at
the corner of Main and Central as follows:
(a) Along the north perimeter, abutting Main Street (eight parking
spaces), to 20 minutes.
(b) Along the south perimeter, abutting Rockingham Park chain
link fence (10 spaces), to two hours.
(c) The remainder of the lot (25 spaces) to two hours.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 466-6 SALEM CODE § 466-7
1:428
§ 466-7. Exception to parking provisions.
Nothing in § 466-6 shall be interpreted as prohibiting:
§ 466-8. Locations where sale of merchandise is prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any candy, ice cream or
confection or any fruit, vegetable or beverage for human consumption or
any goods from any motor vehicle or any vehicle or cart of any kind or any
stand which, because of its location near or adjacent to the street, results
in vehicles stopping on the side of the street for the purpose of conducting
a transaction of business anywhere on the following streets or sidewalks in
the Town of Salem or within 100 feet of any side street which intersects with
said streets:
§ 466-9. Time limit parking.
§ 466-10. Winter parking; parking during snowfall; removal of
snow.
A. Police, fire or emergency parking.
B. Parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading.
C. Parking for weddings or funerals as approved by the Chief of Police.
A. Routes 28, 97, and 38.
B. Cluff Road.
C. Rockingham Boulevard.
D. Veterans Memorial Parkway.
E. Geremonty Drive.
A. A parking time limit of 1/2 hour shall apply to certain streets as follows
(Sundays and holidays excepted):
(1) On the northerly side of Main Street from the Boston and Maine
Railroad right-of-way and tracks westerly, a distance of
approximately 180 feet, from 5:01 a.m. to 2:59 p.m.
B. The Town Manager may establish parking time limits in off-street
parking areas owned or leased by the Town, subject to the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, provide signs of such parking time limits and
enforce such regulations.
A. No operator shall leave an unattended vehicle on any street between
November 15 and April 15, inclusive, of any year, except in case of an
emergency, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Any
vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be moved by or
§ 466-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-10
1:429
§ 466-11. Pedestrians to be granted right-of-way.
The operator of a vehicle shall allow pedestrians the right-of-way crossing a
street at a crosswalk.
§ 466-12. Restrictions on moving vehicles.
§ 466-13. Compliance with police directions.
The Police Department shall control all traffic and vehicles on the streets
of Salem. Vehicles must stop or start immediately on signal by any police
officer in uniform.
§ 466-14. Responsibility of owner.
If any vehicle is found on any street or highway in violation of any provision
of this chapter and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the
owner or the person in whose name the vehicle is registered shall be held
prima facie responsible for such violation.
under the direction of a police officer of the Town of Salem to a place
where parking is permitted, at the expense of the operator.
B. No vehicle shall be left unattended on any street when new snowfall has
accumulated to a depth of three inches, except in case of an emergency.
Any vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be moved by or
under the direction of a police officer of the Town of Salem to a place
where parking is permitted, at the expense of the operator.
C. No person shall shovel, plow or in any way move or cause snow to be
moved from private property to a street or sidewalk.
A. No U-turns. A vehicle shall not turn about (make a one-hundred-eightydegree
turn) in a street or intersection.
B. The operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business related
to a fire call, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to
a fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive within or park such vehicle
within 500 feet of where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire
alarm.
C. Reverse direction locations are hereby designated, permitting the
reversing of direction on roadways with median strip barriers and at
locations so designated by proper signing:
(1) At the intersection of South Broadway (Route 28) and Cluff Road
for southbound traffic only and from the left-turn lane only.
D. Right turns on red light after stop. A vehicle may make a right turn on a
red light after stopping and upon determining that a clear, safe turn can
be made, except where specifically posted prohibiting the same.
§ 466-10 SALEM CODE § 466-15
1:430
§ 466-15. Violations and penalties.140
Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as
described below:
A. Whoever violations a provision of §§ 466-6, 466-7, 466-8, 466-9 and
466-10A and B as hereafter defined shall be subject to a fine as
provided in Subsection E if paid within five days. Failure to pay within
this time limit will be cause for a notice and a doubling of the fine.
Failure to pay this fine within five days will result in the denial of vehicle
registration renewal.
(1) Parking in a restricted area.
(2) Parking in the wrong direction.
(3) Parking more than 12 inches from the curb.
(4) Stopping or standing in a travel lane, thereby obstructing the
normal flow of traffic.
(5) All-night parking when restricted (first offense).
B. Whoever violates a provision of §§ 466-6, 466-7, 466-8, 466-9 and
466-10C as hereafter defined shall be subject to a fine as provided in
Subsection E if paid within five days. Failure to pay within this time
limit will be cause for a notice and a doubling of the fine. Failure to pay
this fine within five days will result in the denial of vehicle registration
renewal.
(1) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(2) Parking on crosswalk.
(3) Parking within 20 feet of an intersection.
(4) Parking in front of a private road or driveway.
(5) Parking within an intersection.
(6) All-night parking when restricted (second through fifth offense,
towing thereafter).
(7) Parking on the sidewalk.
(8) Parking at other than designated times.
(9) Parking in a fire lane.
C. Whenever no penalty is otherwise provided for, any person who violates
the Traffic Rules and Regulations of Salem, New Hampshire, shall be
subject to a fine as provided in Subsection E for each offense.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 466-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 466-15
1:431
§ 466-16. Obstruction of highways and sidewalks.
§ 466-17. One-way streets.
The section of roadway intersecting Main Street and North Main Street,
known as "Cemetery Road," shall be posted for one-way traffic, the
directional flow to be easterly from Main Street to North Main Street.
§ 466-18. Appeal process.
Persons who have received a parking violation may request an appeal with
the Chief of Police within 20 days of the issuance of the violation.
Chapter 477
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 398.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 417.
Utility demand and benefit
assessments — See Ch. 455.
D. Anyone found illegally parked in an area reserved for the handicapped,
where properly posted, shall be subject to a fine as provided in
Subsection E if paid within five days. Failure to pay within this time
limit will be cause for a notice and a doubling of the fine. Failure to pay
this fine within five days will result in the denial of vehicle registration
renewal.
E. Fines for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Police Department and on the
Town of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum penalty
established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.
A. No person shall place, locate, erect, construct or set out or cause to be
placed, located, erected, constructed or set out within the traveled
portion of any street, highway, or sidewalk any object, building or
structure of any kind that will in any way impede the use by the public
or free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. Any person violating any provision of Subsection A shall be punished by
a fine as provided in § 466-15E.141
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 466-15 SALEM CODE § 466-18
1:432
ARTICLE I
Procedure for Overdue Bills
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 8-27-1979 (Ch. 304, Art. V, of
the 1995 Code); amended 5-7-2001]
§ 477-1. Issuance of termination notice.142
When an arrears amount appears on the shutoff list a minimum of 50 days
after the due date, a termination notice shall be mailed by certified letter to
the customer. This notice will be mailed a minimum of 25 days before the
shutoff date.
§ 477-2. Costs to be added following notice.
The cost for certified mail will be added to the overdue amount.
§ 477-3. Right to hearing.
The consumer will have the right to a hearing prior to or following
termination of service.
§ 477-4. Payment plan agreement.143
When a customer is unable to make full payment, a payment plan
agreement will be executed, which shall be satisfactory to the customer and
the Water Division. If the customer fails to make payments in accordance
with the agreement, the Finance Department reserves the right to send
a notice that will indicate that the water may be shut off on the next
scheduled shutoff date. Section 477-5, Termination of service, does not
apply to payment plan agreements.
§ 477-5. Termination of service.
Certified letters will be mailed and the shutoff date noted. After the twentyfive-
day deadline, unpaid accounts will be forwarded to the Public Works
Director for termination of service. Charges for shutting off and turning
water on will be charged to the account and borne by the customer,
including overtime charges, if applicable.
§ 477-6. Acceptance of payment at time of termination
prohibited.144
Under no circumstances will an employee of the Water Division accept any
payment at the time of termination.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-6
1:433

ARTICLE II
Interest Rate on Past-Due Bills
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 4-13-1981 (Ch. 304, Art. IV, of
the 1995 Code); amended 5-7-2001]
§ 477-7. Establishment of rate.
The interest rate on past-due water bills shall be an annual rate of 12%.
Interest is to be charged monthly starting 25 days after the billing date
with a five-day grace period the first month. The interest will be calculated
starting from the bill date.
§ 477-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-7
1:435

ARTICLE III
Water Rate Policy
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-7-1982 (Ch. 304, Art. II, of
the 1995 Code); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 477-8. Fixed costs.
An administrative fee will be assessed to each account each time the meter
is read. This fee includes the cost of reading meters, billing, collection and
administrative expenses.
§ 477-9. Operation and maintenance costs.
Operation and maintenance costs are those associated with maintaining the
Salem Public Works Department, Water Division.
A. The administrative fee is the distribution of administrative costs divided
equally over the number of water customers/service units served by the
system.
B. The administrative fee will be charged per customer/service unit per
the Department of Public Works Fee Schedule. This cost will be divided
evenly between the water and sewer fund if both are charged to an
account. Otherwise, the fee will be charged fully to the water fund.
C. Adjustments will be made periodically employing the following formula:
total administrative costs divided by the number of customer/service
units.
D. Any rate changes approved by the Board of Selectmen will be in the
form of a legal notice and will be posted 90 days prior to
implementation.
A. Operation and maintenance costs are considered to be the operating
budget of the Salem Public Works Department, Water Division, and the
cost of the number of cubic feet of water consumed.
B. The operating and maintenance costs will be charged on the following
formula:
(1) Expenditures, based on appropriations approved at the Annual
Town Meeting, minus non-water-consumption-related revenue
divided by the total billable consumption.
C. Adjustments will be made periodically employing the formula listed
above in Subsection B(1).
D. Any rate changes approved by the Board of Selectmen will be in the
form of a legal notice and will be posted 90 days prior to
implementation.
§ 477-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-10
1:437
§ 477-10. Unmetered accounts.
Unmetered utility accounts will be billed as follows:
A. Unmetered water accounts: based on rates in the Department of Public
Works Fee Schedule.
B. Unmetered sewer accounts: based on rates in the Department of Public
Works Fee Schedule.
C. No administrative fee will be charged to these unmetered accounts.
§ 477-10 SALEM CODE § 477-10
1:438
ARTICLE IV
Regulations Applicable to System
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-21-1982 (Ch. 304, Art. I, of
the 1995 Code); amended 5-7-2001]
§ 477-11. Purpose; former legislation superseded.
The following rules and regulations are adopted to regulate use of the
public water supply and distribution system in the Town of Salem, New
Hampshire. These rules and regulations shall replace and supersede all
previous rules, regulations and ordinances relating to the control of the
water system in Salem.
§ 477-12. Services not in compliance.
All water services not in compliance with these rules and regulations at the
time of adoption shall be brought into compliance as soon as possible, but
not later than the first repair or replacement of that water service.
§ 477-13. Definitions. [Amended by the Board of Selectmen
1-6-2014]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
METER AND METERHORN ASSEMBLY — Includes a meter to register the
amounts of water consumed and the bracket to hold the meter, including a
shutoff and check valve.
OWNER — The owner of record, according to the Town of Salem Tax
Assessor's office, of a parcel of land serviced by the Salem water system.
SERVICE SHUTOFF — The shutoff valve located in a waterline at the point
the water connection becomes a water service. Generally located one to
three feet on the public side of the right of way line, but may be located
otherwise in cases of tap sleeve valves, widening or relocated rights-of-way.
WATER CONNECTION — That part of the water distribution system,
between the water main and the service shutoff, installed specifically to
provide water to one adjacent water service.
WATER MAIN — Any part of the water distribution system which lies in a
public right-of-way or easement installed to provide water to one or more
service connections, public fire hydrants or connections to other parts of
the water distribution system.
WATER SERVICE — The water pipe from the service shutoff into the
property up to the connection to the meter assembly, excluding the meter
and meterhorn assembly.
§ 477-14. Application for service; installation. [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 11-2-2015; by the Board of Selectmen
5-15-2017]
§ 477-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-14
1:439
§ 477-15. Responsibilities of owners. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 1-6-2014]
A. All property owners wanting to tie into the water distribution system
shall file an application for service with the Municipal Services
Department — Engineering Division.
B. At the time of filing the application for water, an application fee shall be
paid in accordance with the current water rate and fee schedule.
C. For each property applying for a new water connection, the owner shall
comply with the following conditions:
(1) Each property is allowed only one water service and one water
meter for domestic service.
(2) Separate water meters for outside water use (i.e., lawns, swimming
pools, gardens, etc.) are required for residential properties.
(3) For commercial properties, all irrigation systems shall be
connected to and serviced by a private well(s) or private water
system.
(4) Approved fire service connections for a building sprinkler system
are permitted and do not count as a second connection/meter.
(5) All water services and connections shall be made directly to the
water main.
(6) Permanent connections to neighboring water services or
connections shall not be allowed.
(7) The water service connection shall enter the owner's building at a
location which is and shall remain easily accessible for the
installation and future maintenance of the meter and meter
assembly. The location of the water service connection in the
owner's building shall be approved by the Municipal Services
Department.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to install and maintain the
water service from the service shutoff to the inside plumbing, excluding
the meter and meter assembly.
B. The meter assembly shall be owned and maintained by the Town of
Salem. The owner shall report any damage or malfunction of the meter
to the Town of Salem. The owner shall not in any way tamper with the
meter. The owner shall be subject to the fines outlined below if any
seals on the meter or meter assembly are broken.
C. There shall be no cross-connections to any other water supply. If an
alternative supply exists, a physical air gap shall be required between
the two supplies so that only the Town water or the alternative supply
may be used at any one time for domestic use.
§ 477-14 SALEM CODE § 477-15
1:440
§ 477-16. Installation and repair standards.
§ 477-17. Violations and penalties; termination of service.
D. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of the water bill and
other legitimate charges. All bills rendered by the Town of Salem are
due within 25 days of the billing date. For all accounts that are
delinquent by 50 days or more, the Town may take action to terminate
the water service.
E. Those owners of facilities with water meters of four-inch or greater
sizes shall test such water meters in accordance with § 477-39.
F. The owner shall allow the Town of Salem and its agents entry to the
premises at all reasonable and/or necessary times for the purpose of
reading, repairing, testing, replacing, and/or disconnecting water
meter(s) on the premises.
A. All work done on extension to, connection to or extensions of the water
distribution system shall be done in accordance with the most current
construction specifications in the Department of Public Works, Town
Engineer's office.
B. Tapping the water main and construction of the water connection shall
be done by the Department of Public Works, Water Division. Any
variance allowing the owner to do this work will be at the discretion of
the Director of Public Works.
C. Whenever work is being done on the water distribution system, the
Department of Public Works, Town Engineer's office, shall be notified
24 hours in advance. The Town Engineer's office shall again be notified
at least one hour prior to backfilling of underground waterworks.
D. Whenever the installation of utilities includes excavation within the
Town's right-of-way, a road opening permit will be required. Such
applications shall be filed with the Department of Public Works.
A. The Board of Selectmen, acting through the Town Manager, may
impose fines and/or terminate service for violations of these rules and
regulations.
B. Fines as specified in Subsection C of this section may be imposed for
any of the following violations of these rules and regulations:
(1) Meter tampering. If the meter is tampered with or if in any way the
seal placed on the meter and meter assembly becomes broken.
(2) Unauthorized entry to the water system. Operation (opening,
closing) of any main line, branch line, service line or other buried
shutoff valve located before (upstream of) an approved meter
assembly, as well as direct taps to the main or any other unmetered
line supplied water by the Salem municipal water system, without
§ 477-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-17
1:441
the express written consent of the Water Division. [Amended by
the Board of Selectmen 1-6-2014]
(3) Unauthorized use of hydrants.
(4) Use of an alternative water supply cross-connection with the Town
of Salem water supply.
(5) Violation of a written order from the Utilities Manager, Public
Works Department, to repair a water service leak or to take
corrective action to protect a water service from recurring freezing
problems.145
C. Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Department of Public Works
and on the Town of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum
penalty established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III. [Amended by the
Board of Selectmen 1-6-2014146]
D. Any water service may be immediately terminated after a twenty-fiveday
written notification for any of the following violations of this article:
(1) An account for water services rendered which is 50 days
delinquent.
(2) A fine that has not been paid within 25 days of issuance.
(3) Denial of access to a representative of the Salem Public Works
Department, Water Division, for the purpose of inspecting the
water service and/or repairing the meter and meterhorn assembly
and/or reading the meter.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-17 SALEM CODE § 477-17
1:442
ARTICLE V
Fee Schedule
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 6-21-1982 (Ch. 304, Art. III, of
the 1995 Code), as amended through 11-3-2008]
§ 477-18. New service fees.
New service application fees shall be set annually by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 477-19. Fees for certain services. [Amended by the Board of
Selectmen 1-6-2014]
Miscellaneous fees, including water shutoff, account deactivation,
restoration of service, service calls, bulk purchase of water, equipment
charges, materials, temporary construction meters, testing of customer
meters, and final billing, shall be set annually by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 477-20. Sewer credits for filling of swimming pools.
Sewer credit for filling of pools shall be discontinued unless formally
approved by the Board of Selectmen in the form of an abatement.
§ 477-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-20
1:443

ARTICLE VI
Backflow
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 3-5-1984 (Ch. 304, Art. VI, of
the 1995 Code); amended 5-7-2001]
§ 477-21. Backflow prevention devices.147
Backflow prevention devices are used to prevent the contamination of
the Salem Public Works Department, Water Division, system from possible
backflow of water or other contaminants into the system. The Town of
Salem follows the regulations set by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services Administrative Order No. 2071, as of July 1, 1982.
§ 477-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to identify and prevent the contamination
of the Salem water distribution system from possible backflow of water or
other liquids, gases, mixtures and process chemicals into said system by
action with its origin beyond the outlet of the customer's water meter.
§ 477-23. Applicability.
The Water Division will determine, as part of its granting of a water service,
those sites which will require a backflow prevention device. There must
be an approved backflow prevention device installed and inspected by the
Salem Water Division at those designated sites prior to the water service
being activated. This regulation will apply to all municipal water customers
with the level of hazard established by the Salem Department of Public
Works.
§ 477-24. Responsibilities of Town.
The Town of Salem acknowledges its responsibility to protect the sanitary
and aesthetic quality of its distribution system by enforcing this article.
A. The Water Division will not permit any water connection to its system
that has the potential for backflow contamination without an approved
backflow prevention device. A permit will be supplied from this
Department.
B. The Water Division will specify the location and type of device to be
installed in each location.
C. The Water Division will maintain records of these devices and will
perform a testing of the device as per this schedule:
(1) High hazard location: semiannually.
(2) Low hazard location: annually.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-24
1:445
§ 477-25. Responsibilities of customer.149
There will be installed a proper, approved backflow prevention device at
all water service locations as deemed necessary by the Water Division.
This installation is the customer's responsibility and will be performed by
competent plumbers, mechanical contractors, and those licensed to provide
plumbing services, under the direction of the Water Division and/or the
Building Division, as per the implementation schedule:
(3) Special applications: as necessary.
D. Testing of the devices will be performed by a responsible technician,
under the direction and approval of the Water Division.
E. There will be an annual testing fee schedule implemented and updated
as necessary.148
(1) First time or retest of a faulty backflow prevention device: see the
Department of Public Works Fee Schedule for rate.
(2) Multiple devices in a building are charged a discount rate; see the
Department of Public Works Fee Schedule for rate.
F. Water service turn-on will not be permitted without approval of the
device and the proper permit issued.
A. Where water service must be continuous, an approved bypass will be
installed.
B. The device will be installed in an accessible location free from debris,
corrosive gases, electrical and/or industrial hazards, etc., and access
will be provided for Salem Department of Public Works personnel and/
or their designee to inspect the device whenever they deem necessary.
C. The customer is responsible for maintaining this device in proper
operating condition at all times.
D. If the device is ever determined to be inoperative, proper repairs must
be implemented within 48 hours or a time satisfactory to the enforcing
agency.
E. The Water Division must be notified if there is any physical damage and/
or modifications to be done to the backflow arrangement.
F. All maintenance and repairs to the device are at the customer's
expense. The customer will provide the Water Division with proper
maintenance and repair records.
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-24 SALEM CODE § 477-25
1:446
§ 477-26. Enforcement.
§ 477-27. Appeal.
The applicability and enforcement of this article may be appealed through
the Salem Board of Adjustment.
G. The customer will further ensure the protection of the "in-plant" water
supply by the installation of other backflow prevention devices, as
determined by the Salem Department of Public Works.
H. The customer will apply to the Town Hall, Water Division Office, 30 days
prior to the permit expiration for renewal. The inspection/renewal fee
must be paid at that time.
A. This regulation is vital to maintaining the safety and integrity of the
Town of Salem's Water Distribution System and will be strictly
enforced.
B. Water service termination and/or fines will be implemented for the
following reasons:150
(1) Failure to install the specified device(s).
(2) Failure to maintain and repair such device as directed by the Salem
Department of Public Works or other such enforcing agency.
(3) Any modification and/or tampering with the device without prior
permission of the Water Division.
(4) Failure to renew the permit and/or pay applicable fees.
(5) Refusal of entry of the Department of Public Works personnel for
inspection of device.
(6) For any action or nonaction which is deemed by an authorized
agency not to be in the best interest of protecting the health and
integrity of the Town of Salem's municipal water supply and
distribution system.
C. Fines for violation of the provisions of this article, as adopted by the
Board of Selectmen, are on file with the Department of Public Works
and on the Town of Salem website. Fines shall not exceed the maximum
penalty established pursuant to RSA 31:39, III.151
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-27
1:447

ARTICLE VII
Drinking Water Resource Protection Program
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 11-16-1994 (Ch. 305 of the
1995 Code)152]
§ 477-28. Purpose.
To prevent any degradation of water resources within the Town of Salem
and to maintain water quality within the Town at ambient water quality
standards as defined by RSA 485-C.
§ 477-29. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of RSA 147:1 and RSA 485-C, Groundwater Protection
Act, the following article is adopted to protect Salem's water resources for
the benefit of the public.
§ 477-30. Statutory provisions.
The rules, regulations and policies of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES), Water Division and the Water Supply
Engineering Bureau, and amendments thereto are referenced and form a
part of this article.
§ 477-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, all the definitions referenced in the abovelisted
rules, regulations and policies of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services, Water Division and the Water Supply Engineering
Bureau, and amendments thereto form a part of this article.
§ 477-32. Inventory of potential contaminant sites (PCS).
§ 477-33. Water resources management program.
A. An inventory of potential contaminant sites (PCS) shall be developed by
the Town Health Officer or his (or her) agent, identifying the location,
property owner, type and quantity of the potential contaminant
substance. A preliminary on-site inspection and interview will be
conducted at each location in the inventory.
B. The inventory of PCS sites will be maintained by the Health Officer or
his (or her) agent and shall be updated at intervals not to exceed three
years. Unannounced inspections will be performed at random intervals
to determine compliance with the water resources management
program outlined in § 477-33.
152. Editor's Note: This article was adopted at a joint meeting with the Windham Board of
Selectmen and approved by the Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services on 11-4-1995.
§ 477-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-33
1:449
§ 477-34. Penalties.
Failure to comply with this article may result in appropriate action,
including prosecution taken by local, state or federal authorities.
A. Best management practices (BMP) are as defined in the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services rules and
regulations referenced in § 477-30 above.
B. The Town of Salem shall be notified by the responsible person of any
spills or releases of regulated contaminant or petroleum products as
soon as possible, not to exceed 24 hours of the occurrence. Notification
shall include time, date, location, volume, material type and all other
information necessary to assess the impact on public health and the
environment. This notification shall not waive notification to the state
and federal agencies where applicable.
§ 477-33 SALEM CODE § 477-34
1:450
ARTICLE VIII
Manufactured Housing Parks
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1-6-2014 (Ch. 304, Art. VII, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 477-35. Master meter.
§ 477-36. Individual customer meters for manufactured housing
park tenants.
A. All manufactured housing parks, which exist at the time of the adoption
of this article or are subsequently constructed, and which obtain water
service from the Town, will do so through a master meter. The master
meter and meter assembly shall be owned and maintained by the Town
of Salem. The master meter shall be located in a meter pit designed to
permit access for maintenance and to maintain a proper operating
environment for the meter and meter reading equipment. Bills for
water usage measured by the master meter shall be prepared on a
billing cycle commensurate with other commercial properties in the
Town of Salem and sent to the manufactured housing park owners or
their agents.
B. For new manufactured housing parks, or for new master meter pits at
existing manufactured housing parks, the design and final construction
of the master meter pit must be approved by the Utilities Manager,
Public Works Department.153
C. The manufactured housing park owner is responsible for maintaining
the master meter pit in a manner that allows the Town access for
maintenance and provides for the proper operation of the master meter
and meter reading equipment.
A. In accordance with RSA 205-A:6, II, manufactured housing park owners
may shift responsibility for payment of water and sewer service to their
tenants. The manufactured housing park owner is responsible for the
cost associated with this shift, including the cost of furnishing and
installing a water meter for each manufactured home.
B. Each new or replaced manufactured home's water meter must be
located within the home's living space or in an approved meter pit (see
Subsection C). Each manufactured home shall have a separate shutoff
at a location accessible to Water Division personnel.154
(1) Existing manufactured homes installed prior to January 13, 2014,
shall be allowed to have the water meter installed under the
manufactured home in the waterline, provided that the meter is
installed in an accessible location to Water Division personnel and
is installed horizontally.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-36
1:451
(2) The manufactured home owner shall provide and maintain a ball
valve on both sides of the meter with an in-line backflow preventer.
The manufactured home owner shall be responsible for providing
and maintaining adequate heat tape, heating cable and insulation
of the waterline. Meters shall be protected by a Styrofoam
insulating jacket or equivalent which can be purchased from the
Town of Salem, New Hampshire.
(3) The Town of Salem, New Hampshire, its personnel, subcontractors
or agents shall not be responsible for damage to siding, skirting,
heat tape, etc., while servicing meters and Town equipment.
C. The construction of the meter pit must meet the Salem Public Works
Department, Water Division's Water Distribution System Material and
Construction Specifications (see Section W-5, Meter Vaults and Pits). All
water meters and meter reading equipment at each manufactured
home must meet the current specifications of the Salem Public Works
Department, Water Division.155
D. Each meter location shall be, and shall remain, easily accessible for the
installation and future maintenance of the meter and meter assembly.
Each location shall be approved by the Utilities Manager, Public Works
Department.156
E. The meter conversion must be completed 90 days after notice or by the
January 1, 2015, deadline. Once the conversion is complete for all
homes in the manufactured housing park, the Town of Salem will
directly bill the tenants for their water usage and for the associated
sewer usage, in accordance with the same procedures used for billing
other residential customers in Salem.
F. The water usage shown on the water bill prepared for the manufactured
housing park owner's master meter will be reduced by an amount equal
to the sum of the water usage of all tenants. The bills will clearly show
the master meter readings and the total tenant water usage for the
billing period. For billing purposes, the net usage at the master meter
will not be less than zero. The readings for the master meter and for the
tenant meters will be made on the same day.
G. For parks which already have master meters and tenant meters at the
time of the adoption of this article, the billing procedures described in
the foregoing subsection shall begin as of the date of adoption of this
article.
H. In the event of nonpayment of any water service account owed to the
Town by a tenant of the park, the Town reserves the right to enter the
park and, following existing laws, ordinances, regulations, and/or the
procedures which the Town has established for the collection of water
accounts owed to it by other users of the Town's water system, may take
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 477-36 SALEM CODE § 477-36
1:452
§ 477-37. Park owner responsible for water distribution
infrastructure.
appropriate steps to collect such account, including but not limited to
shutting off water service to the individual tenant.
I. The Town will also enter the park, including the lots of individual
manufactured housing park tenants, at all reasonable and/or necessary
times for the purpose of reading, repairing, and disconnecting the
water meters within the park.
A. The manufactured housing park owner owns and is responsible for
maintaining water distribution mains, service connections, and
appurtenances located on his property. Such maintenance shall include
but is not necessarily limited to detecting and correcting leakage and
protecting against backflow, cross-connections, and any other sanitary
hazards that may affect the public water system or affect water
consumed by tenants of the park.
B. If water quality at the master meter meets required state and federal
drinking water quality standards but the quality of water as measured
at any tap within the park falls below required state or federal
standards, the manufactured housing park owner shall be responsible
for restoring the water quality to such standards, at the manufactured
housing park owner's expense.
C. The manufactured housing park owner will provide the Town with
copies of all existing and future records and/or plans regarding the
location and specifications of the component parts of the water system
located within the park, including but not limited to plans regarding the
location of all individual shutoffs and meters.
§ 477-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-37
1:453

ARTICLE IX
Customer Water Meter Testing
[Adopted by the Board of Selectmen 1-6-2014 (Ch. 304, Art. VIII, of
the 1995 Code)]
§ 477-38. Meter testing at customer request for meters less than
four inches in size.
A. The Town of Salem water system is not under the jurisdiction of the
New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (NHPUC). Nevertheless,
the Town has reviewed NHPUC's meter testing procedures and has
elected to implement some of their provisions in this article.
B. A customer may request in writing to the Utilities Manager that the
Town test a water meter less than four inches. The Town requires a
deposit of 100% of the testing fee to be paid by the customer with the
request, in accordance with the fee schedule established per § 477-19.
Fee schedule is sent by separate e-mail.
C. For meters of size one inch and smaller testing will be performed
directly by the Town. For meters larger than one inch but smaller than
four inches the Town will not perform the testing directly but instead
will arrange to have the meters tested by a testing firm. The Town and
any such testing firm shall utilize testing facilities, equipment and
procedures consistent with those in NHPUC regulation Puc 605.06.
D. If desired by the customer, the Town will allow the customer or an agent
to be present when the Town conducts the meter test of one-inch and
smaller meters.
E. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(c), the meter test flows
shall be as follows:
Test Flows in Gallons per Minute (gpm)
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum Medium Maximum
5/8 1/4 2 15
3/4 1/2 3 25
1 3/4 4 40
1.5 1.5 8 50
2 2 15 100
3 4 20 150
F. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(e), the percent error of
registration shall be taken as the algebraic sum of the errors at the
medium and maximum rates of test flow, as set forth in the table above,
divided by two.
§ 477-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-38
1:455
§ 477-39. Required testing of large meters by water customers.
Meters four inches and greater in size are required to have the meter tested
every four years at customer expense.
G. The Town will furnish the customer a test record with all data from the
test.
H. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(d), the meter shall be
determined to be inaccurate and will not be returned to service if:
(1) The percent error of registration exceeds 103% or is less than 97%;
or
(2) The registration at the minimum flow exceeds 103% or is less than
90%.
I. The deposit paid by the customer with the meter test request shall be
refunded to the customer if the meter is determined to be inaccurate.
J. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.05, adjustments to the
customer's water bill (and, if applicable, sewer bill) shall be made as
follows:
(1) When the percentage error of registration exceeds 103% of the
correct amount, the Town shall refund an amount equal to the
charge for the excess billed for the shorter of the following:
(a) The previous 12 months;
(b) A period equal to 1/2 the time elapsed since the last test; or
(c) The period of occupancy by the customer.
(2) When the percentage error of registration is below 97% of the
correct amount, the Town shall charge the customer for the
unbilled amount for the shorter of:
(a) The previous 12 months;
(b) A period equal to 1/2 the time elapsed since the last test; or
(c) The period of occupancy by the customer.
A. Customers whose water meters are four inches or larger in size shall
test those meters periodically in accordance with this article.
B. Meter testing shall be conducted and the results reported to the Town
within four days of whichever of the following applies:
(1) The Town's installation of a new meter under the Town-wide meter
replacement program which began in 2011;
(2) Installation of a meter on a new service at any time from 2011 on;
and/or
§ 477-38 SALEM CODE § 477-39
1:456
(3) The prior meter test conducted under this article.
C. The Town shall endeavor to mail to the customer a reminder of the need
for this testing six months before the due date.
D. The customer's meter testing firm must utilize testing facilities,
equipment and procedures consistent with those in NHPUC regulation
Puc 605.06, and the testing report must include a signed certification
statement to that effect. The testing report shall contain all data and
calculations associated with the test. The customer shall furnish the
testing report to the Utilities Manager.
E. Should the customer not perform the required meter testing within the
schedule indicated above, the Town has the right to engage a meter
testing firm to perform the test and shall bill the customer for all costs
of the test plus a surcharge in accordance with the fee schedule
established per § 477-19.
F. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(c), the meter test flows
shall be as follows:
Test Flows in Gallons per Minute (gpm)
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum Medium Maximum
4 7 40 200
6 12 60 500
(1) For meters of larger size, test flows shall be agreed to by the Town,
customer, and the customer's testing firm before the tests are
performed.
G. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(e), the percent error of
registration shall be taken as the algebraic sum of the errors at the
medium and maximum rates of test flow, as set forth in the table above,
divided by two.
H. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.03(d), the meter shall be
determined to be inaccurate and will be replaced at the Town's expense
if:
(1) The percent error of registration exceeds 103% or is less than 97%;
or
(2) The registration at the minimum flow exceeds 103% or is less than
90%.
I. Consistent with NHPUC regulation Puc 605.05, adjustments to the
customer's water bill (and, if applicable, sewer bill) shall be made as
follows:
§ 477-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 477-39
1:457
(1) When the percentage error of registration exceeds 103% of the
correct amount, the Town shall refund an amount equal to the
charge for the excess billed for the shorter of the following:
(a) The previous 12 months;
(b) A period equal to 1/2 the time elapsed since the last test; or
(c) The period of occupancy by the customer.
(2) When the percentage error of registration is below 97% of the
correct amount, the Town shall charge the customer for the
unbilled amount for the shorter of:
(a) The previous 12 months;
(b) A period equal to 1/2 the time elapsed since the last test; or
(c) The period of occupancy by the customer.
§ 477-39 SALEM CODE § 477-39
1:458
Chapter 482
WELFARE GUIDELINES
§ 482-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any health, social service or other entity that provides services
to a client. Any such entity to which a welfare official may refer a client for
additional resources and/or assistance.
APPLICANT — A person who expresses a desire to receive general
assistance or to have his/her eligibility reviewed and whose application
has not been withdrawn. This may be expressed either in person or by an
authorized representative of the applicant.
APPLICATION (REAPPLICATION) — Written action by which a person
requests assistance from a welfare official. This application must be made
on a form provided by the welfare official. The application form may be
written or completed electronically by means of an interview conducted by
a welfare official and verified by the applicant's signature.
ASSETS — All cash, real property, personal property and future assets
owned by the applicant.
AVAILABLE LIQUID ASSETS — Amount of liquid assets after exclusions
enumerated in § 482-8D. Includes cash on hand, checking accounts, bank
deposits, credit union accounts, stocks, bonds, and securities. Individual
retirement accounts (IRA), 401k accounts, insurance policies with a loan
value, and nonessential personal property shall be considered as available
liquid assets when they have been converted into cash.
CASE RECORD — Official files containing forms, correspondence and
narrative records pertaining to the application, including determination of
eligibility, reasons for decisions and actions by the welfare official, and
kinds of assistance given. The case record may be kept electronically. A hard
copy of all signed documents should be kept.
CLAIMANT — A recipient or applicant who has requested, either in person
or through an authorized representative, a fair hearing under § 482-13 of
these guidelines.
CLIENT — An individual who receives services from the Welfare
Department. May be a single person or encompass a family.
ELIGIBILITY — Determination by a welfare official, in accordance with the
guidelines, of an applicant's need for general assistance under the formula
provided in § 482-8.
FAIR HEARING — A hearing which the applicant or recipient may request
to contest a denial, termination or reduction of assistance. The standards
for such a hearing are in § 482-13.
§ 477-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-1
1:459
GENERAL ASSISTANCE — Financial assistance provided to applicants in
accordance with RSA 165 and these guidelines.
HOUSEHOLD —
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
NEED — The basic maintenance and support requirements of an applicant,
as determined by a welfare official under the standards of § 482-8E of these
guidelines.
RECIPIENT — A person who is receiving general assistance.
RELIEVE AND MAINTAIN — The sustaining of basic needs necessary to the
health and welfare of the household.
RESIDENCE or RESIDENCY — An applicant's place of abode or domicile.
The place of abode or domicile is that place designated by an applicant,
unless there is clear evidence otherwise, as his or her principal place of
physical presence for the indefinite future to the exclusion of all others.
Such residence or residency shall not be interrupted or lost by a temporary
absence from it, if there is an intent to return to such residence or residency
as the principal place of physical presence. RSA 165:1, I; RSA 21:6-a.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — All persons physically residing with the applicant,
including persons in the applicant's household and those not within the
household.
SHELTER — A temporary housing provider through which an individual or
family may seek emergency housing until permanent housing can be found.
UTILITY — Any service such as electric, gas, oil, water or sewer necessary
to maintain the health and welfare of the household.
VENDOR/PROVIDER — Any landlord, utility company, store or other
business which provides goods or services needed by the applicant/
recipient.
VOUCHER SYSTEM — The system whereby a municipality issues vouchers
to the recipient's vendors and providers rather than cash to the recipient.
RSA 165:1, III. See § 482-7.
WELFARE OFFICIAL — The official of the municipality, or designee, who
performs the function of administering general assistance. Such person has
The applicant/recipient and persons residing with the applicant/
recipient in the relationship of father, mother, stepfather, stepmother,
son, daughter, husband, wife, or domestic partner; and/or
A.
The applicant/recipient and any adult (including an unrelated person)
who resides with the applicant/recipient "in loco parentis" (in the role
of a substitute parent) to a minor child (a person under 18 years of age).
A person "in loco parentis" is one who intentionally accepts the rights
and duties of a natural parent with respect to a child not his or her own
and who has lived with the child long enough to form a "psychological
family."
B.
§ 482-1 SALEM CODE § 482-1
1:460
the authority to make all decisions regarding the granting of assistance
under RSA 165, subject to the overall fiscal responsibility vested in the
Selectmen or Town Manager. The term includes "overseers of public
welfare" (RSA 165:1; RSA 41:46) and "administrator of town or city welfare"
(RSA 165:2).157
WORK PROGRAM — Labor performed by welfare recipients at municipal
sites or human service agencies as reimbursement for benefits received.
RSA 165:31.
§ 482-2. Confidentiality of information.
Information given by or about an applicant or recipient of general
assistance is confidential and privileged and is not a public record under the
provisions of RSA 91-A. Such information will not be published, released, or
discussed with any individual or agency without written permission of the
applicant or recipient, except when disclosure is required by law, or when
necessary to carry out the purposes of RSA 165. RSA 165:2-c.
§ 482-3. Roles of local governing body and welfare official.
The responsibility of the day-to-day administration of the general assistance
program should be vested in the appointed welfare official. The welfare
official shall administer the general assistance program in accordance with
the written guidelines of the municipality. The local governing body, the
Selectmen, is responsible for the adoption of the guidelines relative to
general assistance. RSA 165:1, II.
§ 482-4. Maintenance of records.
A. Legal requirement. Each welfare official is required by law to keep
complete paper and/or electronic records concerning the number of
applicants given assistance and the cost for such support. Separate
case records shall be established for each individual or family applying
for general assistance. The purposes for keeping such records are:
(1) To provide a valid basis of accounting for expenditure of the
municipality's funds;
(2) To support decisions concerning the applicant's eligibility;
(3) To assure availability of information if the applicant or recipient
seeks administrative or judicial review of the welfare official's
decision;
(4) To provide the welfare official with accurate statistical information;
and
(5) To provide a complete history of an applicant's needs and
assistance that might aid the welfare official in ongoing case
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-4
1:461
§ 482-5. Application process.
management and in referring the applicant to appropriate
agencies.
B. Case records. The welfare official shall maintain case records
containing the following information:
(1) The complete application including any authorizations signed by
the applicant allowing the welfare official to obtain or verify any
pertinent information in the course of assisting the recipient, to
include a signed "Authorization for the Release of Information"
from the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services. See Appendix E, Form B.158
(2) Written grounds for approval or denial of an application, contained
in a notice of decision. See Appendix E, Form L; see also Appendix
B.159
(3) A narrative history recording need for assistance, the results of
investigations of applicants' circumstances, referrals, changes in
status, etc.
(4) A tally sheet, which has complete data concerning the type, amount
and dates of assistance given, which may be kept on paper or
electronically.
A. Right to apply.
(1) Anyone may apply for general assistance by appearing in person or
through an authorized representative and by completing a written
or electronic application form. If more than one adult resides in a
household, each may be required to appear at the welfare office to
apply for assistance, unless one is working or otherwise reasonably
unavailable. Unrelated adults in the applicant's residential unit
may be required to apply separately if they do not meet the
definition of "household" as defined in these guidelines. Each adult
in the household may be requested to sign release of information
forms.
(2) The welfare official shall not be required to accept an application
for general assistance from a recipient who is subject to a
suspension pursuant to § 482-12C of these guidelines (RSA 165:1-b,
VI), provided that any applicant who contests a determination of
continuing noncompliance with the guidelines may request a fair
hearing as provided in § 482-12C(7), and provided further that a
recipient who has been suspended for at least six months due to
noncompliance may file a new application.
158. Editor's Note: Form B is on file at the office of the welfare official.
159. Editor's Note: Form L and Appendix B are on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-4 SALEM CODE § 482-5
1:462
B. Welfare official's responsibilities at time of application. When
application is made for general assistance, the welfare official shall
inform the applicant of:
(1) The requirement of submitting an application. The welfare official
shall provide assistance to the applicant in completing the
application, if necessary (e.g., applicant is physically or mentally
unable, or has a language barrier);
(2) Eligibility requirements, including a general description of the
guidelines and the eligibility formula;
(3) The applicant's right to a fair hearing, and the manner in which a
review may be obtained;
(4) The applicant's responsibility for reporting all facts necessary to
determine eligibility and for presenting records and documents as
requested and as reasonably available to support statements;
(5) The joint responsibility of the welfare official and applicant for
exploring facts concerning eligibility, needs and resources;
(6) The kinds of verifications needed;
(7) The fact that an investigation will be conducted in order to verify
facts and statements presented by the applicant;
(8) The applicant's responsibility to notify the welfare official of any
change in circumstances that may affect eligibility;
(9) Other forms of assistance for which the applicant may be eligible;
(10) The availability of the welfare official to make home visits by
mutually agreed appointment to take applications and to conduct
ongoing case management when necessary for applicants who
cannot leave their homes;
(11) The requirement of placing a lien on any real property owned by
the recipient, or any civil judgments or property settlements, for
any assistance given, except for good cause;
(12) The fact that reimbursement from the recipient will be sought if he/
she becomes able to repay the amount of assistance given; and
(13) The applicant's right to review the guidelines.
C. Responsibility of each applicant and recipient.
(1) At the time of initial application, and at all times thereafter, the
applicant/recipient has the following responsibilities:
(a) To provide accurate, complete and current information
concerning needs and resources and the whereabouts and
§ 482-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-5
1:463
circumstances of relatives who may be responsible under RSA
165:19;
(b) To notify the welfare official promptly when there is a change
in needs, resources, address or household size;
(c) To apply for immediately, but no later than seven days from
initial application, and accept any benefits or resources, public
or private, that will reduce or eliminate the need for general
assistance. RSA 165:1-b, I(d);
(d) To keep all appointments as scheduled;
(e) To provide records and other pertinent information and access
to said records and information when requested;
(f) To provide a doctor's statement if claiming an inability to work
due to medical problems;
(g) Following a determination of eligibility for assistance, to
diligently search for employment and provide verification of
work search (the number of work search contacts to be
determined by the welfare official), to accept employment
when offered [except for documented reasons of good cause
(RSA 165:1-d)], and to maintain such employment. RSA
165:1-b, I(c);
(h) Following a determination of eligibility for assistance, to
participate in the work program if physically and mentally
able. RSA 165:1-b, I(b); and
(i) To reimburse assistance granted if returned to an income
status and if such reimbursement can be made without
financial hardship. RSA 165:20-b.
(2) An applicant shall be denied assistance if he/she fails to fulfill any
of these responsibilities without reasonable justification. A
recipient's assistance may be terminated or suspended for failure
to fulfill any of these responsibilities without reasonable
justification, in accordance with § 482-12C.
(3) Any recipient may be denied or terminated from general
assistance, in accordance with § 482-12, or may be prosecuted for a
criminal offense, if he/she, by means of intentionally false
statements or intentional misrepresentation, or by impersonation
or other willfully fraudulent act or device, obtains or attempts to
obtain any assistance to which he/she is not entitled.
D. Actions on applications.
(1) Decision. Unless an application is withdrawn, the welfare official
shall make a decision concerning the applicant's eligibility
immediately, in the case of emergency, or within five working days
§ 482-5 SALEM CODE § 482-5
1:464
after submission of the application. A written notice of decision
shall be given in hand, delivered or mailed on the same day or next
working day following the making of the decision. The notice of
decision shall state that assistance of a specific kind and amount
has been given and the time period of aid, or that the application
has been denied, in whole or in part, with reasons for denial. A
decision may also be made to pend an application subject to receipt
of specified information from the applicant. The notice of decision
shall contain a first notice of conditions for continued assistance
and shall notify the applicant of his/her right to a fair hearing if
dissatisfied with the welfare official's decision. RSA 165:1-b, II and
III.
(2) Emergency assistance. If, at the time of initial contact, the
applicant demonstrates and verifies that an immediate need exists,
because of which the applicant may suffer a loss of a basic
necessity of living or imminent threat to life or health (such as loss
of shelter, utilities or heat or lack of food or prescriptions), then
temporary aid to fill such immediate need shall be given
immediately, pending a decision on the application. Such
emergency assistance shall not obligate the welfare official to
provide further assistance after the application process is
completed.
(3) Temporary assistance. In circumstances where required records
are not available, the welfare official may give temporary approval
of an application pending receipt of required documents.
Temporary status shall not extend beyond two weeks. The welfare
official shall not insist on documentary verification if such records
are totally unavailable.
(4) Withdrawn applications. An application shall be considered
withdrawn if:
(a) The applicant has refused to complete an application or has
refused to make a good faith effort to provide required
verifications and sufficient information for the completion of an
application. If an application is deemed withdrawn for these
reasons, the welfare official shall so notify the applicant in a
written notice of decision;
(b) The applicant dies before assistance is rendered;
(c) The applicant avails him/herself of other resources to meet the
need in place of assistance;
(d) The applicant requests that the application be withdrawn
(preferably in writing); or
(e) The applicant does not contact the welfare official after the
initial interview after being requested to do so.
§ 482-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-5
1:465
§ 482-6. Verification of information.
Any determination or investigation of need or eligibility shall be conducted
in a manner that will not violate the privacy or personal dignity of the
individual or harass or violate his or her individual rights.
E. Home visits.
(1) A home visit may be made by appointment at the request of any
applicant only when it is impossible for the applicant or his or her
representative to apply in person.
(2) The home visit shall be conducted in such a manner as to preserve,
to the greatest extent possible, the privacy and dignity of the
applicant. To this end, the person conducting the visit shall not be
in uniform or travel in a law enforcement vehicle, shall be polite
and courteous, and shall not knowingly discuss or mention the
application within the listening area of someone who is not a
member of the household.
A. Required verifications. Verification will normally be required of the
following:
(1) Applicant's address;
(2) Facts relevant to the applicant's residence, as set forth in §§ 482-8B
and 482-9;
(3) Names of persons in applicant's residential unit;
(4) Applicant's and household's income and assets;
(5) Applicant's and household's financial obligations;
(6) The physical and mental condition of household members, only
where relevant to their receipt of assistance, such as ability to
work, determination of needs, or referrals to other forms of
assistance;
(7) Any special circumstances claimed by applicant;
(8) Applicant's employment status and availability in the labor market;
(9) Names, addresses, and employment status of potentially liable
relatives;
(10) Utility costs;
(11) Housing costs;
(12) Prescription costs; and
(13) Any other costs that the applicant wishes to claim as a necessity.
§ 482-5 SALEM CODE § 482-6
1:466
§ 482-7. Disbursements.
B. Verification records. Verification may be made through records
provided by the applicant (for example, birth and marriage certificates,
pay stubs, pay checks, rent receipts, bankbooks, bank statements, etc.)
as primary sources. The failure of the applicant to bring such records
does not affect the welfare official's responsibility to process the
application promptly. The welfare official shall inform the applicant
what records are necessary, and the applicant is required to produce
records possessed as soon as possible. However, the welfare official
shall not insist on documentary verification if such records are not
available, but should ask the applicant to suggest alternative means of
verification.
C. Other sources of verification. Verification may also be made through
other sources, such as relatives, employers, former employers, banks,
school personnel, and social or government agencies. The cashier of a
national bank or a treasurer of a savings and trust company is
authorized by law to furnish information regarding amounts deposited
to the credit of an applicant or recipient. RSA 165:4.
D. Written consent of applicant. When information is sought from such
other sources, the welfare official shall explain to the applicant or
recipient what information is desired, how it will be used, and the
necessity of obtaining it in order to establish eligibility. Before contact
is made with any other source, the welfare official shall obtain written
consent of the applicant or recipient, unless the welfare official has
reasonable grounds to suspect fraud. In the case of suspected fraud, the
welfare official shall carefully record his/her reasons and actions, and
before any accusation or confrontation is made, the applicant shall be
given an opportunity to explain or clarify the suspicious circumstances.
E. Legally liable relatives. The welfare official may seek statements from
the applicant's legally liable relatives regarding their ability to help
support the applicant.
F. Refusal to verify information. Should the applicant or recipient refuse
comment and/or indicate an unwillingness to have the welfare official
seek further information that is necessary, assistance may be denied for
lack of eligibility verification.
A. The municipality pays in a voucher system (RSA 165:1, III). Vouchers
are payable directly to the vendors (utilities, landlords, stores, etc.)
involved. Landlords are verified through the application process and
notified in written decisions.
B. The amount shown on the voucher is the maximum amount to be used
for payment. In accordance with the municipality's accounting
practices, a recipient may be required to sign the voucher to ensure
proper usage. The vendor returns the voucher with the required
documentation, for payment, to the welfare official. After the initial
§ 482-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-7
1:467
§ 482-8. Determination of eligibility and amount.
transaction, if there is any unspent money, the voucher shall be
returned to the municipality for payment of the actual amount listed on
an itemized bill or register tape. Vouchers altered by the recipient or
vendor may not be honored.
A. Eligibility formula. An applicant is eligible to receive assistance when:
(1) He/she meets the nonfinancial eligibility factors listed in
Subsection C below; and
(2) The applicant's basic maintenance need, as determined under
Subsection E below, exceeds his/her available income (Subsection
F below) plus available liquid assets (Subsection D below). If
available income and available liquid assets exceed the basic
maintenance need (as determined by the guideline amounts), the
applicant is not eligible for general assistance. If the need exceeds
the available income/assets, the amount of assistance granted to
the applicant shall be the difference between the two amounts, in
the absence of circumstances deemed by the welfare official to
justify an exception.
B. Legal standard and interpretation. "Whenever a person in any town is
poor and unable to support himself, he shall be relieved and maintained
by the overseers of public welfare of such town, whether or not he has
residence there." RSA 165:1.
(1) An applicant cannot be denied assistance because he/she is not a
resident. See § 482-9.
(2) "Whenever" means at any or whatever time that person is poor and
unable to support him/herself.
(a) The welfare official, or a person authorized to act on his/her
behalf, shall be available during normal business hours.
(b) The eligibility of any applicant for general assistance shall be
determined no later than five working days after the
application is submitted. If the applicant has an emergency
need, then assistance for such emergency need shall be
immediately provided in accordance with § 482-5D(1) and (2).
(c) Assistance shall begin as soon as the applicant is determined to
be eligible.
(3) "Poor and unable to support" means that an individual lacks income
and available liquid assets to adequately provide for the basic
maintenance needs of him/herself or family as determined by the
guidelines.
(4) "Relieved" means an applicant shall be assisted to meet those basic
needs.
§ 482-7 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:468
C. Nonfinancial eligibility factors.
(1) Age. General assistance cannot be denied any applicant because of
the applicant's age; age is not a factor in determining whether or
not an applicant may receive general assistance. Minor children
are assumed to be the responsibility of their parent(s) or legal
guardian(s), unless circumstances warrant otherwise.
(2) Support actions. No applicant or recipient shall be compelled, as a
condition of eligibility or continued receipt of assistance, to take
any legal action against any other person. The municipality may
pursue recovery against legally liable persons or governmental
units. See § 482-15.
(3) Eligibility for other categorical assistance. Recipients who are, or
may be, eligible for any other form of public assistance must apply
for such assistance immediately, but no later than seven days after
being advised to do so by the welfare official. Failure to do so may
render the recipient ineligible for assistance and subject to action
pursuant to § 482-12 of these guidelines.
(4) Employment. An applicant who is gainfully employed, but whose
income and assets are not sufficient to meet necessary household
expenses, may be eligible to receive general assistance. However,
recipients who without good cause refuse a job offer or referral to
suitable employment or participation in the work program, or who
voluntarily leave a job without good cause, may be ineligible for
continuing general assistance in accordance with the procedures
for suspension outlined in the guidelines. The welfare official shall
first determine whether there is good cause for such refusal, taking
into account the ability and physical and mental capacity of the
applicant, transportation problems, working conditions that might
involve risks to health or safety, lack of adequate child care, or any
other factors that might make refusing a job reasonable. These
employment requirements shall extend to all adult members of the
household.
(5) Registration with the New Hampshire Department of Employment
Security (NHES) and work search requirements.
(a) All unemployed recipients and adult members of their
households shall, within seven days after having been granted
assistance, register with NHES to find work and must conduct
a reasonable, verified job search as determined by the welfare
official. Each recipient must apply for employment to each
employer to whom he/she is referred by the welfare official.
These work search requirements apply unless the recipient
and each other adult member of the household is:
[1] Gainfully employed full-time;
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-8
1:469
[2] A dependent 18 or under who is regularly attending
secondary school;
[3] Unable to work due to illness or mental or physical
disability of him/herself or another member of the
household, as verified by the welfare official; or
[4] Solely responsible for the care of a child under the age of
five (RSA 165:31, III). A recipient responsible for the care
of a child aged five to 12 shall not be excused from work
search requirements but shall be deemed to have good
cause to refuse a job requiring work during hours the child
is not usually in school, if there is no responsible person
available to provide care, and it is verified by the welfare
official that no other care is available.
(b) The welfare official shall give all necessary and reasonable
assistance to ensure compliance with registration and work
requirements, including the granting of allowances for
transportation and work clothes. Failure of a recipient to
comply with these requirements without good cause will be
reason for denial of assistance.
(6) Students. Applicants who are college students not available for or
refusing to seek full-time employment are not eligible for general
assistance.
(7) Noncitizens. The welfare officer may, in his/her sole discretion,
provide limited assistance to noncitizens not otherwise eligible for
general assistance.
(a) A noncitizen who is not a qualified alien under 8 U.S.C.A.
§ 1641, a nonimmigrant under the federal Immigration and
Nationality Act, or an alien paroled into the United States for
less than one year under 8 U.S.C.A. § 1182(d)(5) is not eligible
for general assistance from the municipality. 8 U.S.C.A.
§ 1621(a).
(b) Qualified aliens include aliens who are lawfully admitted for
permanent residence under the Immigration and Nationality
Act (8 U.S.C.A. § 1101 et seq.), aliens who are granted asylum
under that act, certain refugees, and certain battered aliens. 8
U.S.C.A. § 1641.
(c) A noncitizen who is not eligible for general assistance may be
eligible for state assistance with health care items and services
that are necessary for the treatment of an emergency medical
condition, which is defined as a medical condition (including
emergency labor and delivery) manifesting itself by acute
symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such
that the absence of immediate medical attention could
reasonably be expected to result in:
§ 482-8 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:470
[1] Placing the patient's health in serious jeopardy;
[2] Serious impairment to bodily functions; or
[3] Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part. 8 U.S.C.A.
§ 1621(b) and 42 U.S.C.A. § 1396b(v)(3).160
(d) A noncitizen may also be eligible for general assistance for
treatment of an emergency medical condition, pursuant to
§ 482-8E(8)(a) of these guidelines.
(e) Noncitizen applicants for general assistance may be required
to provide proof of eligibility.
(8) Property transfers. No applicant who is otherwise eligible shall
receive such assistance if he/she has made an assignment, transfer,
or conveyance of property for the purpose of rendering him/herself
eligible for assistance within three years immediately preceding
his/her application. RSA 165:2-b.
(9) Employment of household members.
(a) The employment requirements of these guidelines, or
participation in the workfare program, shall be required for all
adults aged 18 to 65 years residing in the same household,
except those regularly attending secondary school or employed
on a full-time basis, who are:
[1] Members of the recipient's household;
[2] Legally liable to contribute to the support of the recipient
and/or children of the household; and
[3] Not prevented from maintaining employment and
contributing to the support of the household by reason of
physical or mental disability or other justifiable cause as
verified by the welfare official.
(b) The welfare official may waive this requirement where failure
of the other household members to comply is not the fault of
the recipient and the welfare official decides it would be
unreasonable for the recipient to establish a separate
household. RSA 165:32.
(10) Disqualification for voluntary termination of employment.
(a) Any applicant eligible for assistance who voluntarily
terminated employment shall be ineligible to receive
assistance for 90 days from the date of employment
termination, provided that the applicant:
[1] Has received local welfare within the past 365 days;
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-8
1:471
[2] Has been given notice that voluntary termination of
employment without good cause could result in
disqualification;
[3] Has terminated employment of at least 20 hours per week
without good cause within 60 days of an application for
local welfare;
[4] Is not responsible for supporting minor children in his/her
household; and
[5] Did not have a mental or physical impairment which
caused him/her to be unable to work.
(b) Good cause for terminating employment shall include any of
the following: discrimination, unreasonable work demands or
unsuitable employment, retirement, leaving a job in order to
accept a bona fide job offer, migrant farm labor or seasonal
construction, and lack of transportation or child care. An
applicant shall be considered to have voluntarily terminated
employment if the applicant fails to report for work without
good cause. An applicant who is fired or resigns from a job at
the request of the employer due to applicant's inability to
maintain the employer's normal work productivity standard
shall not be considered to have voluntarily terminated
employment. RSA 165:1-d.
D. Available assets.
(1) Available liquid assets. Cash on hand, bank deposits, credit union
accounts, securities and retirement plans (i.e., IRAs, deferred
compensation, Keoghs, etc.) are available liquid assets. Insurance
policies with a loan value and nonessential personal property may
be considered as available liquid assets when they have been
converted into cash. The welfare official shall allow a reasonable
time for such conversion. However, tools of a trade, livestock and
farm equipment, and necessary and ordinary household goods are
essential items of personal property which shall not be considered
as available assets.
(2) Automobile ownership. The ownership of one automobile by an
applicant/recipient or his/her dependent does not affect eligibility if
it is essential for transportation to seek or maintain employment, to
procure medical services or rehabilitation services, or if its use is
essential to the maintenance of the individual or the family.
(3) Insurance. The ownership of insurance policies does not affect
eligibility. However, when a policy has cash or loan value, the
recipient will be required to obtain and/or borrow all available
funds, which shall then be considered available liquid assets.
§ 482-8 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:472
(4) Real estate. The type and amount of real estate owned by an
applicant does not affect eligibility, although rent or other such
income from property shall be considered as available to meet
need. Applicants owning real estate property, other than that
occupied as their primary residence, shall be expected to make
reasonable efforts to dispose of it at fair market value. Applicants
shall be informed that a lien covering the amount of any general
assistance they receive shall be placed against any real estate they
own. RSA 165:28.
E. Standard of need. The basic financial requirement for general
assistance is that an applicant be poor and unable to support him/
herself. An applicant shall be considered poor when he/she has
insufficient available income/assets to purchase either for him/herself
or dependents any of the following:
(1) Shelter. The amount to be included as "need" for shelter is the
actual cost of rent or mortgage necessary to provide shelter in that
municipality for the current month, or other rental period if
deemed appropriate by the welfare official. All requests for rental
or mortgage assistance will be reviewed based on a consideration
of the applicant's ability to pay future rent or mortgage payments.
(a) Shelter arrearages. Shelter arrearages will be included in the
"need" formula if, and only if, such payment is necessary to
prevent eviction or foreclosure or to protect the health and
safety of the household. However, if the amount of such
mortgage or rental arrearage substantially exceeds the cost of
alternative, available housing which complies with local health
and housing code standards, or if the payment of arrears will
not prevent eviction or foreclosure, the welfare official may
instead authorize payment of security deposit, rent, and/or
reasonable relocation expenses for such alternative housing if,
under the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable to do so
and would not cause undue hardship to the applicant
household. Alternative housing may include transitional
housing as an option.
(b) Security deposits. Security deposits may be included in the
"need" formula if, and only if, the applicant is unable to secure
alternative shelter for which no security deposit is required or
is unable to secure funds, either him/herself or from
alternative sources, for payment of the deposit. Any security
deposit provided by the general assistance program which is
returned under RSA 540-A:7 shall be returned to the
municipality, not the recipient.
(c) Relative landlords. Whenever a relative of an applicant is also
the landlord for the applicant, a financial analysis of the
landlord shall be made in accordance with RSA 165:19.
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-8
1:473
Otherwise, an applicant is not eligible for rental assistance if
the landlord is a parent.
(d) Storage. Storage charges are not an eligible shelter expense
under the basic needs formula, unless the applicant is
homeless.
(2) Utilities. When utility costs are not included in the shelter expense,
the most recent outstanding monthly utility bill in the name of the
applicant will be included as part of "need" by the welfare official.
Arrearages will not normally be included in "need" except as set
forth below.
NOTE: The New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC)
has established comprehensive rules governing the provision of
some utility services. Generally speaking, the PUC governs electric,
telephone, water, and sewer; it does not govern any municipal
utilities, propane tanks, or fuel oil. With the exception of telephone,
the rules are consistent across utilities. These rules and regulations
cover the initiation of service, payment arrangements, termination
of service, the terms of restoration of service, the requirement of
deposits, municipal guarantees and guarantees from other third
parties. There are special rules as to winter termination. The
welfare official should be familiar with these rules in order to
ensure that needs are properly met at the lowest available cost. The
PUC has a toll-free consumer assistance number: 800-852-3793.
(a) Arrearages. Arrearages will not be included except when
necessary to ensure the health and safety of the applicant
household or to prevent termination of utility service where no
other resources or referrals can be utilized. In accordance with
the rules of the PUC relating to electric utilities, arrearages for
electric service need not be paid if the welfare official notifies
the electric company that the municipality guarantees
payment of current electric bills as long as the recipient
remains eligible for general assistance.
(b) Restoration of service.
[1] When utility service has been terminated and the welfare
official has determined that alternative utility service is
not available and alternative shelter is not feasible,
arrearages will be included in "need" when restoration of
service is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the
applicant household. The welfare official may negotiate
with the utility for payment of less than the full amount of
the arrears and/or may attempt to arrange a repayment
plan to obtain restoration of service.
[2] When electric service has been terminated and restoration
is required, arrearages may either be included as set forth
in the above subsection or may be paid in accordance with
§ 482-8 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:474
a reasonable payment plan entered into by the applicant
and the electric company. The welfare official may hold
the recipient accountable for the payment arrangement
for as long as the recipient continues to request general
assistance on a regular basis. Payment of a payment plan
may be a required element of a notice of decision or case
plan.
(c) Deposits. Utility security deposits will be considered as "need"
if, and only if, the applicant is unable to secure funds for the
payment of the deposit and is unable to secure utility service
without a deposit. Such deposits shall, however, be the
property of the municipality.
(3) Food. The amount included as "need" for food purchases will be in
accordance with the most recent standard food stamp allotment, as
determined under the food stamp program administered by the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services. An
amount in excess of the standard food allotment may be granted if
one or more members of the household need a special diet, as
verified by the welfare official, the documented cost of which is
greater than can be purchased with the family's allotment of food
stamps. Food vouchers may not be used for alcohol, tobacco, pet
food, or reading materials.
(4) Household maintenance allowance. Applicants may include, in
calculating "need," the cost of providing personal and household
necessities in an amount not to exceed these guidelines, as
determined in accordance with Subsection E(11) below. (See
Appendix A.161) Need allowance for diapers shall be calculated
based on usage.
(5) Telephone. If the absence of a telephone would create an
unreasonable risk to the applicant's health or safety (as verified by
the welfare official), or for other good cause as determined by the
welfare official, the lowest available basic monthly rate will be
budgeted as "need." While payments will not be made for telephone
bills, under exceptional circumstances where no other source of
assistance is available payments may be made to maintain basic
telephone service.
(6) Transportation. If the welfare official determines that
transportation is necessary (e.g., for health or medical reasons, to
maintain employment, or to comply with conditions of assistance),
"need" should include the costs of public transportation, where
available. If, and only if, the transportation need cannot be
reasonably provided by alternative means, such as public
transportation or volunteer drivers, a reasonable amount for car
161. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-8
1:475
payments and gasoline should be included as part of "need" when
determining eligibility or amount of aid.
(7) Maintenance of insurance. In the event that the welfare official
determines that the maintenance of medical insurance is essential,
an applicant may include as "need" the reasonable cost of such
premiums.
(8) Emergency and other expenses. In the event that the applicant has
the following current expenses, the actual cost shall be included as
emergency and other expenses to determine eligibility and amount
of assistance:
(a) Medical expenses. The welfare official shall not consider
including amounts for medical, dental or eye services unless
the applicant can verify that all other potential sources have
been investigated and that there is no source of assistance
other than local welfare. Other sources to be considered shall
include state and federal programs, local and area clinics, area
service organizations and area hospital indigent programs
designed for such needs. When an applicant requests medical
service, prescriptions, dental service or eye service, the local
welfare official may require verification from a doctor, dentist
or person licensed to practice optometry in the area, indicating
that these services are absolutely necessary and cannot be
postponed without creating a significant risk that the
applicant's well-being will be placed in serious jeopardy.
(b) Legal expenses. Except for those specifically required by
statute, no legal expenses will be included.
(c) Clothing. If the applicant has an emergency clothing need
which cannot be met in a timely fashion by other community
resources (i.e., Salvation Army, Red Cross, church group), the
expense of reasonably meeting that emergency clothing need
will be included.
(9) Unusual needs not otherwise provided for in these guidelines. If the
welfare official determines that the strict application of the
standard of need criteria will result in unnecessary or undue
hardship (e.g., needed services are inaccessible to the applicant),
such official may make minor adjustments in the criteria or may
make allowances using the emergency need standards stated in
§ 482-5D(2) of these guidelines. Any such determination, and the
reasons therefor, shall be stated in writing in the applicant's case
record.
(10) Shared expenses. If the applicant/recipient household shares
shelter, utility, or other expenses with a nonapplicant/recipient (i.e.,
is part of a residential unit), then need should be determined on a
pro rata share, based on the total number of adults in the
residential unit (e.g., three adults in residential unit, but only one
§ 482-8 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:476
applies for assistance: shelter need is 1/3 of shelter allowance for
household of three adults).
(11) Payment levels for allowable expenses. When adopting these
guidelines, the municipal governing body shall establish payment
levels for various allowable expenses such as food and maintenance
cost which shall be based on actual local market conditions and
costs. The payment levels shall be reviewed by the welfare official
annually, and market rents established by the New Hampshire
Housing Finance Authority through HUD will be used as guides.
F. Income. In determining eligibility and the amount of assistance, the
standard of need shall be compared to the available income/assets.
Computation of income and expenses will be by the month. The
following items will be included in the computation:
(1) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant
or any member of the household through wages, salary,
commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is
to be included as income. Rental income and profits from items sold
are considered earned income. With respect to self-employment,
total profit is arrived at by subtracting business expenses from
gross income in accordance with standard accounting principles.
When income consists of wages, the amount computed should be
that available after income taxes, social security and other payroll
deductions required by state, federal, or local law, court-ordered
support payments and child care costs, and work-related clothing
costs have been deducted from income. Wages that are trusted, or
income similarly unavailable to the applicant or applicant's
dependents, should not be included.
(2) Income or support from other persons. Contributions from relatives
or other household members shall be considered as income only if
actually available and received by the applicant or recipient. The
income of nonhousehold members of the applicant's residential
unit shall not be counted as income. Expenses shared with
nonhousehold members may affect the level of need, however. See
Subsection E(10) regarding determination of need in cases of
nonhousehold residential units.]
(3) Income from other assistance or social insurance programs.
(a) State categorical assistance benefits, OASDI payments, social
security payments, VA benefits, unemployment insurance
benefits, and payment from other government sources shall be
considered income.
(b) Food stamps cannot be counted as income pursuant to federal
law [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)] but may be considered under
"standard of need" to determine true food expenses.
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-8
1:477
(c) Fuel assistance cannot be counted as income pursuant to
federal law [42 U.S.C. § 8624(f)(1)] but may be considered
under "standard of need" to determine true fuel expenses.
(4) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support
payments shall be considered income only if actually received by
the applicant or recipient.
(5) Income from other sources. Payment from pension, trust funds, and
similar programs shall be considered income.
(6) Earnings of a child. No inquiry shall be made into the earnings of a
child 14 years of age or less unless that child makes a regular and
substantial contribution to the family.
(7) Option to treat a qualified state assistance reduction as deemed
income. The welfare official may deem as income all or any portion
of any qualified state assistance reduction pursuant to RSA 167:82,
VIII. The following criteria shall apply to any action to deem income
under this section: (RSA 165:1-e)
(a) The authority to deem income under this section shall
terminate when the qualified state assistance reduction no
longer is in effect.
(b) Applicants for general assistance may be required to cooperate
in obtaining information from the Department of Health and
Human Services as to the existence and amount of any
qualified state assistance reduction. No applicant for general
assistance may be considered to be subject to a qualified state
assistance reduction unless the existence and amount have
been confirmed by the Department of Health and Human
Services.
(c) The welfare official shall provide the applicant with a written
decision which sets forth the amount of any deemed income
used to determine eligibility for general assistance.
(d) Whenever necessary to prevent an immediate threat to the
health and safety of children in the household, the welfare
official shall waive that portion, if any, of the qualified state
assistance reduction as necessary.
G. Residents of shelters for victims of domestic violence and their
children. An applicant residing in a shelter for victims of domestic
violence and their children who has income, and owns resources jointly
with the abusive member of the applicant's household, shall be required
to cooperate with the normal procedures for purposes of verification.
Such resources and income may be excluded from eligibility
determinations unless the applicant has safe access to joint resources
at the time of application. The verification process may be completed
through an authorized representative of the shelter of residence. The
§ 482-8 SALEM CODE § 482-8
1:478
§ 482-9. Nonresidents.
normal procedures taken in accordance with these guidelines to
recover assistance granted shall not delay such assistance.
A. Eligibility. Applicants who are temporarily in a municipality which is not
their municipality of residence and who do not intend to make a
residence there are nonetheless eligible to receive general assistance,
provided that they are poor and unable to support themselves. RSA
165:1-c. No applicant shall be refused assistance solely on the basis of
residence. RSA 165:1. The welfare administrator using his/her
discretion may provide limited assistance.
B. Standards. The application procedure, eligibility standards and
standard of need shall be the same for nonresidents as for residents.
C. Verification. Verification records shall not be considered unavailable,
nor the applicant's responsibility for providing such records relaxed,
solely because they are located in the applicant's municipality of
residence.
D. Temporary or emergency aid. The standards for the fulfilling of
immediate or emergency needs of nonresidents and for temporary
assistance pending final decision shall be the same as for residents, as
set forth in § 482-5D(2).
E. Determination of residence. Determination of residence shall be made
if the applicant requests return home transportation (see Subsection F
below) or if the welfare official has reason to believe the applicant is a
resident of another New Hampshire municipality from which recovery
can be made under RSA 165:20.
(1) Minors. The residence of a minor applicant shall be presumed to be
the residence of his/her custodial parent or guardian.
(2) Adults. For competent adults, the standard for determining
residence shall be the overall intent of the applicant, as set forth in
the definition of "residence" in § 482-1. The statement of an
applicant over 18 as to his/her residence or intent to establish
residence shall be accepted in the absence of strongly inconsistent
evidence or behavior.
F. Return home transportation. At the request of a nonresident applicant,
any aid, temporary or otherwise, to which he/she would be otherwise
entitled under the standards set forth in these guidelines may be used
by the welfare official to cause the applicant to be returned to his/her
municipality of residence. RSA 165:1-c.
G. Recovery. Any aid given to a nonresident, including the costs of return
home transportation, may be recovered from his/her municipality of
residence using the procedures of § 482-15B.
§ 482-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-10
1:479
§ 482-10. Municipal work programs.
A. Participation. Any recipient of general assistance who is able and not
gainfully employed may be required to work for the municipality or an
appropriate local human service agency at any available bona fide job
that is within his/her capacity (RSA 165:31) for the purpose of
reimbursement of benefits received. Participants in the work program
are not considered employees of the municipality, and any work
performed by workfare participants does not give rise to any employeeemployer
relationship between the recipient/workfare participant and
the municipality.
B. Reimbursement rate. The workfare participant shall be allotted the
prevailing municipal wage for work performed, but in no case less than
the minimum wage. No cash compensation shall be paid for workfare
participation; the wage value of all hours worked shall be used to
reimburse the municipality for assistance given. No workfare
participant shall be required to work more hours than necessary to
reimburse aid rendered.
C. Continuing financial liability. If, due to lack of available municipal work
or other good cause, a recipient does not work a sufficient number of
hours to fully reimburse the municipality for the amount of his/her aid,
the amount of aid received less the value of work program hours
completed shall still be owed to the municipality.
D. Allowance for work search. The municipality shall provide reasonable
time during working hours for the workfare participant to conduct a
documented employment search.
E. Workfare program attendance.
(1) With prior notice to the welfare official, a recipient may be excused
from workfare participation if he/she:
(a) Has a conflicting job interview;
(b) Has a conflicting interview at a service or welfare agency;
(c) Has a medical appointment or illness;
(d) As a parent or person "in loco parentis" must care for a child
under the age of five. A recipient responsible for a child age
five but under 12 shall not be required to work during hours
the child is not in school, if there is no responsible person
available to provide care, and no other care is available;
(e) Is unable to work due to mental or physical disability, as
verified by the welfare official;
(f) Must remain at home because of illness or disability of another
member of the household, as verified by the welfare official; or
§ 482-10 SALEM CODE § 482-10
1:480
§ 482-11. Burials and cremations.
The welfare official shall provide for proper burial or cremation, at
municipal expense, of persons found in the municipality at time of death,
regardless of whether the deceased person ever applied for or received
general assistance from any municipality. In such cases, assistance may
be applied for on behalf of the deceased person; however the application
should be made before any burial or cremation expenses are incurred.
The expense may be recovered from the deceased person's municipality of
residence or from a liable relative pursuant to RSA 165:3, II. If relatives,
other private persons, the state or other sources are unable to cover the
entire burial/cremation expense, the municipality will pay up to $1,000 for
burial/cremation. (See Appendix A.162) RSA 165:3 and RSA 165:1-b; see also
RSA 165:27 and RSA 165:27-a.
§ 482-12. Right to notice of adverse action.
(g) Does not possess the materials or tools required to perform the
task and the municipality fails to provide them.
(2) However, the workfare participant should attempt to schedule
appointments so as not to conflict with the workfare program and
must notify his/her supervisor in advance of the appointment. The
welfare official may require participants to provide documentation
of their attendance at a conflicting interview or appointment.
F. Workfare hours. Workfare hours are subject to approval of the
supervisor and the welfare official. Failure of the participant to adhere
to the agreed workfare hours (except for the reasons listed above) will
prompt review of the recipient's eligibility for general assistance and
may result in a suspension or termination of assistance. See
§ 482-12C(2)(b).
G. Workers' compensation. The municipality shall provide workers'
compensation coverage to participants in workfare programs in the
same manner such coverage is provided to other municipal employees,
unless the local governing body of the municipality has voted to adopt a
guideline making the provisions of the workers' compensation laws not
applicable to workfare program participants. RSA 281-A:2, VII(b).
A. Right to a written decision. All persons have a constitutional right to be
free of unfair, arbitrary or unreasonable action taken by government.
This includes applicants for and recipients of general assistance whose
aid has been denied, terminated or reduced. Every applicant and
recipient shall be given a written notice of every decision regarding
assistance. (See § 482-5D for notice where application is granted.) The
welfare official will make every effort to ensure that the applicant
understands the decision.
162. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-12
1:481
B. Action taken for reasons other than noncompliance with the guidelines.
(1) Whenever a decision is made to deny assistance or to refuse to
grant the full amount of assistance requested, a notice of the
decision shall be given or mailed to the applicant either the same
day or next work day following the making of the decision or within
five working days from the time the application is filled out and
submitted, whichever occurs first.
(2) The notice required by Subsection B(1) above shall contain:
(a) A clear statement of the reasons for the denial or not providing
full assistance requested.
(b) A statement advising the recipient of his/her right to a fair
hearing and that any request for a fair hearing must be made in
writing within five working days.
(c) A form on which the recipient may request a fair hearing.
(d) A statement advising the recipient of the time limits which
must be met in order to receive a fair hearing.
(e) A statement that assistance may continue, if there was initial
eligibility, until the date of hearing, if requested by the
claimant. Aid must be repaid if the claimant fails to prevail at
the hearing.
C. Suspension for noncompliance with the guidelines.
NOTE: This procedure has been developed by the Local Government
Center (LGC) in an effort to set forth a clear process for suspension
of assistance for willful noncompliance with guidelines, under RSA
165:1-b. There are differing opinions as to the intent and interpretation
of the statute. There are differing opinions as to the specific procedures
required by the statute. The procedures outlined in this section are not
specifically mandated by RSA 165:1-b but are LGC's attempts to create
a legally sound compromise. See also Appendix B.163
(1) Due process. Recipients must comply with these guidelines and the
reasonable requests of welfare officials. Welfare officials must
enforce the guidelines while ensuring that all recipients and
applicants receive due process. Recipients should be given
reasonable notice of the conditions and requirements of eligibility
and future eligibility and notice that noncompliance may result in
termination or suspension.
(2) Conditions. Any applicant/recipient otherwise eligible for
assistance shall become ineligible under RSA 165:1-b if he/she
willfully and without good cause fails to comply with the
requirements of these guidelines relating to the obligation to:
163. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-12 SALEM CODE § 482-12
1:482
(a) Disclose and provide verification of income, resources or other
material financial data, as set out in §§ 482-5C and 482-6 of
these guidelines, including any changes in this information;
(b) Participate in the work program under § 482-5C, to the extent
assigned by the welfare official;
(c) Comply with the work search requirements imposed by the
welfare official under § 482-5C; and
(d) Apply for other public assistance, as required by the welfare
official under § 482-5C.
(3) First notice. No recipient otherwise eligible shall be suspended for
noncompliance with conditions unless he/she has been given a
written notice of the actions required in order to remain eligible
and a seven-day period within which to comply. The first notice
should be given at the time of the notice of decision and thereafter
as conditions change. (See Form L.164) Additional notice of actions
required should also be given, as eligibility is redetermined, but
without an additional seven-day period unless new actions are
required. RSA 165:1-b, II.
(4) Noncompliance.
(a) If a recipient willfully and without good cause fails to come into
compliance during the seven-day period, or willfully falls into
noncompliance within 30 days from receipt of a first notice, the
welfare official shall give the recipient a suspension notice, as
set forth in Subsection C(5). See Form L; see Appendix B.165
(b) If a recipient falls into noncompliance for the first time more
than 30 days after receipt of a first notice, the welfare official
shall give the recipient a new first notice with a new seven-day
period to comply (see Form L) before giving the recipient the
suspension notice. RSA 165:1-b, III.
(5) Suspension notice. Written notice to a recipient that he/she is
suspended from assistance due to failure to comply with the
conditions required in a first notice shall include (see Form L):
(a) A list of the guidelines with which the recipient is not in
compliance and a description of those actions necessary for
compliance;
(b) The period of suspension [see Subsection C(6) below];
(c) Notice of the right to a fair hearing on the issue of willful
noncompliance and that such request must be made in writing
within five days of receipt of the suspension notice;
164. Editor's Note: Form L is on file at the office of the welfare official.
165. Editor's Note: Form L and Appendix B are on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-12
1:483
§ 482-13. Fair hearings.
(d) A statement that assistance may continue in accordance with
the prior eligibility determination until the fair hearing
decision is made if the recipient so requests on the request
form for the fair hearing; however, if the recipient fails to
prevail at the hearing, the suspension will start after the
decision and such aid must be repaid by the recipient; and
(e) A form on which the individual may request a fair hearing and
the continuance of assistance pending the outcome.
(6) Suspension period.
(a) The suspension period for failure to comply with these
guidelines shall last:
[1] Either seven days or 14 days if the recipient has had a
prior suspension which ended within the past six months;
and
[2] Until the recipient complies with the guidelines if the
recipient, upon the expiration of the seven- or fourteen-day
suspension period, continues to fail to carry out the
specific actions set forth in the notice.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection C(6)(a)[2] above, a recipient who
has been suspended for noncompliance for at least six months
may file a new application for assistance without coming back
into compliance
(7) Fair hearing on continuing noncompliance. A recipient who has
been suspended until he/she complies with the guidelines may
request a fair hearing to resolve a dispute over whether or not he/
she has satisfactorily complied with the required guidelines;
however no assistance shall be available under Subsection C(5)(d)
above.
(8) Compliance after suspension. A recipient who has been subject to a
suspension and who has come back into compliance shall have his/
her assistance resumed, provided that he/she is still otherwise
eligible. The notice of decision stating that assistance has been
resumed should again set forth the actions required to remain
eligible for assistance but need not provide a seven-day period for
compliance unless new conditions have been imposed.
A. Requests. A request for a fair hearing is a written expression, by the
applicant or recipient, or any person acting for him/her, to the effect
that he/she wants an opportunity to present his/her case to a higher
authority. When a request for assistance is denied or when an applicant
desires to challenge a decision made by the welfare official relative to
the receipt of assistance, the applicant must present a request for a fair
§ 482-12 SALEM CODE § 482-13
1:484
hearing to the welfare official within five working days of receipt of the
notice of decision at issue. RSA 165:1-b, III. See Form O.166
B. Time limits for hearings. Hearings requested by claimants must be held
within seven working days of the receipt of the request. The welfare
official shall give notice to the claimant setting the time and location of
the hearing. This notice must be given to the claimant at least 48 hours
in advance of the hearing or mailed to the claimant at least 72 hours in
advance of the hearing.
C. The fair hearing officer(s). The fair hearing officer(s) may be chosen by
the Board of Selectmen. The person(s) serving as the fair hearing
authority must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision causing dissatisfaction;
(2) Be impartial;
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing to be able to obtain evidence
and facts necessary for a fair determination; and
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, to
explain to the claimant the laws and regulations under which the
welfare official operated, and to interpret to the welfare official any
evidence of unsound, unclear or inequitable policies, practices or
action.
D. Fair hearing procedures.
(1) All fair hearings shall be conducted in such a manner as to ensure
due process of law. Fair hearings shall not be conducted according
to strict rules of evidence. The burden of proof shall be on the
claimant, who shall be required to establish his/her case by a
preponderance of the evidence.
(2) The welfare official responsible for the disputed decision shall
attend the hearing and testify about his/her actions and the reasons
therefor.
(3) Both parties shall be given the opportunity to offer evidence and
explain their positions as fully and completely as they wish. The
claimant shall have the opportunity to present his/her own case or,
at the claimant's option, with the aid of others and to bring
witnesses, to establish all pertinent facts, to advance any
arguments without undue interference, and to question or refute
testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and
cross-examine adverse witnesses.
(4) A claimant or his/her duly authorized representative has the right
to examine, prior to a fair hearing, all records, papers and
documents from the claimant's case file which either party may
166. Editor's Note: Form O is on file at the office of the welfare official.
§ 482-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-13
1:485
wish to introduce at the fair hearing, as well as any available
documents not contained in the case file but relevant to the welfare
official's action of which the claimant complains. The claimant may
introduce any such documents, papers or records into evidence.
No record, paper or document which the claimant has requested
to review but has not been allowed to examine prior to the hearing
shall be introduced at the hearing or become part of the record.
(5) The welfare official (or a duly authorized representative) shall have
the right to examine at the fair hearing all documents on which the
claimant plans to rely at the fair hearing and may request a twentyfour-
hour continuance if such documents contain evidence not
previously provided or disclosed by the claimant. Should the
applicant have new documentation relevant to the disputed
decision, he/she may reapply for assistance and file a written
withdrawal of the fair hearing request.
(6) The decision of the fair hearing officer(s) must be based solely on
the record, in light of these guidelines. Evidence, both written and
oral, which is admitted at the hearing shall be the sole contents of
the record. The fair hearing officer shall not review the case record
or other materials prior to introduction at the hearing.
(7) The parties may stipulate to any facts.
(8) All fair hearings may be tape-recorded and retained for six months.
E. Decisions.
(1) Fair hearing decisions shall be rendered within seven working days
of the hearing. Decisions shall be in writing setting forth the
reasons for decision and the facts on which the fair hearing officer
relied in reaching the decision. A copy of the decision shall be
mailed or delivered to the claimant and to the welfare official.
(2) Fair hearing decisions will be rendered on the basis of the officer's
findings of fact, these guidelines and state and federal law. The fair
hearing decision shall set forth appropriate relief.
(3) The decision shall be dated. In the case of a hearing to review a
denial of aid, the decision is retroactive to the date of the action
being appealed. If a claimant fails to prevail at the hearing, the
assistance given pending the hearing shall be a debt owed by the
individual to the municipality.
(4) The welfare official shall keep all fair hearing decisions on file in
chronological order.
(5) None of the procedures specified herein shall limit any right of the
applicant or recipient to subsequent court action to review or
challenge the adverse decision.
§ 482-13 SALEM CODE § 482-14
1:486
§ 482-14. Liens.
§ 482-15. Recovery of assistance.
The welfare official shall seek to recover money expended to assist eligible
applicants. There shall be no delay, refusal to assist, reduction or
termination of assistance while the welfare official is pursuing the
procedural or statutory avenues to secure reimbursement. Any legal action
A. Real estate. The law requires the municipality to place a lien for welfare
aid received on any real estate owned by an assisted person in all cases
except for just cause. (This section does not authorize the placement of
a lien on the real estate of legally liable relatives, as defined by RSA
165:19.) The Selectmen shall file a notice of lien with the County
Registry of Deeds, complete with the owner's name and a description of
the property sufficient to identify it. Interest at the rate of 6% per year,
simple interest, shall be charged on the amount of the lien commencing
one year after the date the lien is filed, unless waived by the
municipality. Simple interest, not compounded interest, will be used.
The lien remains in effect until enforced or released or until the amount
of the lien is repaid to the municipality. The lien shall not be enforced so
long as the real estate is occupied as the sole residence of the assisted
person, his/her surviving spouse, or his/her surviving children who are
under age 18 or blind or permanently and totally disabled. At such time
as the lien may become enforceable, the welfare officer shall attempt to
contact the attorney handling the real estate or estate before enforcing
the lien. Upon repayment of a lien, the municipality must file written
notice of the discharge of the lien with the County Registry of Deeds
(RSA 165:28). A sample notice of lien is included in Appendix E as Form
R.167
B. Civil judgments. RSA 165:28-a.
(1) A municipality shall be entitled to a lien upon property passing
under the terms of a will or by intestate succession, a property
settlement, or a civil judgment for personal injuries (except
workers' compensation) awarded any person granted assistance by
the municipality for the amount of assistance granted by the
municipality.
(2) The municipality shall be entitled to the lien only if the assistance
was granted no more than six years before the receipt of the
inheritance or the award of the property settlement or civil
judgment. When the welfare officer becomes aware of such a claim
against a civil judgment, he/she shall contact the attorney
representing the recipient.
(3) This lien shall take precedence over all other claims.
167. Editor's Note: Form R is on file at the office of the welfare official. Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 482-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-15
1:487
to recover must be filed in a court within six years after the expenditure.
RSA 165:25.
§ 482-16. Application of rents paid by municipality.
Whenever the owner of property rented to a person receiving general
assistance from the municipality is in arrears in sewer, water, electricity, or
tax payments to the municipality, the municipality may apply the assistance
which the property owner would have received in payment of rent on
behalf of such assisted person to the property owner's delinquent balances,
regardless of whether such delinquent balances are in respect of property
occupied by the assisted person. RSA 165:4-a.
A. Recovery. The welfare official may seek recovery from legally
responsible relatives and shall seek to recover from the municipality of
residence the amount of money spent by the municipality to assist a
recipient who has a residence in another municipality. Written notice of
money spent in support of a recipient must be given to the welfare
official of the municipality of residence. In any civil action for recovery
brought under RSA 165:20, the court shall award costs to the prevailing
party. RSA 165:19 and RSA 165:20. (See RSA 165:20-a providing for
arbitration of such disputes between communities.)
B. Recovery from former recipient's income. A former recipient who is
returned to an income status after receiving assistance may be required
to reimburse the municipality for the assistance provided, if such
reimbursement can be made without financial hardship. RSA 165:20-b.
C. Recovery from state and federal sources. The amount of money spent by
a municipality to support a recipient who has made initial application
for SSI and has signed HHS Form 151 "Authorization for
Reimbursement of Interim Assistance" shall be recovered through the
SSA and the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services. Prescription expenses paid by the municipality for applicants
who have applied for Medicaid shall be recovered through the New
Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services if and when the
applicant is approved for medical coverage.
D. Delayed state claims. For those recipients of general assistance deemed
eligible for state assistance, the New Hampshire Department of Health
and Human Services shall reimburse a municipality the amount of
general assistance as a result of delays in processing within the
federally mandated time periods. Any claims for reimbursement shall
be held until the end of the fiscal year and may be reimbursed on a
prorated basis dependent upon the total claims filed per year. RSA
165:20-c. A Form 340 "Request for State Reimbursement" may be
obtained from the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services for this purpose.
A. Payment arrears. A payment shall be considered in arrears if more than
30 days have elapsed since the mailing of the bill or, in the case of real
§ 482-15 SALEM CODE § 482-16
1:488
Chapter 490
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Historical district — See Ch. 284.
Multifamily dwellings and
condominiums — See Ch. 340.
estate taxes, if interest has begun to accrue pursuant to RSA 76:13.
RSA 165:4-a.
B. Order of priority. Delinquent balances will be offset in order of the
following priority:
(1) Taxes.
(2) Water and sewage.
(3) Betterment.
C. Procedure.
(1) The welfare official will issue a voucher on behalf of the tenant to
the landlord for the allowed amount of rent. The voucher will
indicate any amount to be applied to a delinquent balance owed by
the landlord, specifying which delinquency and referring to the
authority of RSA 165:4-a.
(2) The welfare official will issue a duplicate voucher to the
appropriate department (i.e., tax collector, sewer department,
water precinct, municipal electric facility), which shall forward the
voucher to the treasurer or finance director for payment. Upon
receipt of payment, the department will issue a receipt of payment
to the delinquent landlord.
§ 482-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 482-16
1:489

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 490-101. Authority; purpose; when effective.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by RSA 674:16 to 674:23 and RSA 675:2
to 675:9 for the purposes contained in the Revised Statutes Annotated,
this Salem Zoning Ordinance of 1961 shall take effect immediately upon
passage. Amendments take effect immediately upon passage.
§ 490-102. Amendments.
This chapter, or any part thereof, may be amended from time to time
in accordance with procedures currently prescribed under the applicable
sections of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated.
§ 490-103. Establishment of zoning districts.
§ 490-104. Zoning Map incorporated.
The Zoning Map is made part of this chapter and is available at the Town
Hall for viewing or purchase.
§ 490-105. Contiguous lots in single ownership.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Salem is divided into the
following districts as shown on the Zoning Map: [Amended by the
1981, 1982, 1998 and 2003 Town Meetings]
Residential District
Rural District
Recreational District
Garden Apartment R-A District
Manufactured Housing Park District
Business Office Districts, including Subdistricts I and II
Limited Community Shopping Village District
Town Center District
Commercial-Industrial Districts, including Subdistricts A, B and C
Industrial District
B. Zoning district boundaries are shown on the 2008 Zoning Map, as
amended (official version on file at the Town Hall), and are incorporated
by reference in this chapter. [Added by the 2012 Town Meeting]
A. Residential, Rural and Recreational Districts. Subject to the provisions
contained in §§ 490-301A, 490-302A and 490-303A, if two or more
contiguous lots or combination of lots and portions of lots are in single
ownership and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements
§ 490-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-105
1:491
§ 490-106. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 490-107. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A residential living unit that is within or
attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel of land as the principal dwelling
unit it accompanies.[Added by the 2017 Town Meeting]
ABUTTER — See RSA 672:3.[Amended by the 2012 Town Meeting]
ACTIVE ADULT COMMUNITY — A community or living facility designed
specifically for the interests of persons age 55 and older, which typically
contains recreational amenities and support services for older adults who
are healthy, active, and capable of completely independent living.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A business that devotes
more than 15% of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area,
utilized for the display and sale of books, magazines, periodicals, or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, tapes, records, CD-ROMs or other forms of visual or audio
representations, which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/
or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1, or instruments, devices
or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "sexual
conduct" as defined in RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices. "Adult
bookstore" or "adult video store" does not include an establishment that
sells books or periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal
stock and trade and does not devote more that 15% of the total floor area of
the establishment to the sale of books and periodicals.
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment
which, during a substantial portion of the total presentation time, features
live performances in which a person appears in a state of nudity and/or
which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct"
as set forth in RSA 571-B:1 and/or feature films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial
portion of the total presentation time of which is devoted to showing of
established by lot width and area, the Planning Board shall continue to
consider the lands involved to be an undivided parcel for the purpose
of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold
in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter.
§ 490-105 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:492
material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — An open lot or part thereof, with
appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion
pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions,
for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor
seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time being
presented for observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material
which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct"
as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT MOTEL — A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial
portion of the total presentation time of which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of material
which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct"
as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of the images so displayed
is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful
to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An establishment with a capacity
of five or more persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
shown and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is
devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to
minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1 for observation
by patrons.
ADULT NUDE MODEL STUDIO — A place where a person who appears
in a state of nudity or displays male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals is observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, or such
display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the
definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA
571-B:1.
ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex or activities between male and female
persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more persons are in
the state of nudity, or where the activities in adult bookstores, adult video
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:493
stores, or adult motion-picture theaters are characterized by an emphasis
on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any place of business at which
any of the following activities are conducted, and the activities are not
a matter of serious literary, artistic, scientific or political value: adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult drive-in theater, adult
motel, adult motion-picture arcade, adult motion-picture theater, adult
theater, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
ADULT SUBSTANTIAL PORTION OF THE TOTAL PRESENTATION TIME —
The presentation of films or shows for viewing on more than seven days
within any period of 56 consecutive days.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which, for any form of
consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial portion of
the total presentation time of which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on activities in which a person appears in a state of nudity and/or
which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as
set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
ALTERNATIVE SITING — Innovative siting techniques that shall include the
location of antennas which are roof mounted, side mounted or structure
mounted, including but not limited to man-made trees, clock towers, bell
towers, steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas.
ALZHEIMER'S FACILITY — A group living or health services facility
providing health care and support services exclusively for residents
requiring assistance with daily living due to a form of dementia, normally
associated with aging, defined as Alzheimer's disease.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio,
television, personal communications service (PCS), pager network, or any
other communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth.
ANTENNA ARRAY — A collection of antennas attached to a structure or
mount to send and receive radio signals for a single carrier.
APPLICANT — A carrier, tower company, or any other person applying for a
permit under § 490-707.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area designated as Zones A and AE on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map.[Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY (ALF) — Housing for frail elderly persons,
typically age 75 to 85, who require limited supportive services for their daily
living activities. Assisted living facilities typically require residents to be
mobile and capable of performing most routine tasks.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:494
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
BUSINESS OFFICE — A room or building in which one or more persons
conduct clerical work, engage in administrative functions and engage in
transactions and meetings with others in connection with the advancement
of commercial or industrial enterprises.
CANOPY — A permanent roof-like structure of rigid material supported by
and extending from the facade of a building.
CARRIER — A person that provides personal wireless services, as defined
in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii).
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (CRF) — A multi-unit facility
providing residential and habilitative services to persons with
developmental disabilities.[Added by the 1991 Town Meeting]
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY — A group living facility for seniors who
may or may not require assistance with daily living. Congregate care
facilities tend to be limited in size and scope of services, often providing
more intensive services than can be provided in an assisted living facility,
but requiring residents to have at least partial mobility and reasonably good
health.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — Cluster of a
variety of housing options to meet the spectrum of needs and interests
ranging from active adults through assisted living, often including onpremises
skilled nursing facilities. A CCRC's primary feature is the
provision of "lifetime" supportive services at each stage of a senior's later
life.
CURVED STREET — A street with a center-line radius of less than 250 feet
and a change in bearing of the center line of at least 15° in front of a lot
shall be deemed a curved street for the purpose of determining the frontage
requirement for that lot.[Amended by the 1996 Town Meeting]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.[Amended by the 2009 Town
Meeting]
ELDERLY — Persons age 62 and older, as defined in federal regulations.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT (EA) — A document required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a personal wireless service facility
is placed in certain designated areas.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed, vault, or
box near the base of the personal wireless service facility within which
is housed equipment for those facilities, such as battery and electrical
equipment.
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:495
FAA — An acronym for the Federal Aviation Administration.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from
the base of a personal wireless service facility. The fall zone is the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FCC — An acronym for the Federal Communications Commission.
FEE PAYER — The applicant for a subdivision or site plan approval or a
building permit that would create "new development" as defined in this
section.
FEMA — An acronym for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD, BASE — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD; FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters and the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED YEAR — See "flood, base."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY/REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.[Amended by the 2009 Town
Meeting]
FRONTAGE — The continuous length of the lot bordering on an accepted
municipal street.
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES — Establishments engaged in the provision
of medical treatment and/or care to outpatients. Examples of such uses
include but are not limited to: offices for doctors, dentists, and other
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:496
medical practitioners, clinics, medical laboratories, and such activities and
facilities normally associated with and operated in connection with health
care services.[Added by the 2014 Town Meeting]
HEIGHT — Shall be defined in accordance with the International Building
Code and its commentary, as amended.[Added by the 2000 Town
Meeting; amended by the 2008 Town Meeting]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HIGH-WATER MARK[Added by the 1999 Town Meeting] —
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
For natural freshwater bodies without artificial impoundments, the
reference line for the natural mean high-water level as set forth in RSA
483-B:4, XVII, and established by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services.
A.
For artificially impounded freshwater bodies with established flowage
rights, the limit of the flowage rights, and for water bodies without
established flowage rights, the water line at full pond as determined by
the elevation of the spillway crest.
B.
For Arlington Pond, specifically: 161.712 feet, the minimum pond water
elevation between April 30 and October 10 of each year, prior to use
of the pond's waters for use in the Town's water supply (Agreement
for Water Management between the Town of Salem and Arlington Pond
Protective Associate, March 14, 1996). The base flood elevation is
established at 162 feet, as published in the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) dated April 6, 1998. A reference mark is provided at 168.42
feet, identified by a brass plug on the east side of the gatehouse on
Wheeler Dam (National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929).
C.
For all rivers and streams, as established as set forth in RSA 483-B:4,
XI-e, as the "ordinary high-water mark."
D.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
D.
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:497
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit. It is clearly a secondary use of the property which does
not adversely affect the residential character of the neighborhood. It is
in compliance with the criteria established for a minor home occupation.
Home occupations do not include garage sales and yard sales, nor home
parties which are held for the purpose of the sale or distribution of goods or
services.
IMPACT FEE — A fee or assessment imposed upon development, including
subdivision, building construction or other land use change, in order to
help meet the needs occasioned by the development for the construction
or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the municipality,
including and limited to water treatment and distribution facilities;
wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; stormwater,
drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems and rights-ofway;
municipal office facilities; public school facilities; the municipality's
proportional share of capital facilities of a cooperative or regional school
district of which the municipality is a member; public safety facilities;
solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities;
public libraries; and public recreation facilities, not including public open
space.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES — Housing which groups seniors for
the purpose of social interaction and mutual support in a common interest
community. Group facilities may be provided on premises for recreation and
social interaction, but only limited support services are typically provided.
Typically multifamily residential structures.
KENNEL — Any building(s) or land used or operated as a business for the
boarding, breeding, training or selling of five or more dogs, cats or other
household pets.[Added by the 2009 Town Meeting]
LOT OCCUPATION — Maximum lot occupation or coverage shall be defined
as the maximum portion of the lot area devoted to buildings, driveways,
parking lots and other impermeable areas.[Added by the 1991 Town
Meeting]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
(See definition for "single-family dwelling.") For floodplain management
purposes the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers, travel
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:498
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180
consecutive days. This includes manufactured homes located in a
manufactured home park or subdivision.[Amended 2009 Town Meeting]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MAST — A thin pole that resembles a streetlight standard or a telephone
pole.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MONOPOLE — A thicker type of structure than a mast that is selfsupporting
with a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete that is designed for
the placement of antennas and antenna arrays along the shaft.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mount:
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining flood insurance
rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.[Added by the 2009
Town Meeting]
NEW DEVELOPMENT — An activity that results in the creation of a new
dwelling unit or units; the conversion of a legally existing use, or additions
thereto, which would result in a net increase in the number of dwelling
units; construction resulting in a new nonresidential building or a net
increase in the floor area of any nonresidential building; or the conversion
of a lawful existing use to another use, including changing a dwelling unit
from seasonal use to year-round use, if such change would result in a net
increase in the demand on public capital facilities that are the subject
of impact fee assessment; however, new development shall not include
the replacement of an existing housing unit or the reconstruction of a
structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster, provided that
the replacement unit or structure does not involve a change in use that
A. Roof mounted or mounted on the roof of a building.
B. Side mounted or mounted on the side of a building.
C. Ground mounted or mounted on the ground.
D. Structure mounted or mounted on a structure other than a building.
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:499
would generate a net increase in the demand on capital facilities for which
impact fees are assessed.
NURSING HOME — A group living facility providing basic domiciliary
services and semiskilled, rehabilitative nursing service for patients who
have impaired mobility or health problems of a limited duration. Nursing
homes may or may not cater exclusively to senior patients and may provide
rehabilitation services for patients of all ages.[Amended by the 1999
Town Meeting]
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Those improvements that are necessitated
by a development but which are located outside the boundaries of the
property that is subject to a subdivision plat or site plan approval by
the Planning Board. As used in § 490-711, the definition of "off-site
improvements" shall be limited to any necessary highway, drainage, and
sewer and water upgrades pertinent to that development.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — Any facility which provides
commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services and
common carrier wireless exchange access services, as described by Section
332 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i).
PLANNING BOARD or BOARD — The Town of Salem Planning Board.
PREFERRED SITING LOCATIONS — The locations for a personal wireless
service facility in the Town of Salem, ranked in the order of preference
contained in § 490-707C(1)(a).
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building or structure for the storage or parking of
four or fewer passenger motor vehicles without provision for repairing or
servicing such vehicles for profit.[Added by the 1991 Town Meeting]
PRIVATE, NONPROFIT — A 501(C)(2) or 501(C)(3) nonprofit organization
as designated by the Internal Revenue Service.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land essentially unimproved and
available to the public only for passive recreational uses such as walking,
sitting, picnicking, table games, natural resource conservation, and similar
uses. Town parks which do not include public recreation facilities constitute
public open space within the meaning of § 490-711.
PUBLIC RECREATION FACILITIES — The land and facilities owned or
operated by the Town of Salem or the Salem School District, other than
public open space, which are designed for the conduct of recreational sports
or other active leisure time uses of an organized nature, which include
equipment or substantial improvements to the land to provide active indoor
or outdoor public recreation programs.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER — An engineer specializing in
electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio
frequencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE —
A vehicular camping trailer unit not exceeding 36 feet in length, eight
feet in width or 12 feet in height, or a boat/boat trailer not exceeding
A.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:500
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SENIORS — Persons age 55 and older.
SENIORS HOUSING — A variety of housing types designed specifically to
meet the varied needs of persons age 55 and older. Such housing may
include active adult facilities; independent living facilities; continuing care
retirement communities (CCRC); assisted living facilities (ALF); congregate
care facilities; nursing homes; skilled nursing facilities (SNF); and
Alzheimer's facilities.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols,
and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising
or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or service or otherwise
for the purpose of providing information.[Amended by the 2006 Town
Meeting]
SIGN, ADVERTISING DISPLAY AREA — The advertising display surface
(copy area) encompassed within any regular geometric figure which would
enclose all parts of the sign. The structural supports for a sign, whether
they be columns, pylons, or a building, or any part thereof shall not be
included in the advertising area. On a freestanding sign, such area shall be
calculated as the maximum projected area of the sign.
SIGN, BANNER — A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A non-point-of-sale sign which advertises a business,
organization, event, person, place, or thing.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged either manually in
the field (i.e., reader boards with changeable letters) or automatically on
a lampbank or through mechanical means without altering the face of the
surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs are only allowed on freestanding
signs.[Amended by the 2000 and 2005 Town Meetings]
24 feet in length, eight feet in width and 12 feet in height, primarily
designated as temporary living quarters for recreational camping,
travel or boating use; it is designed to be mounted on or drawn by an
automotive vehicle. A vehicle meeting the above definition except for
size is not deemed incidental to a dwelling unit. [Added by the 1983
Town Meeting]
A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less
when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be selfpropelled
or permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. [Added by
the 1994 Town Meeting]
B.
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:501
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign identifying an architect,
contractor, lender and/or material supplier participating in construction on
the property on which the sign is located.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Those signs located at the point of access/egress
directing traffic in and out of the site.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported upon the ground by poles or
braces and not attached to any building.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign whose copy is limited to the commercial
name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity
or occupation being identified.
SIGN, LEGAL NONCONFORMING — A sign which:
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A nonelectric on-premises residential identification
sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or
group of occupants.
SIGN, OFF-SITE — Any sign which does not advertise the name, address,
business, and/or products of the site on which it is located.[Amended by
the 2006 Town Meeting]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached
to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically
designed to support the sign.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon
which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building.
SIGN, ROTATING — A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the
sign moves in a revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not refer to
methods of changing copy.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use.
SIGN, UNDER CANOPY — Those signs underneath a sheltered walkway or
awning in front of a building. They shall be placed perpendicular to the
building.
SIGN, WALL — A sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the
face of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall of any
building and supported by such wall or building and which displays only one
advertising surface.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached or freestanding residence
designed for and occupied by one family to be used for living, eating,
sleeping, and cooking. These dwellings shall include any room or rooms
Was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently
enacted sign restrictions and regulations; or
A.
Does not conform to the sign code requirements but for which a special
permit has been issued.
B.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:502
connected together forming a habitable unit for one family, or a
manufactured home which is used for residential occupancy, built upon a
permanent chassis and which conforms to the definition of manufactured
home under the provisions of RSA 674:31.[Added by the 1990 Town
Meeting]
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY (SNF) — An institution providing primarily
extended nursing care.[Amended by the 1999 Town Meeting]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood, mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on a FHBM
or FIRM as Zones A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, and AH (see "area of special flood
hazard").
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
STORY — Shall be defined in accordance with the International Building
Code and its commentary, as amended.[Added by the 2000 Town
Meeting; amended by the 2010 Town Meeting]
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure,
taking place during the life of the structure, the cumulative cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
that have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value
of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or,
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage
occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement"
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:503
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does
not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places.[Amended by
the 2002 Town Meeting]
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for a personal wireless service
facility, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, stealth
towers, masts or monopole towers.
TOWER COMPANY — A company in the business of building towers and
selling or leasing them, or selling or leasing space on them, to carriers.
TOWER, GUYED — A monopole or lattice tower that is secured to the
ground or other surface by diagonal cables for lateral support.
TOWER HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.
TOWER, LATTICE — A type of structure that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and a cross bracing of structural steel.
TOWER OR ANTENNA, PREEXISTING — Any tower or antenna lawfully
constructed or permitted prior to the adoption of § 490-707. Shall also mean
any tower or antenna lawfully constructed in accordance with § 490-707.
TOWER, STEALTH — Any tower on which the antennas are integrated as
architectural features of the tower to disguise them, so that the purpose of
the tower for providing wireless services is not readily apparent.
USED CAR DEALERSHIP — For § 490-501, that portion of a lot or structure
devoted in whole or part to:
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in § 490-705D(5),
(7) and (8)(b)[2] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.[Added by the 2009 Town Meeting]
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
A. The sale of two or more used automobiles; or
The display of two or more used automobiles for the purpose of sale.
[Amended by the 1981 Town Meeting]
B.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:504
and that under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
WIND ENERGY METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes
the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers
(wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment
for anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the
purpose of § 490-712, "MET tower" shall refer only to those whose purpose
is to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to
install, construct or erect a small wind energy system.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground
level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM MODIFICATION — Any change to the small wind
energy system that materially alters the size, type or location of the small
wind energy system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a
modification.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM NET METERING — The difference between the
electricity supplied to a customer over the electric distribution system and
the electricity generated by the customer's small wind energy system that
is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM POWER GRID — The transmission system,
managed by ISO New England, created to balance the supply and demand
of electricity for consumers in New England.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect
when rotating blades of the wind generator cast shadows on the ground and
nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less
and will be used primarily for on-site consumption.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER — The monopole, guyed monopole or
lattice structure that supports a wind generator.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the
fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind generator.
§ 490-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-107
1:505
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is to
convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate
electricity.
§ 490-107 SALEM CODE § 490-107
1:506
ARTICLE II
Permitted Uses and Dimension Restrictions
§ 490-201. Permitted Uses Table.
The Permitted Uses Table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 490-202. Zoning Dimension Restrictions Table.
The Zoning Dimension Restrictions Table is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 490-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-202
1:507

ARTICLE III
Residential Districts
§ 490-301. Residential District.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings or structures and the use of land in
the Residential District, except that they shall not apply to existing
buildings or structures nor to the existing use of any building or
structure but shall apply to any alteration of a building or structure for
use for a purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use to
which it was put before alteration. However, no building or structure
qualifying as a nonconforming use shall be occupied for a greater
portion of the year than such building or structure was occupied as a
prior nonconforming use unless minimum lot size, setbacks, frontage,
building line, and all other dimensional requirements for this district
are met or a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment. In either
case, the requirements for septic systems, as stated in Chapter 391,
Article I, of the Salem Code, shall be met. Additionally, no building
permits or variances shall be granted that would be likely to result in an
increase of the portion of the year during which a building or structure
qualifying as a nonconforming use will be occupied if such increased
occupation will affect adversely public health standards, water quality,
sewage treatment requirements or the water quality of any lake, stream
or surface water system. The restrictions of § 490-202, minimum lot
size, minimum frontage, and minimum width at the building line, shall
not apply to lots shown in a plat approved by the Salem Planning Board
prior to the adoption of this chapter until January 1, 1981, except that if
two or more lots are contiguous and are held in identical ownership and
none of the lots are improved by a house, then the restrictions of
§ 490-202, minimum lot size, shall apply forthwith. Discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12 consecutive months
shall subject such property to all of the requirements of this section.
[Amended by the 1986 Town Meeting]
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Residential
District:
(1) One-family and two-family dwellings.
(2) Private garages, gardens and orchards incidental to residential
use.
(3) Churches, parish houses, convents, public and parochial schools,
municipal buildings and libraries, including structures and uses
normally incidental thereto.
(4) Casual sales, such as garage sales, may be authorized by the
Selectmen on such terms and conditions as they may impose.
However, no person shall be granted permission to conduct such
sales for more than 36 hours in any calendar year. Neither shall any
§ 490-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-301
1:509
person be granted permission to conduct such sales on more than
three calendar days in any calendar year.
(5) Family day-care homes, as defined in RSA 170-E:2, if licensed by
the State of New Hampshire to operate as such under RSA 170-E.
(6) In-law unit within a single-family dwelling.
C. Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern permitted and all
other uses in the Residential District:
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) When applicable, regulations and restrictions in the following
sections shall be met:
(a) Off-street parking and loading: § 490-701.
(b) Open space preservation: § 490-704.
(c) Home occupations: § 490-709.
(d) Accessory apartments: § 490-801.
(e) In-law apartments: § 490-802.
(f) Obstructed view: § 490-803.
(g) Proximity to water bodies: § 490-804.
D. Exception. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Residential District upon finding that the specified
conditions exist: [Amended by the 1995 Town Meeting]
(1) The use of land for parks, playgrounds of a nonprofit type, other
private schools and hospitals, if the Board of Adjustment shall find
that all restrictions of this section are met, or an exception or
variance therefor granted, and that such land is reasonably
adapted to the use, and either that the use will so alleviate the
burden of similar facilities in the Town or that such use will be
advantageous to the health, morals, and general welfare of such
numbers of persons in such degree as will outweigh any diminution
of property values created thereby.
(2) Relief from any of the provisions of this section shall be granted for
a specified temporary period of time if the Board of Adjustment
shall find either:
(a) That a public emergency exists or is threatened of so serious a
character as to outweigh any diminution of surrounding
property values, or any fire or health dangers or any
overcrowding of land or public facilities occasioned by such
relief; or
§ 490-301 SALEM CODE § 490-301
1:510
§ 490-302. Rural District.
(b) That such relief from any such provisions for one year would be
reasonably necessary for the ultimate use or development of
land in a permitted and desirable way, other than as a onefamily
dwelling, and that such relief would be outweighed by
the advantages available from such ultimate use of the land.
E. Variances. In granting variances, the following shall be generally
considered contrary to the spirit of this chapter in the Residential
District:
(1) The use of land for the keeping of livestock and poultry, but not
domestic pets.
(2) The use of land for mobile homes, mobile home developments,
trailers or trailer parks.
F. Contiguous lots in single ownership. See § 490-105.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings or structures and the use of land in
the Rural Districts, except that they shall not apply to existing buildings
or structures nor to the existing use of any building or structure but
shall apply to any alteration of a building or structure for use for a
purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use to which it
was put before alteration. However, no building or structure qualifying
as a nonconforming use shall be occupied for a greater portion of the
year than such building or structure was occupied as a prior
nonconforming use unless minimum lot size, setbacks, frontage,
building line, and all other dimensional requirements for this district
are met or a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment. In either
case, the requirements for septic systems, as stated in Chapter 391,
Article I, of the Salem Code, shall be met. Additionally, no building
permits or variances shall be granted that would be likely to result in an
increase of the portion of the year during which a building or structure
qualifying as a nonconforming use will be occupied if such increased
occupation will affect adversely public health standards, water quality,
sewage treatment requirements or the water quality of any lake, stream
or surface water system. The restrictions of § 490-202, minimum lot
size, minimum frontage, and setbacks, and § 490-804, Proximity to
water bodies, shall not apply to lots shown in a plat approved by the
Salem Planning Board prior to the adoption of this chapter until January
1, 1981, except that if two or more lots are contiguous and are held in
identical ownership and none of the lots are improved by a house, then
the restrictions of § 490-202, minimum lot size, shall apply forthwith.
Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12
consecutive months shall subject such property to all of the
requirements of this section.
§ 490-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-302
1:511
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Rural
District:
(1) Any use permitted in the Residential District.
(2) Farming and agriculture activities, as defined and restricted by
RSA 21:34-a; forestry; the keeping of cows, goats, sheep, horses,
and other domestic noncommercial livestock (excluding the
keeping of pigs); and greenhouses and nurseries as defined in RSA
433:21, provided that no such use shall be allowed on a lot less
than five acres in size. [Amended by the 1993 and 2009 Town
Meetings]
C. Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern uses under this
section in the Rural Districts:
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) When applicable, regulations and restrictions in the following
sections shall be met:
(a) Off-street parking: § 490-701.
(b) Open space preservation regulations: § 490-704.
(c) Home occupations: § 490-709.
(d) Accessory apartments: § 490-801.
(e) In-law use: § 490-802.
(f) Obstructed view: § 490-803.
(g) Proximity to water bodies: § 490-804.
D. Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Rural District upon finding that the specified
conditions exist:
(1) The uses of land for the purposes specified in § 490-301D(1), if the
Board of Adjustment shall find that the conditions specified in the
respective sections are met.
(2) Relief from any of the provisions of this section shall be granted for
a specified temporary period of time if the Board of Adjustment
shall find either:
(a) That a public emergency exists or is threatened of so serious a
character as to outweigh any diminution of surrounding
property values, any fire, health or aesthetic dangers or any
overcrowding of land or of public facilities occasioned by such
relief; or
(b) That such relief from any such provisions for such temporary
period not exceeding one year would be reasonably necessary
§ 490-302 SALEM CODE § 490-302
1:512
§ 490-303. Recreational District.
for the ultimate use or development of land in a permitted or
desirable way, and that any disadvantage of such relief would
be outweighed by the advantages available from such ultimate
use of the land.
(3) Golf courses and ancillary structures such as clubhouses, driving
ranges, equipment sheds and other buildings necessary for the
normal operation of golf courses if and to the extent that the Board
of Adjustment shall find that such relief will not create a fire,
sanitation, odor, health or traffic hazard, and that such relief would
tend to promote more advantageous use of land in the immediate
area, and that such relief would not seriously diminish the value of
surrounding property, and that such relief would not be contrary to
the spirit of this chapter. [Added by the 1990 Town Meeting]
E. Variances. In granting or denying variances in the Rural Districts, the
Board of Adjustment shall consider:
(1) That variances which will or may require disproportionate
expenditures of public funds during the period in which the
residential and commercial districts are being developed are not in
the spirit of this chapter nor generally in the public interest.
(2) The use of land for commercial or domestic piggeries shall be
considered contrary to the spirit of this chapter.
F. Contiguous lots in single ownership. See § 490-105.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings or structures and the use of land in
the Rural Districts, except that they shall not apply to existing buildings
or structures nor to the existing use of any building or structure but
shall apply to any alteration of a building or structure for use for a
purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use to which it
was put before alteration. However, no building or structure qualifying
as a nonconforming use shall be occupied for a greater portion of the
year than such building or structure was occupied as a prior
nonconforming use unless minimum lot size, setbacks, frontage,
building line, and all other dimensional requirements for this district
are met or a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment. In either
case, the requirements for septic systems, as stated in Chapter 391,
Article I, of the Salem Code, shall be met. Additionally, no building
permits or variances shall be granted that would be likely to result in an
increase of the portion of the year during which a building or structure
qualifying as a nonconforming use will be occupied if such increased
occupation will affect adversely public health standards, water quality,
sewage treatment requirements or the water quality of any lake, stream
or surface water system. The restrictions of § 490-202, minimum lot
size, setbacks, and minimum width at the building line, and § 490-804,
§ 490-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-303
1:513
Proximity to water bodies, shall not apply to lots shown in a plat
approved by the Salem Planning Board prior to the adoption of this
chapter until January 1, 1981, except that if two or more lots are
contiguous and are held in identical ownership and none of the lots are
improved by a house, then the restrictions of § 490-202, minimum lot
size, shall apply forthwith. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for
whatever reason for 12 consecutive months shall subject such property
to all of the requirements of this section.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the
Recreational District:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Private garage, municipal buildings, gardens and orchards
incidental to residential use.
(3) Family day-care homes, as defined in RSA 170-E:1, X(a),168 if
licensed by the State of New Hampshire to operate as such under
RSA 170-E.
(4) Churches, parish houses and convents. [Amended by the 1986
Town Meeting.]
(5) In-law unit within a year-round single-family dwelling. [Added by
the 2000 Town Meeting]
C. Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern permitted and all
other uses in the Recreational District:
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) Sewage drainage disposal facilities, whether through septic tanks,
dry wells, leaching fields, or public systems, adequate for the use
intended, shall be available.
(3) When applicable, regulations and restrictions in the following
sections shall be met:
(a) Off-street parking: § 490-701.
(b) Home occupations: § 490-709.
(c) In-law use: § 490-802.
(d) Obstructed view: § 490-803.
(e) Proximity to water bodies: § 490-804.
D. Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Recreational District upon finding that the specified
conditions exist:
168. Editor's Note: See RSA 170-E:2, IV(a).
§ 490-303 SALEM CODE § 490-303
1:514
(1) The use of land for such commercial activities common to
recreation areas, such as public bathing beaches, children's camps,
sales and service establishments, boat rental agencies, marinas,
boat clubs, picnic grounds and parking areas, if the Board of
Adjustment shall find that all other restrictions of this section are
met, or a variance or exception therefor granted, and that the land
is adapted to such use and either that there is a public need for
such use or that the facilities would be enjoyed by a sufficient
number of persons in such degree as to outweigh any diminution in
value of surrounding properties.
(2) Relief from any of the provisions of this section for a specified
temporary period of time not to exceed one year, if the Board of
Adjustment shall find either:
(a) That a public emergency exists or is threatened of so serious a
character as to outweigh any diminution of surrounding
property values or any fire, health or traffic dangers or any
overcrowding of land or of public facilities occasioned by such
relief; or
(b) That such relief from any of the provisions of this section for
such temporary period would be reasonable, necessary, or
desirable for the ultimate use or development of land in a
permitted or desirable way, and that any temporary
disadvantages to surrounding properties resulting from such
relief would be outweighed by the advantages available from
such ultimate use of the land.
E. Variances. In granting or denying variances in the Recreational District,
the Board of Adjustment shall consider:
(1) That much of the land in the Recreational District has been
developed and used without regard to problems or public interest,
including but not limited to water pollution and sanitation,
resulting from such development and use.
(2) That dangers of serious contamination of bodies of water, which are
great Town assets, and dangers of contamination of private water
supplies have resulted.
(3) That the protection of such bodies of water and such water supplies
is in the public interest and in the spirit of this chapter.
(4) That continuation of the practice of development of small lots in the
Recreational District is generally contrary to the public interest
and to the spirit of this chapter.
(5) The use of land for mobile homes, mobile home developments and
trailers or trailer parks is considered contrary to the spirit of this
chapter.
§ 490-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-303
1:515
§ 490-304. Garden Apartment R-A District.169
F. Contiguous lots in single ownership. See § 490-105.
A. Permitted uses. In the Garden Apartment R-A District, a building may
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, designed or used, and
a lot or premises may be used, for any of the following purposes and for
no other:
(1) Any use permitted by right in the Residential District, in
accordance with the requirements of said district.
(2) A dwelling for two or more families, provided that the entire lot
occupied by such dwelling shall be maintained in single ownership
throughout the life of the building.
(3) A professional office or studio other than accessory to a use
otherwise permitted, provided that the number of such offices or
studios on any lot shall not exceed one for each 25 dwelling units or
major fraction thereof on the lot, and provided further that such
office or studio shall be located only on the street floor of any
building and shall have access provided thereto from other than a
public hall.
(4) Any accessory use permitted in the Residential District shall be
permitted in the R-A District.
B. Restrictions.
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202. Additionally:
(a) No lot shall have an average depth of less than 150 feet. The lot
shall contain not less than 3,500 square feet for each dwelling
unit on each lot.
(b) There shall be a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet;
side yards with no buildings erected nearer than 30 feet to any
side lot line; and a rear yard with a depth of not less than 30
feet. However, cornices or cantilevered roofs may project not
more than two feet, and belt courses, windowsills, and other
ornamental features may project not more than six inches into
a required yard. Paved terraces, steps and walks (other than
such as are needed for access to the buildings on the lot) shall
not project within 25 feet of a street or four feet of a property
line.
(c) Chimneys, flues, towers, bulkheads, spires and other
decorative features shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 490-202, maximum height, provided that they occupy not
169. Editor's Note: Original § 3:4.1, District boundaries, which appeared at the beginning of
this section, was repealed by the 2012 Town Meeting. See now § 490-103.
§ 490-303 SALEM CODE § 490-304
1:516
more than 20% of the area of the roof of the building of which
they are a part.
(2) No building shall exceed a length of 160 feet.
(3) A minimum distance of 40 feet shall be maintained between all
buildings on the same lot.
(4) Any swimming pools provided on the lot shall conform to the Town
of Salem Swimming Pool Ordinance.
(5) Open space. Except as otherwise required, usable open space shall
be provided on the same lot with dwellings containing three or
more dwelling units. Not less than 400 square feet for each
dwelling unit on said lot shall be provided. On any lot containing 15
or more dwelling units, such usable open space shall be devoted to
improved and landscaped play and sitting areas for the use of the
residents thereof. The design, layout, and equipment of such play
and sitting areas shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Board.
(6) Outer courts. The minimum width of an outer court shall be 20 feet,
and the depth thereof shall not exceed its width.
(7) Inner courts. An inner court is permitted if the minimum dimension
of such court is equal to not less than 1/2 times the average height
of all surrounding walls in the case of nonresidential buildings and
not less than 1 1/2 times such height, but not less than 60 feet, in
the case of residential buildings. The height of walls surrounding
an inner court shall be measured from finished grade, at the base
thereto, to the top of such walls, except that in the case of roofs
with a slope exceeding five inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal,
the height shall be measured to the mean point between the top of
the said wall and the highest point of the roof.
(8) Off-street parking requirements. For dwellings for three or more
families, there shall be provided garage space or paved off-street
parking space, or both, sufficient in area for the parking at one time
of not fewer than 1 1/2 times as many passenger vehicles as there
are dwelling units on the lot. Parking in front yards, within 10 feet
of any side or rear lot line or within 15 feet of any wall or portion
thereof of a three-or-more-family dwelling, which wall contains
legal windows, other than a legal bathroom or kitchen window, with
a sill height of less than eight feet above the level of said parking
space, is prohibited. If provided in the open, all required parking
spaces shall be individually identified by means of pavement
markings.
(9) The restrictions for proximity to water bodies in § 490-804 shall be
met.
§ 490-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-304
1:517
§ 490-305. Manufactured Housing Park District. [Amended by the
1982 Town Meeting]
C. Exceptions. Any special exception use permitted in the Residential
District, upon approval of the Board of Adjustment.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
construction and alteration of buildings and structures and the use of
land in the Manufactured Housing Park District; except, however, that
these regulations shall not apply to an existing building, structure or
land if such existing building or structure or existing use of any
building, structure or land was a lawful use under the governing
provisions of prior zoning ordinances, nor to an alteration thereof for a
use or for any purpose or in any manner which is not substantially
different from that to which it was put before alteration. However, in
the event of discontinuance of a nonconforming use for whatever
reason for 12 consecutive months, then the following regulations shall
govern the erection and alteration of buildings and structures and the
use of land in the Manufactured Housing Park District.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the
Manufactured Housing Park District:
(1) Any use permitted in the Residential District.
(2) Manufactured housing.
C. Restrictions. The following shall govern permitted and all other uses in
the Manufactured Housing Park District:
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) The restrictions for proximity to water bodies in § 490-804 shall be
met.
D. Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Manufactured Housing Park District upon finding that
the specified conditions exist:
(1) The use of land for the purpose specified in § 490-301D, if the
Board of Adjustment shall find that the conditions specified in the
respective sections are met.
E. Variances. In granting variances, the following shall be generally
considered contrary to the spirit of this chapter in the Manufactured
Housing Park District:
(1) The use of land for livestock and poultry.
(2) The addition to manufactured housing of living quarters.
§ 490-304 SALEM CODE § 490-305
1:518
ARTICLE IV
Mixed-Use Districts
§ 490-401. Business Office Districts; Subdistricts I and II. [Added by
the 1982 Town Meeting]
A. Intent.
(1) Subdistrict I. It is the intent of this section to provide a district
within the community for the development and expansion of
business and professional office space. The architectural character
of the district shall remain as it is today, residential.
(2) Subdistrict II. This district is in a section of the community on Main
Street that abuts a business district at the Methuen Town line and
has a heavily traveled thoroughfare that serves as the easterly
approach to Salem. It is the intent of this section to create a district
for the development and expansion of business and professional
office space to encourage orderly development that will promote
and enhance the community environment and to only permit
development which is residential in its architectural character.170
B. Permitted uses.
(1) The following shall be permitted uses:
(a) Business and professional offices.
(b) Health care facilities. [Added by the 2015 Town Meeting]
(c) One-family and two-family dwellings.
(d) Use accessory to a permitted use.
(2) The following shall be additional permitted uses in Subdistrict I:
(a) Mixed office and residential, not to have more than two
apartment dwelling units.
(b) Funeral establishments.
(c) Group day-care center limited to 35 children maximum
capacity. [Amended by the 2001 Town Meeting]
(d) Municipal buildings.
(e) Community residential facility (see Subsection D of this
section). [Added by the 1991 Town Meeting]
(3) The following shall be additional permitted uses in Subdistrict II:
(a) Group day-care center. [Added by the 1987 Town Meeting]
170. Editor's Note: Original § 4:1.2, District boundaries, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by the 2012 Town Meeting. See now § 490-103.
§ 490-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-401
1:519
C. Restrictions.
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) In the Business Office Subdistrict I, the gross square footage for
new buildings shall not exceed 12,500 square feet. The total size of
existing buildings and proposed additions shall not exceed 12,500
square feet. [Added by the 2006 Town Meeting]
(3) Parking. In addition to conforming to the off-street parking
requirements of § 490-701, the parking area shall be located to the
rear of the principal structure when practical and possible.171
(4) Landscaping and screening.
(a) Landscaping shall be included in the overall site design that
enhances the aesthetic qualities and character of the district.
(b) Dumpsters or other trash receptacles shall be screened on all
four sides. Screening shall also be required when necessary to
protect against the glare of lights or other visual impact that
may negatively impact adjacent properties.
(c) Buffer zones shall be used whenever necessary to separate
residential and Business Office Subdistrict uses.
(5) No more than one habitable structure shall be permitted on each
parcel. Garages and storage buildings may be permitted in addition
to the principal structure. [Added by the 1985 Town Meeting]
(6) Poorly drained soils and very poorly drained soils may be used to
satisfy up to 1/2 of the unoccupied lot requirement. [Added by the
1985 Town Meeting]
(7) Structures shall be residential in architectural appearance with the
following guidelines: [Added by the 1990 Town Meeting]
(a) Existing buildings with historic features should be preserved
whenever possible.
(b) New buildings should be designed so that their scale,
proportions and materials blend with the existing residential
character of the district with consideration of the following
items:
[1] Height, bulk, and area of the building;
[2] Type and pitch of roof;
[3] Size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings;
171. Editor's Note: Original § 4:1.4.4, Signage, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed by the 1988 Town Meeting. See now § 490-702.
§ 490-401 SALEM CODE § 490-401
1:520
[4] Size, type, and location of towers, chimneys, and roof
structures; and
[5] Exterior colors and materials.
(c) In Subdistrict I, new buildings should be designed to resemble
the traditional form of single-family residential and accessory
buildings found in the Salem area in the 18th and 19th
centuries. Samples of this architectural style can be found in
Gilbert's History of Salem, New Hampshire (available in the
Kelley Library and Planning Department). [Amended by the
2006 Town Meeting]
(d) In Subdistrict II, new buildings should be designed to resemble
the traditional form of residential buildings found in the Salem
area in the 18th and 19th centuries. Samples of this
architectural style can be found in Gilbert's History of Salem,
New Hampshire (available in the Kelley Library and the
Planning Department).
D. Restrictions on community residential facilities. In Subdistrict I, the
following additional restrictions shall govern community residential
facilities: [Added by the 1991 Town Meeting]
(1) The community residential facility shall be built and managed by a
501(C)(2) or a 501(C)(3) nonprofit organization as designated by
the Internal Revenue Service.
(2) No more than five habitable structures shall be permitted on each
parcel with a maximum of four dwelling units per structure. [This
provision supersedes the first sentence of Subsection C(5) which
places a limit of one habitable structure on each parcel.]
(3) Each lot shall contain not less than 5,000 square feet of land area
for each dwelling unit, and each lot shall have a minimum frontage
of 150 feet. (These provisions shall supersede the requirements of
§ 490-202.)
(4) In no case shall there be more than 20 dwelling units on each lot.
(5) There shall be no more than an average of two bedrooms per
dwelling unit.
(6) No community residential facility may be located any closer than
1,500 feet to any other community residential facility.
(7) The community residential facility shall be townhouse-styled
dwelling units.
E. Special exceptions.
(1) In Subdistrict I, special exception uses shall be as follows:
(a) Public or private parking facility.
§ 490-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-401
1:521
§ 490-402. Limited Community Shopping Village District [Added by
the 1982 Town Meeting]
(2) In Subdistrict II, there shall be no special exception uses.
F. Variances. The following shall be considered in granting variances:
(1) That the use is compatible with the character of the district.
A. Intent. The Limited Community Shopping Village District is established
as a district in which the principal use of land is for activities offering
accommodations, supplies or certain specialized commercial activities,
such as retail outlets or service establishments, where achieving
conformity with abutting areas necessitates that commercial
development be limited and more closely regulated than in other
commercial zoning districts: [Amended by the 1985 Town Meeting]
(1) To encourage the construction of and the continued use of land for
commercial and service uses designed to serve both local and longdistance
travelers.
(2) To provide for orderly and responsible development and
concentration of such uses in those areas as may be determined
appropriate by the Town Meeting.
(3) To provide appropriate space and, in particular, sufficient depth
from the street to satisfy the needs of commercial development
where access is entirely dependent on the use of motorized
vehicles.
(4) To encourage the development of a district with such uses and in
such a manner so as to minimize traffic hazards and interference
from highway-oriented businesses and to enhance adjacent living
environments by providing for needed commercial services.
B. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of structures and the use of land in the Limited
Community Shopping Village District, except that they shall not apply
to existing structures nor to the existing use of any structure but shall
apply to any alteration of a structure for a purpose or in a manner
substantially different from the use to which it was put before
alteration.
(1) Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12
consecutive months shall subject such property to all of the
requirements of this section.172
C. Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be:
(1) General consumer retail.
172. Editor's Note: Original § 4:2.3, District boundaries, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by the 2012 Town Meeting. See now § 490-103.
§ 490-401 SALEM CODE § 490-402
1:522
(2) Offices, both professional and business.
(3) Establishments serving food and beverage.
(4) Banking facilities.
(5) Day-care facilities.
(6) All uses presently permitted in Rural Districts.
(7) Studios and personal service shops. [Added by the 1992 Town
Meeting]
(8) Community shopping villages in which: [Amended by the 2012
Town Meeting]
(a) No single store is larger than 8,000 square feet.
(b) The parking is in accordance with the requirements of this
§ 490-701.
(c) No part of any building shall be within 300 feet of a New
Hampshire dwelling in existence at the date of adoption of this
section.
(d) No parking area shall be within 100 feet of a New Hampshire
residential dwelling in existence at the date of adoption of this
section.
(e) There shall be maintained a landscaped area containing
shrubbery, plantings, trees, benches and grass, which area
shall be maintained between the parking area and/or the
structures, and any adjoining roadway in such area shall be at
least equal in square footage to the total footage of all
buildings on the site.
(f) No part of any freestanding light shall be higher than eight
feet.173
(9) Other uses compatible and consistent with the above uses which do
not create excessive noise, light or odors.
D. Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern uses under this
section in the Limited Community Shopping Village District: [Added by
the 1985 Town Meeting]
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) Where a lot sides or rears upon property in any residential zoning
district, a landscaped yard of at least 25 feet deep shall be
provided. Any such yard shall be used and maintained only as a
landscaped planting or screening strip, except for accessways, on
173. Editor's Note: Original § 4:2.4.8(7), Signage, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed by the 1988 Town Meeting. See now § 490-702.
§ 490-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-402
1:523
which shall be placed hedges, evergreens, shrubbery or other
suitable planting or screening materials. Plantings within the
twenty-five-foot yard shall effectively screen from view activities in
the abutting zoning districts.
(3) The restrictions for obstructed view in § 490-803 shall be met. The
restriction includes vehicles.
(4) The restrictions for proximity to water bodies in § 490-804 shall be
met.
E. Special requirements. [Added by the 1985 Town Meeting]
(1) Landscaping. Dumpsters shall be effectively screened on all sides.
Lighting shall be designed and located so as to avoid glare on
abutting properties and traveled ways.
(2) Access and travel controls. Each lot shall have not more than one
accessway to any street or highway, which accessway shall comply
with the following requirements:
(a) The width of any accessway leading to or from a street or
highway shall not exceed 36 feet nor be less than 15 feet in
width at the right-of-way line. Alignment of accessways shall be
determined through site plan approval.
(b) Insofar as practicable, the use of common accessways by two
or more permitted uses shall be encouraged in order to reduce
the number of access points along roadways, and when not
common, no part of any accessway shall be nearer than 20 feet
to any other accessway, nor shall any part of any accessway be
nearer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line.
(c) The locations of accessways shall be so arranged that they will
reduce the possibilities of traffic hazards.
(3) Architectural controls. The design of any development in the
Limited Community Shopping Village District shall be consistent
with design criteria as shall be developed by the Salem Planning
Board for:
(a) Compatibility of design with surrounding residentially zoned
districts.
(b) Permitted size of building masses, treatment of projections,
wall expanses and the like.
(c) Buildings/parking/pedestrian relationships.
(d) Landscaping or screening plans.
F. Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Limited Community Shopping Village District upon
§ 490-402 SALEM CODE § 490-402
1:524
§ 490-403. Town Center District. [Added by the 1998 Town Meeting]
finding that the specified conditions exist: [Added by the 1985 Town
Meeting]
(1) Relief from any of the provisions of this section for a specific,
temporary period of time (not longer than one year) if the Board of
Adjustment shall find that:
(a) A public emergency exists which necessitates grant of relief
requested; or
(b) Grant of relief would be reasonably necessary in order to
permit the ultimate and desirable permitted use and
development of the land.
G. Variances. [Amended by the 1985 Town Meeting]
(1) The following shall generally be considered contrary to the spirit of
this section:
(a) Manufacturing of any kind.
(b) Truck terminals.
(c) Arcades.
(d) Dance halls and nightclubs.
(2) In granting or denying variances in the Limited Community
Shopping Village District, the Board of Adjustment shall consider:
(a) That traffic safety and convenient property access/egress are
of prime importance in the design and administration of this
section.
(b) That no activity within the Limited Community Shopping
Village District shall be allowed to adversely impact abutting
residentially zoned districts whether by reason of fire,
sanitation, odor, health, traffic, stormwater runoff or visual
hazard/nuisance or any other reasonably preventable
condition.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide a district which
primarily provides municipal services, community services, and
services to senior citizens that shall serve as the Town's primary civic
center. The goal is to preserve and enhance the character of Salem's
civic center by achieving the following objectives in accordance with
the Town Master Plan update adopted in 1992:
(1) To allow for government, institutional, and public uses in a
designated district.
§ 490-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-403
1:525
(2) To provide safeguards for the preservation, enhancement, and
construction of appropriate buildings and landscape within the
municipal district which represent or reflect elements of the Town's
civic, aesthetic, cultural, social, economic, political, and
architectural heritage.
(3) To enhance and preserve open space, featuring natural vegetation
and a forest-like setting in the district, including the approaching
access from Veterans Memorial Parkway.
(4) To provide an attractive environment suitable for higher education.
(5) To enhance and preserve critical community recreational and
cultural resources located in the district.
(6) To provide a safe and attractive environment for senior citizens to
live and congregate.
B. Applicability. The following regulations shall govern the erection and
alteration of buildings and structures and the use of land in the Town
Center District; except, however, that these regulations shall not apply
to an existing building or structure, nor to the use of any building,
structure, or land, if such building or structure was a lawful use under
the governing provisions of prior zoning ordinances, nor to an
alteration thereto for a use or for any purpose or in any manner which is
not substantially different from that to which it was put before
alteration. Single-family residential development is permitted under the
provisions of § 490-301A. However, in the event of discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12 consecutive months,
then the following regulations shall govern the erection and alteration
of buildings and structures and the use of land in the Town Center
District.174
C. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Town
Center District:
(1) Municipal activities, including but not limited to government,
police, fire department, library, court facilities, public recreation,
and other public activities.
(2) Public facilities, including parking facilities.
(3) Temporary activities as authorized by municipal agencies having
jurisdiction.
(4) Public parks and playgrounds.
(5) Secondary school and associated customary uses.
(6) Postsecondary school and associated customary uses.
174. Editor's Note: Original § 4:3.3, District boundaries, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by the 2012 Town Meeting. See now § 490-103.
§ 490-403 SALEM CODE § 490-403
1:526
(7) Adult care agency, nursing home, convalescent home, continuing
care retirement center, or assisted living facilities.
(8) Child care agency, day nursery, or nursery school.
(9) Private, nonprofit community service centers available to the
general public.
(10) Private, nonprofit social service centers, both residential and
nonresidential, available to the general public.
(11) Hospitals and health care services.
(12) Business and professional offices.
(13) Religious institutions.
(14) Single-family dwellings.
(15) Use accessory to the primary permitted use.
D. Development standards. The visual character of the district is currently
defined by government and community services buildings surrounded
by generous open spaces and natural wildlife habitat. New buildings
and additions to existing buildings should have generous setbacks as
seen from the major streets and provide natural, open space buffers
between uses in order to maintain the character of the district.
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(a) Open space shall consist of no less than 50% of the lot area.
(2) Design and architectural standards.
(a) Massing and style. Building massing and style must draw on
the historical design elements that are contextually consistent
with regional New England architecture. Historical and
traditional design elements are encouraged. Neoclassical
design vocabularies are preferred within the district. Fences
and landscaping to screen service areas must be provided,
consistent with the intent and use of the space.
(b) Roofs. Preference shall be given to pitched roofs, consistent
with New England traditional or vernacular styles. Material
must be consistent with the architecture of the building.
Composition shingle material is acceptable, provided that it is
of high quality and provides architectural definition to the tab
shingle to emulate traditional wood shingle styles. Tile, slate,
or metal roofing is permitted, provided that it is consistent with
the architectural style of the building.
(c) Facade element. Design of the facade shall be highly detailed
and articulated to be compatible with the scale and sensitivity
to the institutional uses within the district. Facades should
§ 490-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-403
1:527
have a well-defined foundation, a modulated wall element, and
pitched roof or articulated cornice which defines the character
of the building.
(d) Entrances. Building entrances must comply with all current
accessibility regulations; however, the use of ramps and lifts is
discouraged. Buildings should be designed with entrances that
are barrier free for the intended uses. Where grade separation
of an entrance is required because of site topography,
accommodation should be provided in the architectural detail
of the entry to allow barrier-free use by building occupants and
visitors.
(e) Door and window openings. Doors and windows should be
entirely consistent with the architecture of the buildings in
design and placement. The use of cornices, architectural
moldings, side lights, transom lights, and raised panels in
doors is encouraged. A wide range of material for doors and
windows is acceptable, except that the use of commercial,
anodized or painted aluminum or steel storefront assemblies is
discouraged.
(f) Materials and design elements. Material chosen for exterior
elements should be consistent with the intent and use of
materials traditionally found in commercial and residential
design in New England. Siding materials such as clapboard
and shingle are preferred, and the use of new materials which
reduce maintenance but emulate the look and feel of
traditional materials is encouraged. The use of a variety of trim
material to provide detail at the eaves, corners, gables,
pediments, lintels, sills, quoins, and balustrades is encouraged.
The use of bays, towers, cupolas, cross gables, and dormers to
provide unique character to a building and provide articulation
of the facade is encouraged.
(g) Paving and curbing. Granite curbing, gray in color, is required
on all public roads. Rolled asphalt (Cape Cod berm) curbing is
unacceptable on all public roads but is permissible on private
roads, driveways, and parking lots. Curbing is to be sloped or
cut to provide a barrier-free transition at road crossings and
building entrances. Paving should be textured or of different
materials at pedestrian crossings and walkways. The use of
stone, brick or cultured stone pavers for entrance walkways is
encouraged. The use of textured materials for walkway
borders is encouraged.
(h) Signs. Signs of all types and description must conform to all
criteria and requirements established in § 490-702D.
(3) Parking. In addition to the requirements as set forth in § 490-701,
public parking for more than 10 cars must be allocated to the side
§ 490-403 SALEM CODE § 490-403
1:528
and rear of all buildings in such a way as to be buffered from public
view from the access street. The intent of this section is to maintain
a high standard of land planning and landscape architecture within
the district consistent with Salem's rural heritage. The criteria
established in the Site Plan Review Regulations are to be applied
in this district. In addition, the following special landscaping
requirements apply:
(a) A twenty-five-foot landscaped buffer area shall be maintained
along the parking area perimeter fronting the access street
consisting of ground cover, shrubs, and shade or ornamental
trees.
(b) Parking lots of five or more spaces shall be screened from the
access street and adjoining lots by stone walls typical of the
rural area farms and homes, continuous screening hedges, or
earth berms a minimum of 42 inches high.
(c) At the time of planting, deciduous trees must be of a two-inch
caliper or greater, and evergreen trees must be a minimum of
six feet in height.
(d) There must be one shade or ornamental tree provided in the
landscaped buffer for every 1,000 square feet of parking area.
(e) Contiguous parking areas with 11 or more parking stalls shall
provide canopy shade trees of three-inch caliper or greater for
every six parking stalls or fraction thereof selected from the
species as set forth in the Site Plan Review Regulations.
Alternately, one shade tree of four-inch caliper or greater may
be planted for every 12 parking stalls or fraction thereof. Each
tree shall be located in a planting area and/or tree well no less
than nine square feet in area.
(f) If wheel stops or curbing is provided, continuous planting
areas with low ground cover and tree wells with trees centered
at the corner of parking stalls may be located within the threefoot
overhang space of parking stalls.
(g) Hedges and other landscape elements, including planter boxes
over six inches in height, are not permitted within the
overhang space of the parking stalls.
(h) Trees shall be sited so as to be evenly distributed throughout
the interior of any parking lot.
(4) Trash storage and service areas. All outdoor trash and service
areas, except those for single-family dwelling use, shall be
screened from public view and view from abutting lots on a
minimum of three sides by a wall or hedge at least six feet in
height. The wall must be painted, surfaced, or otherwise treated to
blend with the development it serves.
§ 490-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-403
1:529
(5) Transformer entrances. All utility substations, other than individual
transformers, shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence a minimum
of five feet in height, except for necessary openings for access.
Transformer vaults for underground utilities and similar uses shall
be enclosed by a landscape hedge.
(6) Irrigation. All plant material and landscaping shall be provided
with a permanent irrigation system.
(7) Waivers. The Planning Board may grant waivers to this Subsection
D (development standards), if the considered use is consistent with
and compatible with the character of the district.
(8) The use of existing lots in the Town Center District for one-family
and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section but shall comply with the provisions of the Residential
District. [Added by the 1999 Town Meeting]
E. Restrictions.
(1) Residential facilities designed for exclusive occupancy by senior
citizens, at a minimum, must meet federal regulations for such
facilities.
F. Administration. The Planning Board shall administer this section.
§ 490-403 SALEM CODE § 490-403
1:530
ARTICLE V
Nonresidential Districts
§ 490-501. Commercial-Industrial District; Subdistricts CI-A, CI-B
and CI-C.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings and structures and the use of land
in the Commercial-Industrial District; except, however, that these
regulations shall not apply to an existing building or structure, nor to
the existing use of any building, structure or land, if such existing
building or structure or existing use of any building, structure or land
was a lawful use under the governing provisions of prior zoning
ordinances, nor to an alteration thereto for a use or for any purpose or
in any manner which is not substantially different from that to which it
was put before alteration, nor to lots shown in a subdivision plat which
has been approved by the Salem Planning Board. However, in the event
of discontinuance of a nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12
consecutive months, then the following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings and structures and the use of land
in the Commercial-Industrial Subdistricts.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in Commercial
Subdistricts: [Amended by the 1981 Town Meeting]
(1) In all subdistricts:
(a) Business and professional offices, banks, studios, municipal
buildings, passenger and taxi stations, and parking lots.
(b) Retail stores, except that those of the type specified in
Subsection B(3)(a) to (e) are not permitted in CI-A. [Amended
by the 1992 Town Meeting]
(c) Restaurants and other places for the preparation, serving or
sale of food or beverages.
(d) Personal service shops, including tailor, barber-beauty, shoe
repair, dressmaking and similar shops, and self-service
laundry.
(2) In Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict B:
(a) Child-care centers shall be permitted; see § 490-816 for
restrictions. [Added by the 1988 Town Meeting]
(3) In Commercial-Industrial Subdistricts B and C: [Amended by the
2004 and 2009 Town Meetings]
(a) Feed, hay, grain and building material storage and sales
facilities.
§ 490-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-501
1:531
(b) Public garages and repair shops, sales agencies for
automobiles, boats, farm, industrial and construction
equipment and filling stations. However, no such filling station
shall be permitted on a lot that is within 1,000 feet of another
lot on which there is an existing filling station or of another lot
for which a building permit has been issued for the erection of
such a filling station.
(c) Establishments for the sale or storage of furniture, plumbing
supplies, construction supplies, coal, oil or gas, monuments
and liquor.
(d) Hospitals, health care facilities, funeral homes, animal
hospitals, kennels and animal shelters, veterinarian
establishments, greenhouses and nurseries, roadside stands,
printing plants, commercial laundry or cleaning plants.
[Amended by the 2014 Town Meeting]
(e) Racetrack, amusement park, bowling alley, golf driving range,
dance halls and drive-in movies.
(f) Motels and hotels.
(g) Facilities for research and for the manufacture, assembly,
storage, distribution and servicing of products and materials.
However, any manufacturing or industrial use shall be
conducted solely within a building or buildings. Products and
materials must be stored in a fashion that prohibits their being
seen from highways or streets. No fabrication, processing,
converting, altering, chemical treatment or process,
manufacturing, or industrial procedure shall be permitted
which will result in:
[1] Dissemination of noise, vibration, odor, dust, smoke,
observable gas or fumes or other noxious or toxic
atmospheric pollutants beyond the boundaries of the
immediate site of the building in which such use is
conducted;
[2] Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any
person, building or vegetation;
[3] Radiation or interference with radio or television
reception beyond the boundaries of the immediate site of
the building in which such use is conducted;
[4] A harmful discharge of waste materials;
[5] Unusual traffic hazards or congestion due to the type of
vehicles required;
[6] The flowage of waste into the municipal sewer system that
would impose an unusual or abnormal burden upon the
§ 490-501 SALEM CODE § 490-501
1:532
system either because of the amount or quality of the
waste; and
[7] The requirement of an unusual or abnormal supply of
water from the municipal water system.
(h) Health clubs, sports and recreational facilities, indoor movie
theaters, colleges, private schools, and other educational uses,
agricultural uses, and places of worship.
(i) Accessory uses customarily incident to any of the foregoing.
(j) Facilities offering games of chance for charitable
organizations, as defined in RSA 287-D, which are licensed by
the state, provided such facilities are located in that portion of
the Commercial-Industrial B and C Districts to the east of
Route 93 and also to the east of South and North Policy
Streets. The minimum gross floor area devoted to gaming
activities shall be 4,000 square feet. [Added by the 2017
Town Meeting]
C. Restrictions. The following restrictions shall govern permitted and all
other uses:
(1) In all Commercial-Industrial Subdistricts:
(a) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(b) When applicable, regulations and restrictions in the following
sections shall be met:
[1] Off-street parking: § 490-701.
[2] Obstructed view: § 490-803.
[3] Proximity to water bodies: § 490-804.
[4] Large-scale redevelopment projects: § 490-710.
[5] Motel use (CI-B): § 490-815.
[6] Child-care centers (CI-B): § 490-816.
[7] Sexually oriented businesses (CI-B and CI-C): § 490-817.
(c) Wrecking and salvage yards shall be fenced or screened so as
to be completely hidden from view from the highway or street.
(d) Church steeples, flagpoles within the Commercial-Industrial
Subdistricts, and amusement rides in properly zoned
amusement parks may exceed 35 feet in height but may not
exceed 80 feet in height. Office buildings may be allowed a
maximum height of 45 feet. [Amended by the 1989 and
2004 Town Meetings]
§ 490-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-501
1:533
(2) In Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict A:
(a) Adequate provision shall be made for sidewalks in front of lots
where no public sidewalks have presently been provided by the
Town. In front of such lots, provision shall be adequate if either
sidewalk space is available for continuation of existing
sidewalk lines or sidewalk space, not less than six feet in width,
is made available. A certificate from the Selectmen of intent
ultimately to make sidewalk areas available in front of the
property shall be sufficient to exempt such area from the
requirements of this subsection.
(b) Each building may be located so that the building front
coincides with the inner sidewalk line.
(3) In Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict B:
(a) In that portion of CI-B north of the intersection of North
Broadway and Rockingham Road, no structures other than
signs will be permitted within 75 feet of the North Broadway
right-of-way.
(b) In that portion of CI-B north of the intersection of North
Broadway and Old Rockingham Road, permitted uses shall be
limited to those allowed in Subsection B(1) and (3)(a) through
(d), (f) and (h). [Amended by the 1988 Town Meeting]
(c) In that portion of CI-B north of the intersection of North
Broadway and Old Rockingham Road, no pavement shall be
permitted within 25 feet of the North Broadway right-of-way.
This area shall be grassed or landscaped and may be included
in the open space requirement. [Amended by the 1987 Town
Meeting]
(d) That portion of CI-B north of the intersection of North
Broadway and Old Rockingham Road is designated as a
controlled highway access area. The purpose of this
designation is to provide for control of the number and location
of accesses to the highway, subject to approval of the State
Highway Department, to ensure the safety of those using the
highway and abutting properties. The Planning Board shall
have the power to require dedication of rights-of-way to
provide for access to and circulation within the designated
area and to limit the number and location of driveways
connecting to North Broadway. [Amended by the 1987 Town
Meeting]
(e) In that portion of the CI-B west of Interstate Route 93, the
permitted uses under Subsection B(1) and (3) shall be
restricted as follows: [Amended by the 1992 and 2003 Town
Meetings]
§ 490-501 SALEM CODE § 490-501
1:534
[1] Any single retail store permitted under Subsection B(1)(b)
shall be limited to not more than 5,000 square feet, and no
more than 10,000 square feet of retail uses shall be
allowed on any one lot. [Amended by the 2007 and 2018
Town Meetings]
[2] (Reserved)175
[3] Restaurants permitted under Subsection B(1)(c) shall not
be larger than 5,000 square feet. Drive-through service
shall only be allowed if the Planning Board finds that the
site is suitable for the proposed use, there will be no
adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian safety, and that the
modification will be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and the Master Plan. [Amended by the 2007
and 2018 Town Meetings]
[4] Retail stores associated with permitted uses under
Subsection B(3) shall be accessory to the main use and
shall not comprise more than 20% of the gross floor area of
the building.
[5] Sales agencies for automobiles and boats shall not be
allowed. [Added by the 2006 Town Meeting]
(f) In that portion of CI-B District between Interstate Route 93 and
South/North Policy Street, any single retail store permitted
under Subsection B(1)(b) shall be limited to not more than
1,500 square feet in gross floor area, and no more than three
such uses, in combination, shall be permitted on any one lot.
Sales agencies for automobiles and boats shall not be allowed.
[Added by the 1994 Town Meeting; amended by the 2006
Town Meeting]
(4) In Commercial-Industrial Subdistricts B and C:
(a) In a filling station, a gasoline pump, light standard or similar
installation may be placed to within 20 feet of the street line.
[Amended by the 1980 and 1981 Town Meetings]
(b) No used car dealership in CI-B and CI-C may be located any
closer than 2,000 feet to any other used car dealership. See
§ 490-107 for the definition of "used car dealership."
(c) All buildings, parking lots, and other commercial
improvements in CI-B and CI-C shall include a buffered area
when abutting a Residential or Rural District. The buffer area
shall include evergreens, fences, shrubs, walls, or some
combination thereof, which will provide a visual screening at
175. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(3)(e)[2], as amended, limiting uses listed in
Subsection B(1)(b) to no more than 50% of the effective use of buildings or structures on
a lot, was repealed by the 2018 Town Meeting.
§ 490-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-501
1:535
§ 490-502. Industrial District.
all seasons of the year as approved by the Planning Board.176
[Added by the 1990 Town Meeting]
D. Exceptions. The Board of Adjustment shall grant the following
exceptions in the Commercial Subdistricts upon finding that the
specified conditions exist: [Amended by the 2005 Town Meeting]
(1) Relief from any of the provisions of this section for a specified
temporary period of time, if the Board of Adjustment shall find
either:
(a) That a public emergency exists or is threatened of so serious a
character as to outweigh any diminution of surrounding
property values or any fire, health or traffic dangers or
overcrowding of land or of public facilities occasioned by such
relief; or
(b) That such relief from any such provisions for such temporary
period, not to exceed one year, would be reasonably necessary
or desirable for the ultimate use or development of land in a
permitted or desirable way, and that any disadvantage of such
relief would be outweighed by the advantages available from
such ultimate use of the land.
(2) Relief from any of the regulations of this section if, and to the
extent necessary or desirable for the proposed use, such proposed
use involves the availability of a railroad siding as a necessary or
desirable adjunct.
E. Variances. In granting or denying variances in the Commercial
Subdistricts, the Board of Adjustment shall consider:
(1) That the compact development of CI-A, with maximum utilization of
its land area without waste thereof, is within the spirit of this
chapter.
(2) That traffic hazards and traffic congestion exist in CI-B and that,
except in extraordinary cases, any increase in such hazards and
congestion is contrary to the spirit of this chapter.
(3) That growth of activity in the districts is considered desirable
within the spirit of this chapter, and that the retention of parking
area for such growth is in the public interest.
A. Applicability of section. The following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings and structures and the use of land
in the Industrial District; except, however, that these regulations shall
176. Editor's Note: Original § 5:1.3.16, which immediately followed this subsection and listed
restrictions in the Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict C, as amended by the 1996 Town
Meeting, was repealed by the 2014 Town Meeting.
§ 490-501 SALEM CODE § 490-502
1:536
not apply to an existing building or structure, nor to the existing
use of any building, structure or land, if such existing building or
structure or existing use of any building, structure or land was a
lawful use under the governing provisions of prior zoning ordinances,
nor to an alteration thereto for a use or for any purpose or in any
manner which is not substantially different from that to which it was
put before alteration, nor to lots shown in a subdivision plat which has
been approved by the Salem Planning Board. However, in the event
of discontinuance of a nonconforming use for whatever reason for 12
consecutive months, then the following regulations shall govern the
erection and alteration of buildings and structures and the use of land
in the Industrial District. Further, signs of all types and descriptions
must conform to all requirements of this chapter not later than April 1,
1982.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Industrial
District:
(1) Business and professional offices, banks, studios, municipal
buildings, and passenger and taxi stations.
(2) Facilities for research.
(3) Facilities for the assembly, warehousing, storage, and/or
manufacture of goods and materials, except for truck terminals.
[Amended by the 2007 Town Meeting]
(4) Commercial indoor skating and tennis facilities.
(5) Motels and hotels.
(6) Health care facilities. [Added by the 2015 Town Meeting]
(7) Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing.
(8) Facilities for wholesale trade of goods and materials. [Added by
the 2018 Town Meeting]
(9) Showrooms up to 40% of the gross floor area of the unit but not
exceeding 5,000 square feet. [Added by the 2018 Town
Meeting]
C. Restriction. The following restrictions shall govern all uses in the
Industrial District:
(1) Zoning dimensions: see § 490-202.
(2) No building, parking lot or other industrial improvements shall be
located within 100 feet of residentially or rurally zoned land if such
residentially or rurally zoned land is not separated by a public way.
Existing vegetation within this setback shall remain undisturbed
but may be enhanced to provide a year-round visual screen.
[Amended by the 1998 Town Meeting]
§ 490-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-502
1:537
(3) Frontage is on a paved Class I, II, II, IV or V highway, as defined in
RSA 30,177 or on a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by
the Salem Planning Board. Frontage on Interstate Route 93 shall
not be deemed to constitute frontage under this provision.
(4) Lighting devices shall have continuous light. Lights shall not shine
on any street or adjacent property. Illuminating devices shall not
have visible moving or flashing parts.
(5) When applicable, regulations and restrictions in the following
sections shall be met:
(a) Off-street parking: § 490-701.
(b) Obstructed view: § 490-803.
(c) Proximity to water bodies: § 490-804.
(d) Motel uses: § 490-815.
177. Editor's Note: See RSA 229 and RSA 231.
§ 490-502 SALEM CODE § 490-502
1:538
ARTICLE VI
Overlay Districts
§ 490-601. Seniors Housing Overlay District. [Added by the 1998
Town Meeting]
A. Intent and purpose.
(1) It is the intent of this section to recognize the need for granting
provisions in certain districts of the Town of Salem whereby
appropriate housing alternatives may be provided for active adults
age 55 and over, elderly persons living independently, frail elderly
persons, and elderly persons requiring skilled or specialty nursing
facilities, and provide appropriate supportive health care and
services for older persons.
(2) This section is intended to operate as a Seniors Housing Overlay
District and will prevail in lieu of the underlying zoning, in
appropriate circumstances, as determined by the Town of Salem
Planning Board, to provide housing opportunities for elderly
persons and provide opportunity for transitional uses between
commercial districts, business districts, the Town Center District,
and abutting residential districts.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107. Cross-Reference: RSA 151 and RSA 151-C
contain specific definitions of residential care and health facilities
requiring licensing. Applicants for development of projects in the
Seniors Housing Overlay District must comply with all state and federal
regulations applicable to these facilities. [Added by the 1999 Town
Meeting]
C. District locations. The primary intent of applying an overlay to
established districts is to provide a compatible location for senior
housing projects. Senior facility developers and operators may apply for
any of the defined senior uses in § 490-107; however, the Planning
Board shall have the sole authority for approval of a proposed project
for a particular site based on the standards and criteria noted in this
section. [Amended by the 2002 Town Meeting]
(1) A senior housing overlay district may be established on any parcel,
or combination of parcels, that has the following characteristics:
(a) A total land area appropriate to the use as set forth in
Subsection F below, unless otherwise waived by the Planning
Board, consistent with the interests of the community.
(b) Served by municipal sewer and water or by private systems
approved for community use by the Planning Board and the
State of New Hampshire.
(c) Having frontage on an existing or proposed Class V Town road
of at least 200 feet, or access to a Class V Town road through
§ 490-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-601
1:539
an adjoining commercially zoned or business-office property
with conforming frontage on a Class V Town road.
(d) Commercial-Industrial A or C Subdistrict, or abutting or
adjoining commercially zoned land, or Business-Office
Districts. [Amended by the 2004 Town Meeting]
(e) Town Center District.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board may approve
placement of an overlay in any rurally or residentially zoned area
after employing the development standards in Subsection F.
D. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Seniors
Housing Overlay District: [Amended by the 2002 Town Meeting]
(1) A variety of housing types exclusively addressing the needs of
senior citizens, including but not limited to active adult homes and
facilities; independent living facilities; continuing care retirement
communities; assisted living facilities; congregate care facilities;
nursing homes; and skilled nursing facilities.
(2) Only single-family detached dwellings shall be allowed in the
Residential and Rural Districts. [Added by the 2004 Town
Meeting]
E. Evaluation criteria. In considering plans submitted under this section,
the Planning Board shall take into consideration the public health,
safety and general welfare and the comfort and convenience of the
public in general and the residents of the immediate neighborhood in
particular and shall make any appropriate conditions and safeguards in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section, and
particularly in regard to achieving: [Added by the 2002 Town
Meeting]
(1) Maximum safety of traffic access and egress, minimum on the
capacity of existing roads and sufficient parking areas to provide
for adequate off-street parking.
(2) A site layout which would have no adverse effect upon any
properties in adjoining residential districts by impairing the
established character or the potential use of properties in such
districts.
(3) The reasonable screening of all parking lots, service areas, and
multifamily housing developments from the view of adjacent
residential properties and streets.
(4) Conformance of the proposed plan with the Salem Master Plan.
(5) Installation of public improvements and amenities, at the expense
of the applicant, to assist in the establishment of a sound urban
environment. Such improvements may include, but shall not be
§ 490-601 SALEM CODE § 490-601
1:540
limited to, granite curbing, sidewalks and street trees, extension
of utilities and, when deemed necessary, improvements to existing
roadways and/or drainage systems in order to adequately serve the
proposed project.
(6) Conformance of the building and all related signs and structures to
the properties of the aesthetic character of the area, as determined
by consideration of architecture, building size and type, scale of lot
coverage, and consistency of uses in the immediate area.
F. Development standards.
(1) General standards.
(a) Zoning dimensions (minimum acreage, frontage, setbacks,
height restriction): see § 490-202.
(b) Seniors facilities must be served by municipal water and sewer
or by private systems approved for community use by the
Planning Board and the State of New Hampshire.
(c) Facilities designed as dwelling units within the district may
have a maximum of two bedrooms.
(d) Open space shall consist of no less than 50% of the lot area.
(2) Design and architectural character.
(a) Massing and style. Building massing and style must be
distinctively residential in character, drawing on the historical
design elements that are contextually consistent with regional
New England architecture. Historical and traditional design
elements are encouraged. Front yards which use boxwood
hedges, evergreen hedges, traditional style picket fences,
stone walls, or iron picket fences with granite curb and
pilasters are encouraged. Fences or hedges should not exceed
three feet in height at the fronts of buildings. Fences and
landscaping to screen service areas may exceed this height,
consistent with the intent and use of the space.
(b) Roofs. Preference shall be given to roof pitches consistent with
single-family residential design. New England traditional or
vernacular styles are preferred. Material must be consistent
with the architecture of the building. Composition shingle
material is acceptable, provided that it is of high quality and
provides architectural definition to the tab shingle to emulate
traditional wood shingle styles. Tile, slate, or metal roofing is
permitted, provided that it is consistent with the architectural
style of the building. Gutters and downspouts are encouraged
to provide drainage away from foundations but must be
consistent with the other architectural elements of the
building. The installation of chimneys on the roofs of all
§ 490-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-601
1:541
buildings is encouraged to convey the look and feel of
residential use.
(c) Facade element. Design of the facade shall be highly detailed
and articulated to be compatible with the scale and sensitivity
to the residential uses of the project. Facades should have a
well-defined foundation, a modulated wall element, and
pitched roof or articulated cornice which defines the character
of the building and provides relation to the human scale of
typical family residences.
(d) Entrances. Building entrances must comply with all current
accessibility regulations; however, the use of ramps and lifts is
discouraged. Buildings should be designed with entrances that
are barrier free for the intended residential or commercial
uses. The use of sloping entry walks, covered entryways,
porticos, arcades, and covered porches is encouraged. Where
grade separation of an entrance is required because of site
topography, accommodation should be provided in the
architectural detail of the entry to allow barrier-free use by
building residents and visitors.
(e) Door and window openings. Doors and windows form the
transition from public to private space and should reflect
residential detailing in design and placement. The use of
cornices, architectural moldings, side lights, transom lights,
and raised panels in doors is encouraged. Window openings
should vary between buildings but should not be unbroken and
continuous in any circumstance. The use of opening sash
windows with true divided lights or detailing to convey the
character of divided lights is encouraged. The use of shutters
consistent with the architecture of a building is encouraged. A
wide range of material for doors and windows is acceptable,
except that the use of commercial, anodized or painted
aluminum or steel storefront assemblies is discouraged.
(f) Materials and design elements. Material chosen for exterior
elements should be consistent with the intent and use of
materials traditionally found in residential design in New
England. Siding materials such as clapboard and shingle are
preferred, and the use of new materials which reduce
maintenance but emulate the look and feel of traditional
materials is encouraged. The use of a variety of trim material
to provide detail at the eaves, corners, gables, pediments,
lintels, sills, quoins, and balustrades is encouraged. The use of
bays, towers, cupolas, cross gables, and dormers to provide
unique character to a building and provide articulation of the
facade is encouraged. The color palette chosen for any building
should be consistent with traditional residential colors.
§ 490-601 SALEM CODE § 490-601
1:542
(g) Paving and curbing. Granite curbing, gray in color, is required
on all public roads and is preferred, except in areas of very low
traffic volume where no curbing will be required. Rolled
asphalt (Cape Cod berm) curbing is unacceptable in all public
ways. Curbing is to be sloped or cut to provide a barrier-free
transition at road crossings and building entrances. Paving
which provides a nonskid surface and is contrasting in design,
materials, or color is encouraged at all pedestrian crosswalks
and walkways.
(h) Parking. Parking lots in front setbacks are prohibited. Parking
areas are to be to the side or rear of all buildings. Parking lot
layout shall be planned to permit landscaping, buffering, or
screening to prevent direct views of parked vehicles from
adjacent streets. The use of traditional picket fencing, hedges,
walls, or landscape berms to define parking areas is
encouraged. Parking lot interiors shall be landscaped to
provide shade and relief. In parking areas of 11 or more
parking stalls, at least one tree of three-inch or greater caliper
shall be planted for every six parking places. Adequate tree
wells and irrigation shall be provided for all parking lot
landscaping. Pedestrian access is to be taken into
consideration in parking lot design. The use of separate
walkways is encouraged. Textured paving or grade-separated
(elevated) walkways are desired on all pedestrian accessways.
Separate loading areas are required for service vehicles in all
residential projects of 20 or more units and at all other
facilities greater than 2,500 square feet. In multifamily
buildings of 20 or more units, at least one loading area must be
provided for 20 to 50 units and one additional loading area for
each additional increment of 25 units. In other facilities,
loading areas must be provided at the ratio of one space for
each 10,000 square feet of building area on a site, except that
all activities of 2,500 square feet or more shall have at least
one loading area provided. Loading areas must be at least 20
feet by nine feet and have a minimum overhead clearance of 10
feet. Screening and landscaping shall be provided to block all
views of loading areas (except those specifically designated for
emergency vehicles) from the public right-of-way and adjacent
properties.
(i) Parking ratios shall be as follows:
Use Ratio per Dwelling Unit
Adult community 2.2:1
Independent living
facilities
1.5:1
CCRC 2:1
ALF 1:1 plus 1:each employee
§ 490-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-601
1:543
Use Ratio per Dwelling Unit
Congregate care facility 0.5:1 plus 1:each employee
Nursing home 0.25:1 plus 1:each employee
SNF 0.25:1 plus 1:each employee
Alzheimer's facility 0.25:1 plus 1:each employee
(j) Signs. Permitted signs are to be as specified in § 490-702D(1)
for Residential, Rural, Recreational or Garden Apartment
Districts.
(k) Lighting. Multi-halide lighting or color-corrected sodium
lighting is encouraged. Streetlighting, except as required for
vehicle entrances and public rights-of-way in the Subdivision
Regulations, should be pedestal mounted or mounted on
adjacent buildings at pedestrian-scale heights between 10 and
14 feet. Lights should not illuminate adjacent properties, and
caps or cutoffs must be provided to prevent direct lighting of
abutting or adjacent properties. The use of porch lights,
gatepost lights, and bollard lighting to illuminate walkways is
encouraged.
(l) Foundation planting and general landscaping. A broad range of
foundation plants and general landscape planting is
encouraged. The intent is to provide an intensity of
landscaping that creates a residential character for any project
in this district.
(3) Development density. [Amended by the 2002, 2003 and 2004
Town Meetings]
(a) Maximum allowable density shall be based on project location
as follows: [Amended by the 2017 and 2018 Town
Meetings]
[1] Commercial-Industrial Districts: five units per acre.
[2] Town Center District: four units per acre.
[3] Residential Districts: same as underlying district.
[4] Business-Office Districts: two units per acre.
[5] Rural Districts: same as underlying district.
(b) A density bonus of up to 10% of the total units allowed above
may be granted by the Planning Board for projects which
restrict the age of all occupants to age 62 and older. An
additional density bonus of up to 10% may be granted by the
Planning Board for projects of any size which dedicate a
greater percentage of affordable units than required in
§ 490-601 SALEM CODE § 490-601
1:544
Subsection H(5), but in no case may the total density bonus
exceed 20% of the total units otherwise allowed.
(c) Density calculations shall be based on the amount of
contiguous upland area of a lot.
(4) Open space requirements. Land within the parcel or lot which is
not specifically covered by the buildings, roads, driveways, parking
areas, or service areas, and not set aside as private yards, patios, or
gardens for residents, shall qualify as open space. Private yards
shall be considered to encompass all property within 20 feet of the
dwelling or building. Further, all open space shall be unobstructed
and open to the sky. Flagpoles, sculptures, benches, swimming
pools, tennis courts, atriums, trees, and similar objects shall not be
considered obstructions. No more than 25% of the minimum
required open space may lie within a wetland. At least 50% of the
required open space must be undisturbed land that remains in its
natural state. The size, dimension, character, and location of open
space shall be suitable to enable its enjoyment and use for
conservation, recreation, or agricultural purposes by residents of
the community. Such restrictions regarding open space shall be in a
form and substance as the Planning Board may prescribe, and shall
be recorded in an instrument enforceable by the Town. [Amended
by the 2017 Town Meeting]
(5) Single-family detached dwelling units may be situated on individual
lots, may be part of a detached condominium regime, or may be
separate rental units. Single-family detached projects within the
district require a minimum parcel size of 10 acres. In the case of
condominium units, condominium projects must be 75% owneroccupied.
If separate lots are created, they shall not be less than
10,000 square feet and may have frontage on either Town roads or
private roads within the overlay district, in which case the roads
shall be maintained by an owners' association. In the case of singlefamily
detached dwellings, the density of a district may not exceed
one unit for each 10,000 square feet of lot area.
(6) Multifamily residential structures may be either condominium units
or rental units, except that condominium units must be 75% owneroccupied.
More than one structure may be built on a lot in
accordance with the density limits for the project type.
G. Special use permits. The implementation of Seniors Overlay Districts
shall be overseen by the Town of Salem Planning Board. Under the
provisions of RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may, by application for a
special use permit, provide an exception from the development
standards in Subsection F, provided that:
(1) Such exception is consistent with the purpose and intent of this
section.
§ 490-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-601
1:545
(2) The exception is in the public interest.
(3) The exception will not aggravate or worsen the impact on adjoining
residential areas.
(4) The exception will provide a development opportunity that could
not be otherwise obtained.
H. Restrictions.
(1) Residential facilities designed for exclusive occupancy by senior
citizens, as a minimum, must meet federal regulations for such
facilities.
(2) All occupants shall be age 55 or older. [Amended by the 2004
Town Meeting]
(3) A unit occupied by surviving members of a household, in which the
head of household met the age requirements at time of death, may
continue to be occupied by surviving household members
regardless of age.
(4) Residency restrictions for residential projects within the Seniors
Housing Overlay District shall be accomplished by restrictions
recorded in condominium declarations, restrictive covenants, or
other documents recorded in the Rockingham Registry of Deeds.
All such covenants shall be subject to review by Town Counsel and
shall include enforcement provisions in favor of the Town.
(5) At least 10% of the total dwelling units in all projects shall be
dedicated as affordable to low-income households, defined as being
available at a cost of no more than 30% of gross household income
of households at or below 80% of the Lawrence, MA PMSA - NH
Portion median income as reported by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. As an alternative to providing
these units, the Planning Board may allow an applicant to
contribute a fee to a local housing trust fund to be used for the
development of affordable senior housing. The fee shall be
equivalent in value to the units which otherwise would have been
provided within the development, in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by the Salem Planning Board, and shall be paid
on a timetable approved by the Board. [Amended by the 2004,
2007 and 2017 Town Meetings]
(6) Pursuant to RSA 674:21, I(b), to ensure that the rate of growth of
new dwelling units does not unreasonably interfere with the Town's
capacity for planned, orderly, and sensible expansion of its services
to accommodate such growth, the construction of new dwelling
units approved under this section shall be phased so that no more
than 20 single-family detached units or 50 multifamily units shall
be built in any one project per year. [Added by the 2004 Town
Meeting; amended by the 2008 Town Meeting]
§ 490-601 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:546
§ 490-602. Depot Village Overlay District. [Added by the 2011 Town
Meeting]
A. Purpose. It is the purposed of this overlay district to:
(1) Encourage development in the Depot of a mixed-use environment
that is less automobile dependent and more pedestrian friendly.
(2) Encourage a diverse mix of business, commercial, office,
residential, institutional and entertainment uses for workers,
visitors, and residents.
(3) Limit and discourage development of highway-oriented strip
commercial uses that create traffic hazards and congestion
because they require numerous individual curb cuts and generally
higher traffic volumes.
(4) Encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment and pedestrianoriented
commercial enterprises and consumer services.
(5) Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and
nonresidential uses within and abutting the district.
(6) Allow for more compact development than may be permitted in
other zoning districts to reduce the impacts of sprawl and traffic
congestion.
(7) Allow for an appropriate density of land uses to achieve a critical
mass of people and activities needed to support vibrant Depot
Village developments.
B. Applicability and administration.
(1) The Depot Village Overlay District is hereby established and
consists of those areas shown on the Town of Salem Zoning Map on
file with the Town Clerk. The district boundaries are as indicated on
the Zoning Map. The Depot Village Overlay District encompasses
land located within the following underlying zoning districts:
Commercial-Industrial A, B and C, Business-Office I, Industrial, and
Residential. The provisions of this overlay district are
superimposed over the underlying existing zoning districts.
Applicants are encouraged, but not required, to use the provisions
of this overlay district.
(2) The Planning Board shall be the permit granting authority for the
Depot Village Overlay District and is responsible for administering
this section as an innovative land use pursuant to RSA 674:21.
(3) Since this section grants broad authority to the Planning Board to
modify underlying zoning restrictions to facilitate development in
the Depot, the Board may reject or require modification of plans
which it finds would have an unanticipated or undesirable impact
on the community or are not suitable for the sites on which they are
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:547
proposed. If a plan is rejected, the Planning Board shall state the
reasons for the rejection and offer suggestions for modifications to
the plan that would make it acceptable, after which the applicant
may submit a revised plan for the Planning Board's consideration.
(4) Conditional use permits. [Amended by the 2014 Town Meeting]
(a) The Planning Board may grant conditional use permits to
modify the requirements and standards in Subsections D, E, F
[except Subsection F(5)], G, and H of this section in limited
respects, provided that the Board finds that all of the following
criteria are met:
[1] The modification complies with the purposes of the district
noted in Subsection A;
[2] The applicant's particular situation justifies a modification
to the requirements;
[3] The site is suitable for the proposed modification;
[4] There will be no adverse impact on neighboring
properties;
[5] There will be no adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian
safety;
[6] The aesthetic character of the site and the surrounding
area will not be adversely affected; and
[7] The modification will be consistent with the spirit and
intent of this chapter and the Master Plan.
(b) An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit, and the
Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant it if the
Board determines such permit is not justified or warranted.
(c) This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21 and the Planning Board is vested with
sole authority to administer it and to grant conditional use
permits.
C. Review procedure.
(1) Applicants seeking approval to develop a project pursuant to this
section are encouraged to meet with the Planning Board prior to
submitting a formal application to the Board. The purpose of the
meeting is to present the proposed project informally and to
understand the development standards established pursuant to this
section.
(2) The Planning Board will review the following items when
considering proposals under this section:
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:548
(a) Architectural character.
[1] Building facade and exterior architectural features;
[2] Building height and setbacks;
[3] Rooftop features and cornice lines;
[4] Exterior materials and colors; and
[5] Exterior illumination.
(b) Urban design considerations.
[1] Building placement and orientation;
[2] Relationship to parking and adjacent uses;
[3] Relationship of building to sidewalk, public ways and open
space;
[4] Storage and loading; and
[5] Impact on abutters and nearby residents.
(c) Site improvements.
[1] Fences, walls and raised planters;
[2] Site landscaping and parking lot screening;
[3] Street and parking lot lighting;
[4] Plazas, squares and public spaces;
[5] Street furniture: benches, trash containers, news racks,
kiosks etc.;
[6] Safety issues; and
[7] Infrastructure and environmental impacts.
D. Allowed and prohibited uses.
(1) The following shall be permitted uses:
(a) Mixed-use developments with retail on the first floor, with
office and/or residential above, subject to the additional
restrictions noted below.
(b) Multifamily housing in a mixed-use development with no more
than 12 units per acre.
(c) Senior housing and assisted living with no more than 12 units
per acre.
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:549
(d) Business and professional offices, including medical offices, up
to 15,000 square feet (per building).
(e) Banks.
(f) Retail stores no greater than 15,000 square feet (per individual
store).
(g) Food markets up to 20,000 square feet.
(h) Convenience stores.
(i) Restaurants and other places for the preparation, serving or
sale of food and beverages.
(j) Production and processing of food products for restaurants
and food establishments in the district.
(k) Personal service stores.
(l) Bed-and-breakfast; hotels.
(m) Health clubs no greater than 10,000 square feet.
(n) Performance theater or movie theater with up to three screens.
(o) Public and private parking garages.
(2) The following shall be prohibited uses:
(a) Facilities for research and for the manufacture, assembly,
storage, distribution and servicing of products and materials,
unless associated with a previously approved use on the site.
(b) Gas stations and automobile repair or body shops; sales
agencies for automobiles, boats, and farm, industrial and
construction equipment.
(c) Convenience stores/mini-marts associated with gas stations.
(d) Motels.
(e) Single-family homes.
(f) Drive-through restaurants.
(g) Multi-screen movie theater with over three screens.
(3) The Planning Board may allow uses deemed similar to those listed
in Subsection D(1).
E. Restrictions.
(1) Location and distribution of uses. The ground floor of a commercial
building or mixed-use building (any combination of retail, office,
and residential) shall be occupied by commercial uses only.
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:550
(2) Height. Mixed-use buildings shall be permitted up to four stories or
60 feet in height.
(3) Maximum residential density shall be 12 units per acre.
(4) There shall be no minimum frontage requirement, minimum lot
size, and no front, rear, or side yard setbacks.
(5) Maximum lot coverage shall be 90%.
F. Parking areas. The following guidelines are included to ensure that new
and renovated off-street parking areas are constructed in accordance
with the district's desired design character, the provisions of this
section, and other city178 ordinances pertaining to parking.
(1) Parking lots for new construction are prohibited within the front
yard unless no other location is feasible. Parking lots that abut
public rights-of-way or grade parking under the building shall be
screened with one or a combination of the following:
(a) A low wall made of concrete, masonry or other suitable
material not exceeding a height of 2.5 feet.
(b) Raised planters planted with a minimum of 80% evergreen
shrubs not to exceed a total height of five feet (including
planter).
(c) Landscaping consisting of a mix of trees and shrubs, provided
that 80% of the shrub plantings are evergreen.
(2) Walls, fencing and architectural details shall compliment the
materials of adjacent architectural styles.
(3) Where walls are provided, planting areas shall be a minimum width
of four feet and should be located adjacent to the public right-ofway.
(4) Where possible, parking areas shall be interconnected in a manner
that allows the unobstructed flow of vehicles and pedestrians
between uses and parking areas.
(5) Shared or reduced parking.
(a) The minimum required parking spaces within the Depot Village
Overlay District shall be 75% of the minimum required parking
spaces found in § 490-701 of this chapter, provided that the
Planning Board finds that an adequate amount of parking will
be provided to meet the needs of the proposed uses.
(b) Conditional use permit. The Planning Board may grant a
conditional use permit to reduce this requirement to 50% of
178. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:551
what would be required in § 490-701 if it finds that the criteria
in § 490-701D and these additional criteria are met:
[1] Submission of a reciprocal agreement executed by the
owners and operators of the different sources or uses (to
be recorded in the Registry of Deeds) ensuring the longterm
joint use of such shared parking, and defining the
terms upon which the parking is shared;
[2] Submission of the following information:
[a] The hours of operation and parking demand for each
use;
[b] The hours of peak demand for parking;
[c] A description of the character of the land use and the
parking patterns of adjacent uses;
[d] An estimate of the anticipated turnover in parking
space use over a twenty-four-hour period of time;
[e] A site plan showing all proposed parking spaces,
including the shared use spaces in the lot and the
walking distance to the uses sharing the lot; and
[f] Any other information concerning parking deemed
necessary by the Planning Board to render a decision;
and
[3] A determination shall be made by the Planning Board that:
[a] The shared parking is no more than 500 feet from
each use sharing the parking facility;
[b] Hours of operation and peak demand of the uses
involved shall not conflict; and
[c] The shared parking will provide an adequate number
of spaces for the applicable uses.
G. Curb cuts.
(1) Developments shall be designed in a manner that minimizes the
number of curb cuts on primary streets. To the extent feasible,
access to businesses shall be provided through one of the following
methods:
(a) From an existing side or rear street or public alley, thus
avoiding the principal thoroughfare; or
(b) From a common driveway serving one or more adjacent
properties.
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:552
(2) The Planning Board may deny a curb cut if the proposed
development is inconsistent with the following guidelines:
(a) Curb cuts shall be limited to one unless the Board feels that
due to large parcel size an additional cut is justified.
(b) When access is available from a public alley the Board may
deny a curb cut from a primary street.
(c) Shared drives are encouraged between adjacent parcels when
appropriate.
(d) Curb cuts shall not be greater than 36 feet long.
H. Performance standards.
(1) Pedestrian and bicycle access. Provision for safe and convenient
pedestrian access shall be incorporated into plans for new
construction of buildings and parking areas and should be designed
in concert with landscaping plans noted below. Site plans in the
Depot Village Overlay District should provide for continuity from
sidewalks in public streets to all pedestrian entrances on the site,
and walkability should be given primary importance over road
speed and other access criteria. New construction should improve
pedestrian access to buildings, sidewalks and parking areas and
should be completed with consideration of pedestrian safety,
handicapped access and visual quality. Where appropriate,
applicants are encouraged to provide pedestrian and/or bicycle
paths (or connection to the proposed bicycle rail trail) connecting
the site with abutting areas in order to promote pedestrian and
bicycle circulation and safety in the Depot Village. When parking is
located in the rear, pedestrian access via a pedestrian-oriented
alley or walkway through to the primary street is encouraged.
Bicycle and pedestrian access that provides connections between
developments should be established. Connections with the rail trail
should also be provided.
(2) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be incorporated into new and
redeveloped properties in such a way as to create visual relief and
interest, provide shade for pedestrian areas and to screen parking
and loading areas. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect unless the Board finds that the plans
submitted are consistent with the intent of this regulation and meet
the specific guidelines as set forth herein. Landscape plans shall
show the location, type, and size of all proposed plantings as well as
enough of the surrounding context such that the Board may
determine the plan's appropriateness.
(a) Side yard treatment.
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:553
[1] Where the distance between structures on adjacent lots is
10 feet or less, the side yard shall be landscaped with
grass and plantings.
[2] Where the distance between structures on adjacent lots is
greater than 10 feet, landscaping shall consist of a
combination of materials sufficient to break up the view
into the side yard, but, for safety reasons, in no case
should this planting be impermeable; or
[3] Side yards may, in the alternative, be established as
pedestrian walkways to access parking areas to the rear of
the building. Such walkways shall be landscaped and
lighted for safety.
(b) Parking areas.
[1] Large parking areas shall be relieved by landscaped
islands of a minimum of five feet in width, equal in depth to
the depth of a typical parking space and located such that
there is one island per 15 continuous spaces;
[2] Alternatively, at least 5% of the interior area of the lot shall
be devoted to landscaping. Areas described in the above
shall have at a minimum one shade tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches diameter at breast height (dbh).
Trees planted in such locations shall be planted in
protected pervious areas which have a minimum
dimension of five feet; and
[3] Where parking lots abut public rights-of-way, shade trees
with a minimum caliper of three inches shall be provided
within a planting strip no less than five feet in width and at
a rate of one tree per every 10 continuous spaces.
(c) Trash and service areas.
[1] All service, loading and trash storage areas viewable from
a public right-of-way or from an adjacent residential area
shall be screened by one or a combination of masonry,
wood fencing, or evergreen plantings to reduce their
visual impact;
[2] Loading and service areas shall not face any residential
area unless no other location is possible. Loading areas
shall be subject to screening requirements stated herein;
[3] Garage doors and loading spaces are prohibited on the
front facade of any building unless no other location is
feasible; and
[4] Hours of operation for deliveries and trash pickup shall be
restricted to minimize impacts on nearby residences.
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:554
(3) Design regulations.
(a) Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented parallel to the front
property line to preserve a consistent facade line with the
street. Primary building entrances should be easily identified
and be oriented to the street. The primary entry should be
clearly visible from the public street which provides the
building's main orientation.
(b) Articulation.
[1] New and redeveloped buildings should reinforce the
character of the existing streetscape by creating visual
interest and reinforcing pedestrian scale. The apparent
bulk and large wall expanses of multistory buildings as
well as single-story buildings of 15 feet in height or more
should be minimized by incorporating one or preferably a
combination of the following:
[a] Windows;
[b] Architectural details;
[c] Canopies;
[d] Overhangs;
[e] Indented bays; and
[f] Change of building materials.
[2] The top of such buildings should display a distinct profile
or outline incorporating such elements as a projecting
parapet, cornice, upper level setback or pitched roofline.
When immediately adjacent a building with such
articulation, new and redeveloped buildings should
provide a treatment that is respectful, such as providing a
consistent cornice line where possible.
[3] Large expanses of blank walls are prohibited for
commercial and mixed-use buildings. The ground floor
facade along the primary street shall have continuous
storefront windows, with the exception of necessary piers,
columns, pilasters, doors, etc.
(c) Transparency. For commercial and mixed-use buildings, a
minimum of 60% of the building facade oriented to the street
must be comprised of clear windows that provide views to
indoor retail space, dining space or product areas when
applicable. Where parking occupies the ground floor, the same
solid to void ratio must be achieved utilizing techniques such
as half walls, grillwork, or landscaped trelliswork or their
equal.
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:555
(d) Doors and entrances.
[1] Buildings must have a primary entrance facing a public
street or way and should be visually prominent; and
[2] In buildings with multiple ground floor tenants, entries
should provide a coordinated design theme, i.e., a common
canopy, architectural projection or awning design.
(e) Pedestrian spaces and comfort.
[1] For the purpose of providing a pedestrian-friendly
environment in the Depot Village Overlay District, new and
redeveloped buildings should provide for outdoor seating
areas, scaled to the size and demands of the proposed use,
where feasible. For example, a large, multistory project
should provide a patio or small plaza area located near the
front entry with multiple benches and landscaping. A
mixed-use project with ground floor retail such as a
restaurant may provide an area for outdoor dining which
extends the indoor dining space for seasonal use. A ground
floor use may provide a sidewalk bench where there is
sufficient width.
[2] Such pedestrian areas are best located when they take
advantage of southern exposure and provide space that
affords visual connectivity but is set back from major
pedestrian flow and vehicular ways and is appropriate to
the location.
[3] Outdoor sales and display areas should be well organized
and located such as not to impede pedestrian circulation if
located on a public walk or way.
[4] The following guidelines should be considered in the
design and location of pedestrian spaces:
[a] Flexible design to allow for flexible use;
[b] Buffering from major vehicular areas such as parking
lots or main trafficways;
[c] Lighting for nighttime comfort and safety;
[d] Appropriate street furnishing (i.e., benches, trash
receptacles);
[e] A focal element where appropriate such as a water
feature, special landscape feature or public art
installation;
[f] Decorative paving and seasonal planting;
[g] South facing locations;
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-602
1:556
[h] Visual connectivity, especially to important views such
as an historic structure; and
[i] Appropriately scaled to the development.
(f) Utilities. Underground utilities for new and redeveloped
buildings are required unless physically restricted or blocked
by existing underground obstructions.
(g) Lighting.
[1] Site lighting, security lighting and architectural/landscape
lighting should provide the user with illumination levels
appropriate for the designed activity (i.e. parking, walking,
outdoor dining) while meeting minimum requirements.
Illumination levels should also be reasonably uniform
throughout the site and strive to minimize glare.
[2] Light fixtures should be designed to reflect the traditional
character of New England villages or downtowns.
[3] Adequate lighting levels should be provided in all
pedestrian areas, including building entries, along
walkways, parking areas, and other public areas. Lighting
plans should provide for:
[a] An overlapping pattern of light at a height of about 10
to 15 feet in lighted areas;
[b] Lighting at consistent lumens with a gradual
transition to unlighted areas. Highly contrasting pools
of light and dark can be temporarily blinding and
should be avoided;
[c] In each lighted area, design lighting levels that will
allow pedestrians to identify a face 15 yards away
(generally, a minimum of four footcandles). Adequate
lighting reduces anonymity and gives pedestrians an
opportunity to choose another route;
[d] Adequate lighting at all building entrances, exits and
corridors between buildings, at least four footcandles
during active use, especially where doors are
recessed;
[e] Confine site lighting to the project site; use shields or
other methods to eliminate glare on adjacent
properties;
[f] Place light posts and standards so that they do not
create hazards for pedestrians or vehicles;
§ 490-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-602
1:557
[g] Indicate specific lighting levels in each lighted area;
and
[h] Address potential impacts of lighting on residential
abutters and neighbors.
(h) Quality of site furnishings. Provide for the following site plan
elements:
[1] High-quality materials in site furnishings and features,
such as durable and easily maintained walls and paving;
[2] Site features and furnishings that discourage vandalism.
Furnishings that are easily removed or do not convey an
image of care invite misuse; and
[3] Safe materials, such as nonslip walkway surfaces.
(i) Signs.
[1] Signs should be designed to be compatible with the
intended nature of Depot Village (e.g., pedestrian-scaled).
[2] Sign materials in the Depot Village Overlay District should
include traditional-looking materials such as wood, brass,
bronze, or similar materials. Wooden signs should be
constructed of dense wood that will accept paint readily.
[3] The number and size of signs shall meet requirements set
forth in § 490-702.
[4] All freestanding signs shall be monument signs no more
than six feet in height.
[5] All wall signs shall be individual letters.
[6] All sign illumination shall be external. Neon, fluorescent,
and LED lighting is not allowed. Sign lighting shall comply
with § 490-702D(2)(i).
(j) Snow storage/removal. Adequate areas for snow storage
should be provided. Removal and off-site storage may be
required if adequate on-site areas are not available.
(k) Accessibility. State and federal regulations on accessibility
shall be met.
I. Traffic management.
(1) The traffic management regulations in the Site Plan Review
Regulations shall apply.
(2) Applicants shall be required to implement the road connections and
improvements outlined in the Depot Redevelopment Plan, as
adopted by the Planning Board.
§ 490-602 SALEM CODE § 490-603
1:558
§ 490-603. Business Innovation Overlay District. [Added by the
2016 Town Meeting]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Business Innovation Overlay District is to
encourage and support key growth industries (including but not limited
to high technology, health care, medical device, biotechnology, and
education) by supporting a diverse mix of business, commercial, office,
residential, institutional, and entertainment uses for workers, visitors,
and residents in an integrated campus-like setting; to ensure that
future development is complementary and compatible in purpose and
use; to encourage the redevelopment of existing properties to bring
increased investment to the Town of Salem to create a sustainable
economic base; to encourage the retention, growth, and creation of
innovative businesses and sustainable jobs; to enable residents to live/
work/play within this district; and to leverage the New Hampshire
Advantage, and Salem's existing businesses, to build an environment in
which innovative businesses, entrepreneurs, and workers can thrive.
B. Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this section may be applied to any lot in the
portion of the Commercial-Industrial District B west of Interstate
93 and between Interstate 93 and North and South Policy Street
and in the Industrial District which consists of 10 acres or more.
(2) In accordance with RSA 674:21, I(i), the intent of these provisions
is to promote flexibility in development and redevelopment of
parcels in the Commercial-Industrial District B and Industrial
District in the vicinity of Interstate 93. The process allows flexibility
for projects which meet the criteria in Article IV to be proposed
largely independent from current land use regulations, including
the selection of land uses, density, setbacks, buffers, building
heights, lot sizes, lot dimensions, and parking requirements
otherwise applicable to the property.
C. Conditional use permits. The Planning Board may grant conditional use
permits to vary the provisions of §§ 490-501 and 490-502 (permitted
uses and restrictions), and § 490-701 (Off-street parking and loading),
consistent with the objectives and criteria below. An applicant is not
entitled to a conditional use permit, and the Planning Board may, in its
discretion, decline to grant such permit if the Board determines that
such permit is not justified or warranted in accordance with the below
objectives and criteria and the purpose of this section. This section is
adopted as an innovative land use control pursuant to RSA 674:21, II,
and the Planning Board is vested with sole authority to administer it
and to grant the conditional use permits described herein. All other
zoning regulations shall apply.
D. Conceptual development plan.
(1) As part of the site plan approval process for development using the
Business Innovation Overlay District, the applicant/owner shall be
§ 490-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-603
1:559
required to prepare a conceptual development plan for the entire
parcel even if construction is to be phased. The conceptual
development plan shall show existing site conditions and proposed
development, including the general types, locations and intensities
of proposed land uses and proposed traffic and pedestrian flows,
and shall generally indicate how the proposed development of
the site will impact municipal services and facilities and abutting
properties.
(2) The conceptual development plan and subsequent approved site
plan shall meet the following objectives and criteria:
(a) Encourage the aggregation of smaller existing properties as
well as the redevelopment of older commercial and industrial
properties;
(b) Encourage a campus-like development pattern (with
interconnected buildings, parking, pedestrian access, and
open space) which provides an alternative to conventional
commercial-industrial development;
(c) Encourage new roadway configurations, connections and
access methods that enable improved access and facilitate
vehicle movement without degrading intersection function
and/or creating bottlenecks;
(d) Encourage complementary and integrated uses such as retail,
residential and commercial that are co-located within a single
building;
(e) Allow complementary retail uses (e.g. banking, coffee shop,
dry cleaner, etc.) as part of a mixed-use development to serve
office/industrial employees that are fully integrated into the
primary building structure;
(f) Allow limited multifamily residential uses (condominiums,
apartments, etc.) that do not exceed 20% of the total gross
floor area on a site as part of a mixed-use development that are
physically integrated with and complementary to the primary
building structure(s);
(g) Avoid freestanding and/or standalone retail and residential
uses;
(h) Mitigate negative impacts on traffic, public utilities, municipal
services, and natural resources;
(i) Provide high-quality site planning, architectural, landscaping,
lighting, and signage designs that meet the Town of Salem
Design Guidelines;
(j) Create pedestrian and vehicular links to abutting parcels and
add sidewalks that enable interconnected and safe pedestrian
§ 490-603 SALEM CODE § 490-603
1:560
access to avoid the need to use vehicles to access other
buildings and/or properties;
(k) Establish open space amenities, including usable common
land, outdoor plazas, greens, or parks.
(l) Buffer residential areas from commercial-industrial
encroachment. No building, parking lot or other improvements
shall be located within 100 feet of residentially or rurally zoned
land if such residentially or rurally zoned land is not separated
by a public way;
(m) Prohibit commercial-industrial access onto Brookdale Road
and Brady Avenue;
(n) Limit building height to 75 feet (NOTE: Building height shall be
calculated in accordance with the New Hampshire State
Building Code, as amended.);
(o) At least 20% of the total parking on a site must be located in
parking decks, below-grade parking garages, or at grade
parking incorporated into a building;
(p) Be consistent with the Salem Master Plan.
(3) The Planning Board shall have sole authority for approval of a
conceptual development plan based on the criteria noted above.
The Planning Board shall have the authority and ability to deny a
conceptual development plan if it deems the plan to be unsuitable,
undesirable or inconsistent with the vision and purpose of this
section. The Board may approve amendments or revisions to a
previously approved conceptual development plan. All subsequent
site plans and subdivisions submitted to the Planning Board for
approval within the parcel shall conform to the conceptual
development plan and these provisions and the Site Plan Review
Regulations. The Planning Board may adopt additional
performance standards for Innovation District projects. The
construction standards in the Subdivision Regulations, the Town of
Salem Design Guidelines, and the Traffic Management Regulations
shall apply.
E. Waivers. The Planning Board may grant waivers to modify the
requirements and standards in Subsection D of this section in limited
respects, provided the Board finds that all of the following criteria are
met:
(1) The modification complies with the purposes of the Business
Innovation Overlay District;
(2) The applicant's particular situation justifies a modification to the
requirements and benefits the overall Business Innovation Overlay
District and the Town of Salem;
§ 490-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-603
1:561
(3) The site is suitable for the proposed modification;
(4) There will be no adverse impact on neighboring properties;
(5) There will be no adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian safety;
(6) The aesthetic character of the site and the surrounding area will
not be adversely affected;
(7) The modification will be consistent with the spirit and intent of this
chapter and the Master Plan.
§ 490-603 SALEM CODE § 490-603
1:562
ARTICLE VII
Regulations
§ 490-701. Off-street parking and loading. [Amended by the 1981
Town Meeting]
A. Intent. To provide for the free movement of ordinary public and private
traffic in the streets at all times, to reduce congestion in the streets and
to permit the rapid but safe passage of emergency vehicles of all sorts,
to facilitate the maneuvering of public emergency equipment in the
streets, to facilitate the removal of snow, and for all related purposes, it
is declared to be the intent of this section that all structures and land
uses be provided with adequate associated off-street vehicular parking
space to meet the reasonable parking needs of persons making use of
the premises.
B. Existing structures and uses; exceptions.
(1) The off-street parking requirements set forth in the Table of Off-
Street Parking Requirements in Subsection E shall apply to all
buildings and land uses except those:
(a) In existence at the effective date of adoption of this section.
(b) For which building permits were approved by the effective date
of adoption of this section.
(c) Located in Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict A.
(2) After the adoption of this section:
(a) No expansion of a building or use may take place unless the
requirements of this section are met with respect to such
expansion.
(b) No change of use may take place unless the requirements of
this section are met for such changed use.
C. Lot design and landscaping requirements. [Amended by the 1990,
2004 and 2005 Town Meetings]
(1) Parking lot design, except for one- and two-family dwellings, shall
be regulated by the following provisions:
(a) All parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with a
minimum of two inches of bituminous concrete or equivalent
material acceptable to the Town Engineer. Parking spaces shall
be clearly marked on the parking lot surface.
(b) All parking areas shall be graded and drained so as not to
cause puddling or water accumulation within the parking area.
(c) Joint off-street parking facilities may be provided by two or
more separate buildings or land uses on the same lot or on
§ 490-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-701
1:563
contiguous lots, but in such case the total spaces required shall
be the sum of the spaces required for the individual buildings
and land uses.
(d) Each required off-street space shall be at least nine feet in
width and at least 20 feet in length. The minimum parking aisle
width for ninety-degree parking shall be 24 feet, except for
expansion of existing parking lots where a twenty-two-foot
width is already provided. [Amended by the 2006 Town
Meeting]
(e) Handicap parking space requirements must comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations.
(f) At least 75% of the required parking spaces for nonindustrial
uses must be located within 400 feet (as measured by walking
distance) from the nearest public entrance to the building they
serve unless the Planning Board determines that all of the
following criteria are met: [Added by the 2008 Town
Meeting]
[1] The applicant's particular situation justifies a modification
to the requirement;
[2] The site and proposed use(s) are suitable for the proposed
parking layout;
[3] There will be no adverse impact on neighboring
properties;
[4] There will be no adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian
safety; and
[5] The modification will be consistent with the spirit and
intent of the parking regulations.
(2) Parking lot landscaping requirements. Parking lot landscaping
shall be regulated by the following provisions:
(a) In off-street parking lots for 10 or more cars, but fewer than 50
cars, the area within five feet of the perimeter of such parking
lot, except for the entrances to the lot and except where the lot
is adjacent to the building that it serves, will be landscaped and
adequately maintained with grass, shrubs, shade or
ornamental trees or ground cover plantings.
(b) In off-street parking lots for 50 or more vehicles, the Planning
Board shall require, within the perimeter of the parking lot, not
less than one live shade or ornamental tree for each 2,000
square feet of parking area. Additionally, the area within 10
feet of the perimeter of such parking lot, except for the
entrances to the lot and except where the lot is adjacent to the
building that it serves, will be landscaped and adequately
§ 490-701 SALEM CODE § 490-701
1:564
maintained with grass, shrubs, shade or ornamental trees, or
ground cover plantings.
(c) The provisions of this section do not apply to multiple-story
parking decks.
(d) In off-street parking lots for 100 or more vehicles, no pavement
other than accessways shall be permitted within 20 feet of the
front property line. This area shall be grassed or landscaped
and may be included in the open space requirement.
D. Conditional use permits. [Added by the 2008 Town Meeting]
(1) The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to modify
the requirements of Subsection E in limited respects. provided that
the Board finds that all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The modification complies with the purposes of the parking
regulations noted in Subsection A.
(b) The applicant's particular situation justifies a modification to
the requirements.
(c) The site is suitable for the proposed modification.
(d) There will be no adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(e) There will be no adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian safety.
(f) The aesthetic character of the site and the surrounding area
will not be adversely affected.
(g) The modification will be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and the Master Plan.
(2) An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit, and the
Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant it if the
Board determines such permit is not justified or warranted.
(3) This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21, and the Planning Board is vested with sole
authority to administer it and to grant the conditional use permits.
[Added by the 2010 Town Meeting]
E. Table of Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. Off-street parking
requirements are shown in the following table:
Table of Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Principal Use
Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Agricultural - road stand 7 per customer service employee
Colleges, universities, trade
schools and vocational institutions
1 per 2 seats and 1 per employee
§ 490-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-701
1:565
Table of Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Principal Use
Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Covered skating rinks, bowling
alleys and all other similar places
of assembly, the capacity of which
cannot be measured in terms of
seats
1 per 150 square feet of gross
floor area
Group day-care centers and child
care centers [Amended by the
2001 Town Meeting]
1 per employee and 1 per every 4
students maximum capacity in
Business Office I District or 1 per
7 students maximum capacity in
other districts
Housing: single-family dwelling
and apartments
2 per dwelling unit
Housing for the elderly 1 per dwelling unit
Industrial: wholesale, warehouse
and storage [Amended by the
2004 Town Meeting]
1 per employee and 1 per
company vehicle operating from
premises and 1 per 1,000 square
feet of first 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area and 1 per each
additional 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Industrial: manufacturing,
research and testing laboratories
[Amended by the 2004 Town
Meeting]
1 per employee and 1 per
company vehicle operating from
premises and 1 per 1,200 square
feet of gross floor area
Medical and dental offices and
medical office buildings
[Amended by the 2008 Town
Meeting]
1 per 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Membership club [Amended by
the 1988 Town Meeting]
1 per 150 square feet of gross
floor area and 1 per 3 seats for
ancillary restaurant and 1 per
employee
Motels and hotels 1 per rental unit and 1 per 5 seats
in ancillary restaurant, of gross
floor area used, and 1 per 300
square feet of gross floor area for
function rooms and other such
uses
Office: business, professional,
administrative and bank
[Amended by the 1988 Town
Meeting]
1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 490-701 SALEM CODE § 490-701
1:566
§ 490-702. Signs. [Amended by the 1988, 1989, 1992, 1997, 2000,
2002, 2005 and 2006 Town Meetings]
Table of Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Principal Use
Off-Street Parking
Requirements
Places of assembly: theaters,
auditoriums, churches and other
places of assembly with fixed
seats (based on maximum
capacity)
1 per 3 seats and 1 per 55 inches
of permanent bleacher or bench
seating space and 1 per 150
square feet of area without
permanent seating facilities that is
devoted regularly to public
assembly and 1 per employee
Restaurants [Amended by the
2006 Town Meeting]
1 per 75 square feet of gross floor
area or 1 per 2 seats, whichever is
greater; minimum 25 spaces
required for all restaurants
Retail sales of furniture,
automobiles, nursery stock and
such other goods as usually
involve extensive display areas in
relation to customer traffic
1 per 500 square feet of gross
floor area
Retail stores, store groups, shops
and service establishments
1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area of first floor area and 1
per 400 square feet of gross floor
area above and below first floor
Sports complex* 0.25 per seat as a general
requirement
NOTES:
* Applicant shall submit a traffic analysis which would include but not
be limited to design hourly volume (DHV), peak hour traffic entering
and leaving the site and generated traffic, and a comprehensive
traffic assessment concerning traffic circulation within the parking
lot, and conflict points at the site, and adjacent roadways and
intersections.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the erection of signs
for the purpose of providing information and advertising in an orderly,
effective and safe manner. Restrictions on type, location and size of
signs protect the public from hazardous and distracting displays and
create an attractive environment which is conducive to business,
industry, and tourism.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Administration and enforcement.
§ 490-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-702
1:567
(1) A permit shall be applied for and received from the Building
Department prior to erecting, (re)placing, rebuilding,
reconstructing, or moving any sign. A permit is not necessary for
sign repair and maintenance.
(2) The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a sketch
plan of the site and elevation drawings of the proposed sign,
caption of the proposed sign, and such other data as are pertinent
to the application.
(3) All signs shown on an approved site plan may not be altered
without the approval of the Planning Board, unless the proposed
alteration is to change a tenant name or the effect of the alteration
does not make the sign more intensive and/or obtrusive.
(4) In accordance with RSA 676:17, any person who violates any part
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a
fine of $100 for each day the violation continues after written
notification.
D. Permitted signs. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the
contrary, to the extent that this section permits a sign containing
commercial copy, it shall permit a noncommercial sign to the same
extent.
(1) Within any Residential, Rural, Recreational, or Garden Apartment
District, signs or nameplates advertising those uses permitted in
the respective district are permitted with a thirty-foot setback as
follows:
(a) For multifamily or multi-unit ("multi" meaning greater than
two) structures, one identification sign for which the display
area shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(b) For nonresidential uses, one identification sign not exceeding a
total of 16 square feet.
(c) Signs shall be painted on or be placed flat against the building
facade or detached, provided that they do not exceed six feet in
height, and shall not be internally illuminated.
(d) Subdivision development identification signs. One freestanding
sign identifying a subdivision is allowed at each entrance to the
subdivision with a minimum setback from the right-of-way of
five feet, a maximum height of five feet, and a maximum
display area of 20 square feet. Such signs may not be located in
the public right-of-way.
(2) Within any Commercial-Industrial, Business Office or Industrial
District, or Limited Community Shopping District, signs are
permitted in accordance with the following table179 and as
restricted by the following subsections:
§ 490-702 SALEM CODE § 490-702
1:568
(a) Freestanding signs.
[1] Where more than one freestanding sign is permitted, the
minimum distance between the signs is 300 feet.
[2] Where a parcel fronts on more than one public street
(excluding alleys and service ways), the provisions of this
subsection shall apply to each frontage.
[3] The maximum portion of a freestanding sign dedicated to
changeable copy is 20%.
[4] Minimum setback for freestanding signs may be reduced
to 10 feet provided the freestanding sign area is reduced
by at least 50%.
[5] All freestanding signs must incorporate the property's
street address and plaza name (if any) on the sign.
[6] In the Business Office I District, signs may not be
internally illuminated.
[7] Ground/monument signs shall be located perpendicular to
the road.
(b) Wall signs.
[1] Linear building frontage refers to building frontage facing
on each public right-of-way (excluding service streets and
alleys) or interior courtyard/parking area. Businesses
without frontage on streets may be allowed one wall sign
not exceeding 15 square feet in size.
[2] Lots fronting on more than one public right-of-way may not
combine allowable square feet for one frontage with that
of another frontage for the purpose of placing the
combined area of signs on one frontage.
[3] The maximum permitted area for wall signs may be
increased by 10% provided the applicant reduces the area
of his permitted freestanding sign(s) by at least 30% and/
or reduces the number of freestanding signs permitted on
the property.
(c) Roof signs.
[1] All roof signs must be set back a distance of at least four
feet from all the outside walls of the building on or over
which they are located.
[2] Roof signs are not permitted in the Limited Community
Shopping District.
179. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Signs is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 490-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-702
1:569
(d) Projecting signs. The projecting sign may exist instead of, but
not in addition to, a freestanding sign.
(e) Under canopy signs. Under canopy signs shall be placed
perpendicular to the building. In the Limited Community
Shopping District, these signs shall be of a carved wooden
design.
(f) Commercial temporary signs. [Amended by the 2009 Town
Meeting]
[1] A poster or banner that does not exceed 20 square feet in
size is permitted on a building or wall or on an existing
freestanding sign, or one A-frame/sandwich board sign up
to nine square feet in size and no taller than three feet is
permitted up to 14 days at a time up to three times per
calendar year. Permits are required for these temporary
signs.
[2] A sign described in Subsection D(2)(f)[1] above, or a
portable or wheeled sign, is allowed for 30 days upon the
opening of a new business. [Amended by the 2011 Town
Meeting]
(g) Office/industrial park identification signs. Freestanding signs
with a maximum display area of 24 square feet are permitted at
the entrance to an industrial or office park development with
multiple lots. These signs shall be less than six feet in height.
Such signs may identify the industrial or office park by name
and street address but shall not list the subdivision tenants nor
be situated in the public right-of-way.
(h) Directional signs. One such sign is permitted near each
driveway path (i.e., lane). The area of each sign may not exceed
four square feet. Such signs shall be limited to "in," "out,"
"enter," "exit," etc. Directional signs shall not be used to
advertise the business or products on site.
(i) Illumination. No sign which is visible from a property used for
residential purposes shall be illuminated between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the premises on which it is
located is open for business.
(j) Signs allowed without permits (provided all other provisions of
this section are met):
[1] Real estate signs. One real estate "for sale," "for rent" or
"for lease" sign is permitted, provided that:
[a] The size of the sign shall not exceed six square feet in
area in districts zoned Residential, Rural, or
Recreational or 20 square feet in all other districts.
§ 490-702 SALEM CODE § 490-702
1:570
[b] The sign advertises only the premises on which it is
located and is removed promptly after completion of
the sale or rental.
[2] Construction signs. Constructions signs are permitted,
provided that:
[a] The total area of all signs shall not exceed 20 square
feet per lot in districts zoned residential or rural or 32
square feet in all other districts.
[b] The signs are to be maintained on the premises during
actual construction and must be removed two days
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
[3] Political signs shall conform to all New Hampshire state
statutes. [Amended 2011 Town Meeting]
[4] Nameplates for residential uses, but not exceeding four
square feet per single-family residence or eight square
feet per duplex.
(k) Temporary signs relating to a qualifying event, subject to the
following restrictions: [Added by the 2014 Town Meeting]
[1] Signs shall be no greater than three feet in height and nine
square feet in size.
[2] No more than two signs shall be displayed on a single
property at any time.
[3] Signs may not be illuminated.
[4] For qualifying events occurring three times per calendar
year or less, signs may be displayed for up to two weeks
prior to the event plus the duration of the event but shall
be removed within 48 hours after the event concludes. For
qualifying events occurring more than three times per
calendar year, signs may be displayed for six hours prior to
the event plus the duration of the event but shall be
removed within six hours after the event concludes.
[Amended by the 2015 Town Meeting]
[5] Signs may be located off site and shall be placed at grade
level. Signs may be placed on private property in any
zoning district with the permission of the private property
owner.
[6] Signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way or on
Town-owned property, on fences, boulders, planters, trees,
other signs, vehicles, utility facilities, or any structure.
§ 490-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-702
1:571
[7] For the purposes of this section, a qualifying event shall be
a special event taking place in the Town of Salem and
occurring no more than three times per calendar year.
Qualifying events shall include festivals, craft fairs,
farmers' markets, and similar activities which are
organized by or for the benefit of a not-for-profit
organization registered with, or eligible to be registered
with, the State of New Hampshire Attorney General's
Office, Division of Charitable Trusts, or that is duly
organized, or eligible to be organized, pursuant to RSA
292 et seq.
[8] Permits are required for these signs.
E. Prohibited signs and materials. The following types of signs are
expressly prohibited in all districts unless otherwise provided for in this
section:
(1) Animated, moving, flashing, and intensely lighted signs and signs
that emit audible sound, noise, or visible matter. This includes
scrolling, flashing, or repeating messages, images or displays.
Electronic reader boards and electronic changeable copy signs are
prohibited.
(2) Off-site signs; billboard signs.
(3) Parking of advertising vehicles is prohibited. No person shall park a
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way or public property, or on
private property so as to be visible from the public right-of-way,
which has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or
advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement
of products or directing people to a business or activity located on
the same or nearby property or any other premises. This subsection
is not intended to prohibit any form of vehicular signage, such as a
sign attached to a bus or lettered on a motor vehicle.
(4) Signs located on public property or over or across any public street
or right-of-way. Special permission for such signs may be granted
by the Board of Selectmen where a public benefit can be
ascertained.
(5) Pennants, searchlights, twirling signs, balloons or other gas-filled
figures, and outdoor display of products in parking lots or
landscaped areas (unless shown on an approved site plan), shall not
be allowed. [Amended by the 2011 Town Meeting]
(6) Signs which imitate, and may be confused with, an official traffic
control sign or signal or an emergency or road equipment vehicle.
(7) Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, pornographic or immoral character or which contain
§ 490-702 SALEM CODE § 490-702
1:572
advertising matter which is untruthful, or as otherwise prohibited
by state law.
(8) Fences or any wall which is not structurally a part of a building may
not be used for a sign.
(9) In accordance with RSA 236:75, it shall be unlawful to affix, attach,
or display any advertisement upon any object of nature, utility pole,
telephone booth, or highway sign.
(10) Signs which block the view of traffic, street signs, or traffic signals
or which, due to their placement, inhibit adequate sight distance.
F. Uniformity. In order to improve a particular lot's aesthetics and
commercial value, all wall and under canopy signs on the lot shall be of
uniform size and shape, color, and style, with the exception of
trademarks and logos.
G. Nonconforming signs.
(1) A sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status when:
(a) The sign is enlarged or altered such that its effect is more
intensive and/or obtrusive.
(b) The sign is relocated.
(c) The sign is abandoned for 180 days or more.
(d) The sign advertises or calls attention to any products,
businesses or activities which have not been carried on or sold
at the premises for the past six months.
(e) The sign shall not have been repaired or properly maintained
within 30 days after written notice to the effect has been given
by a building official.
(2) No sign and/or advertising structures that had been erected in
violation of any previously existing sign ordinance shall, by virtue
of adoption of this section, become legal nonconforming.
H. Conditional use permits. [Added by the 2009 Town Meeting]
(1) The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to modify
the requirements of Subsection D(2) in limited respects, provided
that the Board finds that all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The modification complies with the purposes of the sign
regulations noted in Subsection A.
(b) The applicant's particular situation justifies a modification to
the requirements.
(c) The site is suitable for the proposed modification.
§ 490-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-702
1:573
§ 490-703. Workforce housing. [Added by the 2010 Town Meeting]
(d) There will be no adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(e) There will be no adverse impact on traffic or pedestrian safety.
(f) The aesthetic character of the site and the surrounding area
will not be adversely affected.
(g) The modification will be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and the Master Plan.
(2) An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit, and the
Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant it if the
Board determines such permit is not justified or warranted in
accordance with the above criteria.
(3) This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21, and the Planning Board is vested with sole
authority to administer it and to grant the conditional use permits.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and provide for the
development of workforce housing in the Town of Salem as provided for
in RSA 674:58 to 674:61. It is intended to ensure the continued
availability of a broad spectrum of home ownership and tenancy
opportunities for individuals and families with moderate income. All
workforce housing proposed to be developed in the Town of Salem shall
be approved and developed in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
B. Authority. This section is adopted under the authority of the Workforce
Housing Statute (RSA 674:58 to 674:61) and the Innovative Zoning
Statute (RSA 674:21).
C. Applicability. The following provisions apply to the terms of this section:
(1) The innovative land uses allowed under this section function as
permitted variations of the underlying zoning requirements, by
conditional use permit administered by the Planning Board, to the
general requirements of this chapter solely for the purposes stated
in Subsection A above. Provisions of this section shall not be
applied for any other purpose.
(2) Variances to the requirements of this section, including increased
residential densities, without having received a conditional use
permit under this section, shall be considered contrary to the spirit
of this section.
D. Administration. This section shall be administered by the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall amend subdivision and site plan
regulations as provided by RSA 675:6 to include procedures for
administering the provisions of this section.
§ 490-702 SALEM CODE § 490-703
1:574
E. Restrictions. The following restrictions govern the Planning Board's
implementation of this section:
(1) The number of additional/bonus housing units authorized to be
constructed under provisions of this section in any calendar year
shall not exceed 1% of the existing housing supply. Additional
housing units are defined as residences in excess of the number
which could be constructed at the density permitted for singlefamily
detached housing in the underlying district.
(2) No single project or group of projects will have an unreasonable or
disproportionate impact on the environment, traffic, schools,
recreation areas, requirements for public services, or property
rights. Impact shall be considered disproportionate if it is
substantially greater per unit of housing than that for housing
constructed under provisions of the underlying district.
(3) The design of housing to be constructed under this section shall be
controlled to ensure that requirements of this subsection are
maintained. Expansion of housing contrary to provisions of this
subsection shall not be permitted, and variances to permit such
expansion shall be contrary to the spirit of this section.
(4) Since this section grants broad authority to the Planning Board to
facilitate development of workforce housing in Salem, the Planning
Board is granted discretion to reject or require modification of
plans which it finds would have an unanticipated or undesirable
impact on the community. If a plan is rejected, the Planning Board
shall state the reasons for the rejection and offer suggestions for
modifications to the plan that would make it acceptable, after
which the applicant may submit a revised plan for the Planning
Board's consideration.
(5) Affordability for home ownership shall be based on housing costs,
including mortgage principal, interest, taxes and insurance, not
exceeding 30% of the household income for a family of four persons
with an annual income that does not exceed 100% of the area
median income as determined annually by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Affordability for housing rental
shall be based on monthly rental and utility costs not exceeding
30% of the household income for a three-person household with an
annual income that does not exceed 60% of the area median
income as determined annually by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development.
F. Procedure.
(1) An applicant desiring to develop under the provisions of this
section shall file an application with the Planning Board on forms
prescribed by it in regulations adopted pursuant to Subsection D.
Said application shall include a written statement of the applicant's
§ 490-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-703
1:575
intent to develop workforce housing and how the applicant intends
to comply with the terms and conditions of this section.
(2) The Planning Board shall review an application for a workforce
housing development in a manner consistent with its procedures
for other subdivision and/or site plan proposals.
(3) Final approval and review of considerations. Since one of the
objectives of this section is to provide long-term affordability of
units approved under this section, the Planning Board will be
mindful of potential added development costs that could impair the
affordability of the development. If the applicant for a project
reviewed under the provisions of this section believes that the
affordability of the project has been impaired as a result of the
conditions of project approval, the applicant may seek resolution of
these issues as provided for in RSA 674:60, II and III.
(4) The Planning Board is not required to allow a workforce housing
development that does not meet the Town's normal development
standards, required fees, or conditions of approval related to
environmental protection, water supply, sanitary disposal, traffic
safety, and fire and life safety protection.
G. Design criteria. The following provisions govern the design and
construction of workforce housing proposals under this section:
(1) Development in the Rural District is limited to single-family
detached and single-family attached (maximum of two units per
grouping) dwellings and uses incidental thereto situated on
development parcels that are at least five acres in size.
(2) Development in the Residential District is limited to single-family
detached and single-family attached (maximum of four units per
grouping) dwellings and uses incidental thereto situated on
development parcels that are at least five acres in size.
(3) Density.
(a) Density in the Residential District shall be based on either of
the following standards. Density in the Rural District shall be
based on the density bonus standards in the following
Subsection G(3)(a)[2]:
[1] The number of bedrooms shall be no more than 50%
greater than permitted on the basis of four bedrooms per
single-family detached dwelling in the underlying district.
In calculating permitted density, the fifty-percent increase
shall be applied to the number of single-family lots which
are shown on a conceptual subdivision or site plan meeting
all the requirements of the underlying district. All of the
units developed under this standard shall meet the
affordability requirements of Subsection E(5).
§ 490-703 SALEM CODE § 490-703
1:576
[2] The number of dwelling units shall be no more than 30%
greater than permitted in the underlying district. In
calculating permitted density, the thirty-percent increase
shall be applied to the number of single-family lots which
are shown on a conceptual subdivision or site plan meeting
all the requirements of the underlying district. All of the
bonus units developed under this standard shall meet the
affordability requirements of Subsection E(5).
(b) Units may be constructed with various numbers of bedrooms,
except that all of the units shall contain at least two bedrooms.
Furthermore, none of the units approved for a development
under this section may be age restricted.
(c) Any fractional product of the maximum dwelling unit density
calculation in Subsection G(3)(a) shall be rounded down to the
nearest whole number if below 0.6, or rounded up to the
nearest whole number if 0.6 or above.
(4) Workforce housing constructed in Commercial-Industrial Districts
shall contain not less than 3,500 square feet of upland (nonwetland
soils) lot area for each dwelling unit that shall consist exclusively of
upland (nonwetland) soils. Such housing may be configured as onefamily
attached, townhouse, multifamily or mixed use. If a mix of
multifamily housing and permitted commercial-industrial uses is
proposed, calculation of the maximum residential density shall be
made after deducting the building footprint area for the
nonresidential uses. Such housing shall conform to the garden
apartment maximum lot coverage in § 490-202, plus applicable
requirements of § 490-304B, subject to exceptions as provided in
this section. All of the units developed under this standard shall
meet the affordability requirements of Subsection E(5).
(a) Units may be constructed with various numbers of bedrooms,
except that more than 50% of the units shall contain two or
more bedrooms. Furthermore, none of the units approved for a
development under this section may be age restricted.
(b) The Planning Board may permit multifamily workforce housing
developments that comply with the requirements of this
Subsection G(4) in other zoning districts if the following
additional criteria can be met to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board:
[1] Total development parcel size shall be a minimum of 10
acres.
[2] The development shall have a landscaped buffer around
the perimeter of the development that provides an
effective year-round visual screen between the
development and abutting properties.
§ 490-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-703
1:577
[3] The Planning Board finds that all of the other
requirements of this section are met.
[4] The development is substantially funded by state and/or
federal affordable housing programs that require longterm
housing affordability.
(5) Projects with a residential density greater than permitted by the
district wherein they are located will be served by the municipal
water and sewer systems or by private systems acceptable to the
Planning Board and State of New Hampshire.
(6) The Planning Board may require extension of roads and utilities,
construction of community facilities, dedication of land for public
purposes, and payment for off-site improvements to the extent that
they are reasonably necessitated by developments authorized
under provisions of this section.
(7) Developments which differ moderately from abutting residential
developments shall be visually buffered from them by distance and
vegetation.
(8) The plan shall comply with the lot requirements and design criteria
of the underlying district unless a conditional use permit is
specifically requested and voted by the Planning Board under
Subsection H.
(9) Workforce housing units shall be similar in exterior appearance to
market-rate units and dispersed throughout the development.
(10)Workforce housing units must be constructed in a sequence
proportional to the construction sequence of the market-rate units,
and all workforce housing units must be completed and made
available for sale or rental before the final 10% of the market-rate
units are approved for occupancy.
H. Conditional use permits. The Planning Board may grant a conditional
use permit for the development of workforce housing under this section
which results in a design that modifies the requirements of the
underlying district, subject to the following specific criteria:
(1) The proposed design or development is compatible with
surrounding neighborhoods, and no diminution of surrounding
property values will be suffered.
(2) The modifications are necessary to accomplish the purpose and
intent of this section.
(3) Modification of the requirements for maximum allowable height
that exceeds three stories, compliance with § 490-706, Wetlands
conservation, and to permit commercial development in
noncommercial districts shall not be permitted.
§ 490-703 SALEM CODE § 490-703
1:578
§ 490-704. Open space preservation. [Amended by the 1996 Town
Meeting]
(4) The plan meets all of the provisions of this section.
(5) The Salem Housing Authority, the New Hampshire Housing
Finance Authority or other similar organization has established
agreements with the applicant, subject to review and approval by
the Planning Board, to ensure that the purpose of this section will
be fulfilled and will continue to be fulfilled after the project is
completed, that the benefit to affordability will be commensurate
with the increased value resulting from the increased density
permitted by this section, and such agreements are an integral part
of the proposal. Agreements shall include provisions to enforce the
requirement of Subsection E(5). They may include agreements to
provide a share of equity in trust of the Salem Housing Authority,
New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority or other similar
organization, restrictions related to the sale or rental price, resale,
or occupancy of the housing, and other provisions and conditions
consistent with development and allocation of a limited housing
resource, provided that said restrictions benefit the development
or retention of moderately priced housing in Salem.
(6) The applicant has demonstrated and the Planning Board has found
that the benefit to be gained from the project in providing
workforce housing outweighs any adverse impact on the
community or Town as a whole and that the project is in the public
interest. An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit,
and the Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant it if
the Board determines such permit is not justified or warranted in
accordance with the above criteria.
I. Nonseverability. If any of the requirements, conditions, or discretionary
authority granted to the Salem Housing Authority, New Hampshire
Housing Finance Authority, or other similar organization, or to the
Planning Board, is found to be invalid or unenforceable, then the
authority in this section to grant conditional use permits to permit
residential densities greater than permitted in the existing Residential
and Rural Districts shall be invalid.
A. General description. This section applies to the Residential and Rural
Districts.
(1) General concept. An open space preservation design (hereinafter
OSPD) shall mean a residential development in which the buildings
and accessory uses are located more closely together, with reduced
lot sizes, into one or more groups. All land not included in the
building lots or street rights-of-way shall be dedicated as
permanently preserved open space. The overall housing density
shall not exceed that which could be built under a conventional
development plan, except as noted below, and all lots must be
§ 490-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-704
1:579
serviced by municipal water and sewer or by private systems
acceptable to the Planning Board and State of New Hampshire.
[Amended by the 2003 Town Meeting]
(2) Permitted uses. Residential uses are limited to single-family
detached dwellings and accessory uses, including residential
additions, garages, sheds, fences, and pools. Open space uses are
limited to noncommercial parks, conservation and recreation
areas, and commercial agriculture and forestry. The following uses
shall not be permitted: day-care facilities, accessory apartments
and kennels. [Amended by the 2000 Town Meeting]
(3) Authority. In order to allow OSPD under the powers granted under
RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may waive the restrictions in
§ 490-202 (except maximum height) and § 490-804 in the
Residential or Rural Districts for new subdivisions on lots of 15
acres or more, provided that the criteria in this section are met.
B. Purposes. The purposes of OSPD are to:
(1) Preserve undeveloped land in its existing natural state in order to
protect valuable land and water resources for conservation,
forestry, agriculture, aquifer recharge, watershed protection,
wildlife habitat, outdoor recreation, and scenic and historic values
beyond the extent provided by existing regulations.
(2) Encourage housing development alternatives which are
harmonious with natural features through more sensitive siting of
buildings and better overall site planning. [Amended by the 2003
Town Meeting]
(3) Preserve views of open fields, woodlands, and undeveloped land as
seen from existing streets and observation points. [Added by the
2003 Town Meeting]
(4) Enable economical and efficient street, utility, and public facility
installation, construction and maintenance and a more efficient
provision of municipal services.
(5) Encourage a range of housing development alternatives which add
recreational and aesthetic amenities to new neighborhoods.
C. Review and approval process.
(1) Evaluation and approval of an OSPD shall be by the Planning Board
in accordance with the purposes, standards and guidelines set
forth in this section and the Salem Subdivision Control Regulations.
(2) Preapplication meetings. Prior to the submission of any final plans,
applicants are encouraged to prepare conceptual plans under both
conventional and OSPD regulations, review these plans with the
Planning Director, then review the plans with the Planning Board at
a regularly scheduled meeting. The conceptual design process for
§ 490-704 SALEM CODE § 490-704
1:580
an OSPD should start with a delineation of the most valuable
natural resources and open space attributes of the site. Potential
house locations, lot lines, road alignments and drainage facilities
should then be configured so as to accomplish the protection and
preservation of these resources and attributes.
D. Density standards.
(1) Maximum permitted lots. The number of lots or homes must be
equal to or less than the number allowed under § 490-301C in the
Residential District or § 490-302C in the Rural District, except as
noted below. A conventional subdivision layout, in accordance with
the restrictions in § 490-301C, 490-302C and § 490-706, shall be
used to determine the total number of lots or homes allowed. Any
land area used in the calculation of allowed homes or lots in an
approved OSPD shall not thereafter be eligible as contributing land
area in any subsequent development proposal. [Amended by the
2003 Town Meeting]
(2) Unbuildable lots. For the purposes of determining the number of
lots allowable under this section, there shall be excluded from the
number of lots shown on such conventional subdivision layout all
lots which the Planning Board finds are not reasonably buildable,
whether by reason of excessive development or site preparation
costs due to remote proposed location; poorly drained soils or steep
slopes; sanitary disposal, drainage or water supply requirements;
limited or unusually configured buildable area; the permitting
requirements of the state or other Town boards; or a combination
of the above. In consideration of the foregoing, the Planning Board
may consider recommendations of the Town Engineer,
Conservation Commission, Planning Director, or any appropriate
state agencies.
(3) Incentive provision. To encourage the preservation of open space
within the remaining large undeveloped parcels in the community,
the Planning Board may, at its discretion, award a density bonus
not to exceed 20% of the conventional number of lots allowed in a
subdivision (rounded to the highest number after 0.6) if the
following criteria are met: [Amended by the 2003 Town
Meeting]
(a) Initial parcel size of 40 acres or greater; and
(b) The Planning Board determines that the location of open space
and house lots demonstrates conformance with the purposes
and site design guidelines in Subsections B and G of this
section.
E. Open space standards.
(1) General. All land not utilized for road rights-of-way or building lots
shall be dedicated as permanently preserved open space.
§ 490-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-704
1:581
(2) Minimum required open space. At least 50% of the site must be
reserved in perpetuity as common open space. Of the minimum
open space required, at least 50% must consist of nonwetland soils
and soils with slopes less than 25%. Open space dedicated in
excess of the minimum required area may contain any percentage
of wetland soils or steep slopes. Open water may not be used to
meet more than 25% of the open space requirement. [Amended by
the 2003 Town Meeting]
(3) Protection, ownership and management. All common open space
shall be permanently protected by covenants and restrictions in
perpetuity, approved by the Conservation Commission, and:
(a) Shall be conveyed by the applicant to:
[1] A homeowners' association or other legal entity under
New Hampshire state statutes, or similar legal
arrangement, subject to review and approval by the Town
Attorney; or [Amended by the 2003 Town Meeting]
[2] A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is
the conservation of open space; or
(b) Subject to approval of the Planning Board and Board of
Selectmen, may be dedicated to the Town of Salem with a trust
clause ensuring that it be maintained as open space.
(4) The Board may allow open space in excess of the minimum
requirements to be unrestricted by a conservation easement,
provided that use of the open space is limited by deed covenant to
noncommercial parks, conservation and recreation areas or
commercial agriculture and forestry. The Planning Board may
require further legal review of any documents submitted, the cost
of which shall be borne by the applicant.
F. Dimensional standards for building lots.
(1) Zoning dimensions.
(a) Lot shape and size. House lots and building envelopes should
generally be square or rectangular in shape and contain
sufficient area to accommodate average-sized houses and
typical amenities such as garages, pools and sheds. The
minimum lot size shall be no less than 15,000 square feet if
serviced by municipal sewer and 25,000 square feet if serviced
by on-site septic systems.
(b) Frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet.
Individual lot frontages may be further reduced to 75 feet
when fronting on curved streets, or when the Planning Board
determines that the purposes and standards of this section are
better met, provided that in no case shall there be less than
§ 490-704 SALEM CODE § 490-704
1:582
100 feet of lot width at the building line. [Amended by the
2003 Town Meeting]
(c) Setbacks (yards). For all dwelling units, the minimum front
yard setback shall be 30 feet, the minimum side yard setback
shall be 15 feet, and the minimum rear yard setback shall be 30
feet. Garages, sheds and pools must meet the setbacks in the
underlying district. [Amended by the 2000 and 2003 Town
Meetings]
(2) The Planning Board may vary these dimensional standards in
limited respects, provided that the intent and purposes of this
section are met.
G. Site design guidelines. The layout and configuration of lots, homes,
streets, building setbacks and open space are subject to the approval of
the Planning Board. The layout must demonstrate preservation of open
land in furtherance of the stated purposes of this section, without
detracting from the character of the neighborhood and without
seriously diminishing the value of surrounding property. Toward that
end, the Planning Board shall evaluate each proposal for an OSPD using
the following design guidelines, modified as appropriate to each
individual development site:
(1) Development location. Residences should be grouped in locations
so that scenic views and vistas will remain unblocked, particularly
as seen from public roads; prime agricultural soils, wildlife habitat
and shoreline areas will be protected; stone walls, historic sites and
their environs will be preserved; and significant natural features,
such as, but not limited to, vernal pools, prime aquifers, oldergrowth
trees, unique geologic formations and ridgelines, will be
protected. Wherever possible, structures should be located within
any wooded upland on the parcel, or along the far edges of open
fields and so that silhouettes of structures will be below the
ridgeline or hilltop or, if the site is wooded, the building silhouettes
will be lower than the existing canopy height. New dwellings and
structures should be screened from view from public roads with a
buffer of existing trees or new plantings. [Added by the 2003
Town Meeting]
(2) Open space layout. Open space should include the most sensitive
resource areas of the property and should be designed in larger
blocks of land, preferably as part of an integrated open space
network, laid out to be contiguous with open space areas of similar
character (whether permanently preserved or not) on adjacent
parcels. Contiguous open space should generally be more than
three acres in area and should have a length-to-width ratio of no
greater than four to one, except where intended to buffer linear
features such as watercourses and wetlands, or designed as trail
links. Fragmentation, or the creation of long, thin strips of open
space, should be avoided. Where open space directly adjoins
§ 490-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-704
1:583
§ 490-705. Floodplain development.
private lots, it shall be demarcated with logical, straightforward
boundaries such as existing stone walls, boulders, tree lines,
topographic breaks, a roadway or path, or post-and-rail fencing,
small signs or monuments. [Amended by the 2003 Town
Meeting]
(3) Pedestrian access/circulation. Open space should be laid out in
conjunction with existing and proposed streets, sidewalks and lots
so that the greatest degree of internal pedestrian circulation and
access from the lots to both on-site and off-site open space is
achieved. Access to the open space must be clear and direct and
arranged in a manner that does not conflict with the actual or
apparent use of private lots.
(4) Landscaping. Common areas (such as community greens, cul-desac
islands, and along both sides of new streets) should be
landscaped with deciduous shade trees and flowering shrubs. The
suggested minimum caliper is two inches and street tree interval is
50 feet but may vary according to species selected and site-specific
factors, at the discretion of the Planning Board.
A. Adoption of flood-related maps. The Flood Insurance Rate Maps
referred to in Subsection D as prepared for the Town of Salem by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency are hereby adopted, and such
maps shall be a part of this chapter and the Salem Building Codes.
[Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
B. Developments or encroachments in floodway prohibited. Any
development or encroachment, including fill, is prohibited in the
floodway, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps referred to in
Subsection A, which would result in the increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge. [Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
C. Restrictions on mobile homes in the floodway. No mobile home shall be
placed in the floodway as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
referred to in Subsection A, unless the area is zoned for mobile homes
and there is an existing mobile home park at such location at the time of
the adoption of this section. [Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
D. Regulations for floodplain development. The following regulations shall
apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance
Study for Rockingham County, New Hampshire, dated May 17, 2005, or
as amended, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Map
Panels numbered 0543, 0545, 0551, 0552, 0553, 0554, 0558, 0561,
0562, 0563, 0564, 0570, 0657, 0676, 0677, and 0681, dated May 17,
2005, or as amended, which are declared to be part of this section and
are hereby incorporated by reference. [Added by the 1989 Town
Meeting; amended by the 1998, 2002 and 2005 Town Meetings]
§ 490-704 SALEM CODE § 490-705
1:584
(1) Definitions. See § 490-107.
(2) The construction or placement of new buildings and structures in
any special flood hazard area is prohibited. Other proposed
development such as additions to existing buildings or replacement
of existing buildings in any special flood hazard areas shall require
a permit. In addition to the Town building permit application form,
applicants shall also complete a supplemental building permit
application ("floodplain building permit application") for proposed
construction in the special flood hazard area. [Amended by the
2007 Town Meetings]
(3) The Town of Salem shall review all building permit applications for
new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If a proposed building site is in a special flood hazard
area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall:
(a) Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy;
(b) Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(c) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages; and
(d) Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding. [Amended by the 2009 Town
Meeting]
(4) Where new and replacement water and sewer systems (including
on-site systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area, the
applicant shall provide the Town of Salem with assurance that new
and replacement sanitary sewage systems will be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during periods of flooding. [Amended
by the 2009 Town Meeting]
(5) The Town of Salem shall maintain for public inspection, and furnish
upon request, any certification of floodproofing and the as-built
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and include whether or not such structures contain a
basement. If the structure has been floodproofed, the as-built
§ 490-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-705
1:585
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was
floodproofed. This information must be furnished by the applicant.
(6) The Town of Salem shall review proposed developments to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal
or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to certify these assurances to the
Town of Salem.
(7) Riverine situations.
(a) Prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the
applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands
Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services and submit copies of such notification to the Town of
Salem, in addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3.
Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said
notification to those adjacent communities as determined by
the Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled
hearings before the Wetlands Bureau.
(b) Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the
applicant shall submit to the Town of Salem certification
provided by a registered professional engineer assuring that
the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse has been
maintained.
(c) Along watercourses that have a designated regulatory
floodway, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development, are allowed
within the designated regulatory floodway unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practices
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the base
flood discharge.
(d) In Zone A the Town of Salem shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other source as criteria for requiring that
development meet the following floodway requirement: "No
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are allowed within the
designated regulatory floodway that would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the base
flood discharge." [Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
(e) Along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway
designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or
§ 490-705 SALEM CODE § 490-705
1:586
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.
[Amended by the 2009 Town Meeting]
(8) Special flood hazard areas.
(a) In special flood hazard areas the Town of Salem shall
determine the one-hundred-year flood elevation in the
following order of precedence according to the data available:
[1] In Zone AE, refer to the elevation provided in the
community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying
FIRM.
[2] In Zone A, the Town of Salem shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any one-hundred-year flood elevation
data available from federal, state, development proposals
submitted to the community (example: subdivision, site
approvals, etc.) or other source. [Amended by the 2009
Town Meeting]
(b) The Town of Salem's one-hundred-year flood elevation
determination will be used as criteria for requiring in Zones A
and AE that: [Amended by the 1994, 2002 and 2009 Town
Meetings]
[1] Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential building (or manufactured
home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
[2] Nonresidential construction. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
nonresidential building (or manufactured building) shall:
[a] Have the lowest floor, including basement, mechanical
and utility equipment, elevated no lower than one foot
above the level of the base flood elevation; or
[b] Be floodproofed to a level no lower than one foot
above the level of the base flood elevation, provided
that all areas of the building (including basement,
mechanical and utility equipment) below the required
elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, and use
structural components having the capability of
§ 490-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-705
1:587
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and
[c] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this section.
[3] Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and
AE shall either:
[a] Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[b] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[c] Meet all standards of the National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations Section 60.3(B)(1) and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in Paragraph (c)(6) of Section
60.3.
[4] All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially
improved within special flood hazard areas shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood level and be securely anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
[5] For all new construction and substantial improvements,
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject
to flooding are permitted, provided that the enclosed areas
meet the following requirements:
[a] The enclosed area is unfinished or flood-resistant,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage;
[b] The area is not a basement;
[c] The area shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[i] A minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every
§ 490-705 SALEM CODE § 490-705
1:588
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
[ii] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade.
[iii] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
[6] A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop
or review the structural design, specifications and plans
for the foundation of the building and shall certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted practices to withstand flotation, collapse, lateral
movement, erosion and scour, undermining and the effects
of water and wind action simultaneously on all building
components during the base flood.
(9) Any encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, or other development, within a special flood hazard
area shall provide compensatory floodplain storage equal to twice
the amount of encroachment. All parking areas located within a
special flood hazard area shall be tiered, sloped, or otherwise
designed to flood during a base flood event. A licensed professional
engineer shall prepare the floodplain storage site plan and/or
certify that the proposed compensatory floodplain storage is
properly designed and that the floodplain storage capacity is of
adequate volume to accommodate the water displaced by the
proposed development. After construction of the approved
compensatory site, an as-built plan shall be certified by a
professional engineer and submitted to the Town for inclusion in
the project file. [Added by the 1991 Town Meeting; amended
by the 2002 and 2007 Town Meetings]
(10) Variances and appeals.
(a) Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector made under this section may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5.
(b) If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as
authorized by RSA 674:33, I(b), the applicant shall have the
burden of showing, in addition to the usual variance standards
under state law:
[1] That the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense;
§ 490-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-705
1:589
§ 490-706. Wetlands conservation. [Added by the 1987 Town
Meeting; amended by the 1989, 1996, 1997, 2006, 2007, 2012 and
2013 Town Meetings]
[2] That if the requested variance is for activity within a
designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge will result; and
[3] That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering
the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(c) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions.
(d) The community shall:
[1] Maintain a record of all variance actions, including the
justification for their issuance; and
[2] Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial
report submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance
Administrator. [Amended by the 1998 Town Meeting]
(11) Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy may be issued
for a building or structure that is within the purview of the
regulations contained in this Subsection D until the Building
Inspector certifies that all site and building improvements as
contained in the building permit application, plans and associated
documents have been completed; provided, however, that an
applicant may request that the Town accept a suitable and
sufficient performance bond or letter of credit, in a form suitable to
Town Counsel, to assure the completion of certain site or building
improvements that, due to factors beyond the control of the
applicant, have not been completed. [Added by the 2002 Town
Meeting]
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare, by controlling and guiding the use
of land areas which have been found to be wetlands. This section is
adopted pursuant to the authority granted by New Hampshire RSA
674:16 and 674:17 and RSA 674:20 and 674:21. It is intended that this
section shall:
§ 490-705 SALEM CODE § 490-706
1:590
(1) Protect residents against the dangers of increased flooding by
preventing the destruction of, or significant changes to, natural
wetlands that provide flood protection.
(2) Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers and aquifer
recharge areas.
(3) Prevent the pollution of surface water and groundwater.
(4) Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, natural
wetlands which provide filtration of water flowing into water bodies
or are connected to the ground- or surface water supply.
(5) Prevent unnecessary or excessive expense to the Town in providing
or maintaining essential services and utilities which might be
required as a result of misuse or abuse of wetlands and adjacent
upland areas.
(6) Lessen damage to structures and properties caused by
inappropriate development adjacent to or in wetlands.
(7) Protect wildlife habitats, maintain ecological balances, and
enhance ecological values.
(8) Maintain the integrity of wetlands by protecting adjacent vegetated
upland areas.
(9) Protect unique and unusual natural areas, including rare or
endangered species of flora and fauna.
(10) Promote conservation corridors along all major rivers, streams,
and drainage waterways.
(11) Encourage those low-intensity uses that can be harmoniously,
appropriately, and safely located in or adjacent to wetlands.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Wetland delineation and limits.
(1) This section applies to wetlands as defined in § 490-107 and RSA
482-A:2, X. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps,
marshes, bogs, vernal pools, and other similar areas. Wetlands
shall be identified and mapped by a certified wetland scientist.
(a) Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic
vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology in accordance
with the techniques outlined in the Corps of Engineers
Wetlands Delineation Manual, the Regional Supplement to the
Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual: North
Central and Northeast Region (current version), and the Field
Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England (current
version), published by New England Interstate Water Pollution
Control Commission.
§ 490-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-706
1:591
(b) Prime wetlands shall be delineated using the current NH
Method in accordance with the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES) Wetland Delineation
Standards: The Method for Inventorying and Evaluating
Freshwater Wetlands in New Hampshire. Town of Salem
mapped prime wetlands can be reviewed at the Salem Planning
Office.
(c) Vernal pools shall be delineated in accordance with the New
Hampshire Fish and Game Department's Identification and
Documentation of Vernal Pools in New Hampshire (current
version).
(2) Limits of wetlands covered under this section are:
(a) Wetland areas 1/2 acre or more in size;
(b) Wetland areas of any size if contiguous to or containing surface
waters (such as lakes, ponds, and streams) or very poorly
drained soils as defined by the Corps of Engineers Wetland
Delineation Manual and any current regional supplemental
manuals; and
(c) Vernal pools over 500 square feet in size.
(3) The following types of wetland areas are not subject to jurisdiction
of this section:
(a) A constructed vegetated swale, roadside ditch, or driveway
ditch.
(b) A sedimentation, detention, or retention basin.
(c) An excavated agricultural, irrigation, or fire pond.
D. Wetlands incorrectly delineated. In the event that an area has been
incorrectly delineated as a wetland, or that an area not so designated
was subsequently found to meet the criteria for a wetlands designation,
the Planning Board shall determine whether the regulations contained
herein have application.
(1) When it is believed that an area has been incorrectly delineated a
wetland, the applicant may present to the Planning Board the
findings of an independent certified wetland scientist approved by
the Planning Board or its agent. The Planning Board shall make its
judgment based upon the determination of the independent
certified wetland scientist. The applicant shall bear the costs of the
certified wetland scientist. Prime wetland redelineation will be
done using the method in Subsection C(1)(b), not the method
originally used to map the wetland.
(2) Where an area is not delineated as a wetland and the Planning
Board or its agent reasonably believes it to be a wetland, the
§ 490-706 SALEM CODE § 490-706
1:592
Planning Board may require the applicant to supply the findings
of an independent certified wetland scientist as defined in RSA
310-A:76, II-a, as approved by the Board or its agent. The Planning
Board shall make its judgment based upon the determination of
the independent certified wetland scientist. The applicant is
responsible for bearing the costs of the certified wetland scientist.
E. Buffers and setbacks.
(1) An undisturbed natural buffer area of at least 20 feet in width shall
be maintained around the entire edge of any wetland defined in
§ 490-107. Access through the buffer zone shall be granted to allow
activities in furtherance of those wetland uses permitted under
Subsection G. Fallen, dead, diseased, unsafe or New Hampshire
identified invasive trees and vegetation may be removed.
(2) An undisturbed natural buffer area of at least 100 feet in width
shall be maintained between any designated prime wetland, as
defined in RSA 482-A:15 and adopted by Town Meeting, and any
new development, including but not limited to structures,
dwellings, septic systems, and roads.
(3) No building or surface structure shall be constructed within 40 feet
of a wetland area.
(4) All paved surfaces shall be set back 40 feet from any wetland.
Paved surfaces shall include but not be limited to parking lots, fire
lanes, and roads.
(5) The minimum setback between septic systems and wetlands shall
meet New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
requirements. [Amended by the 2016 Town Meeting]
F. Restrictions
(1) Where water and other effluents leave a man-made drainage
system, adequate measures, including but not limited to buffer
zones and natural treatment swales (such as rain gardens), shall be
provided to protect the wetland from pollution, erosion, or siltation.
Treatment systems shall be designed according to NHDES and
federal regulations.
(2) Adequate erosion control, including but not limited to hay bales,
silt fences, and riprap, shall be maintained before, during, and after
construction to protect undisturbed wetland areas from intrusion
and siltation. After site stabilization, temporary erosion controls
shall be removed.
(3) Total wetland area used to satisfy minimum lot size requirements
shall not exceed 25% of lot size with the following provisions:
§ 490-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-706
1:593
(a) Areas designated as poorly drained may be used to satisfy up
to 25% of the minimum lot size required by the underlying
zoning district.
(b) Areas designated as very poorly drained or freshwater marsh
may not be used to fulfill any portion of the minimum lot size
required by the underlying zoning district.
G. Permitted and prohibited uses.
(1) Prohibited uses within wetlands are those that require the erection
or construction of any structure or building, will alter the natural
surface configuration by the addition of fill or by dredging, and that
otherwise are not permitted by this chapter.
(2) Permitted uses within wetlands include the following or similar
uses:
(a) Forestry according to recognized tree harvest practices and
tree farming;
(b) Cultivation and harvesting of crops according to recognized
soil conservation practices;
(c) Wildlife refuge;
(d) Parks and recreation uses that are primary uses of the property
and that are consistent with the purpose and intent of this
section; and
(e) Conservation areas and nature trails.
H. Exemptions.
(1) RSA 674:39 applies.
(2) Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the construction
of additions and extensions to one- and two-family dwellings shall
be permitted within the areas controlled by this section, provided
that:
(a) The dwelling lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this
section;
(b) The proposed construction conforms to all other applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Town of Salem; and
(c) The dwelling continues in its present use.
(3) Wetland buffer. Exempt from this requirement are the construction
of additions and extensions to buildings which existed prior to the
effective date of this section (March 1987) or the development or
redevelopment of a lot where the buffer does not already exist as of
the effective date of this section.
§ 490-706 SALEM CODE § 490-706
1:594
(4) Prime wetland buffer. Exempt from this requirement are those uses
permitted under Subsection G(2), those lots separated from a
prime wetland by an existing public road, and the construction of
additions and extensions to buildings which existed prior to the
effective date of this section. Nothing herein is intended to prohibit
the development or redevelopment of any portion of a lot which has
already been improved, or developed and regularly maintained, as
of the effective date of this section.
(5) Setback. For all wetlands, residential driveways are exempt from
this regulation. Also exempt is access to a property, not including
parking spaces, and road crossings approved under the Subsection
I(1) conditional use permit criteria.
I. Conditional use permit.
(1) The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to modify
the requirements of Subsections E, F and G, in limited respects,
provided the Board finds that all of the following criteria are met:
(a) The modification complies with the purposes and intent of this
section noted in Subsection A.
(b) There is no feasible alternative to the modification with less
impact to the wetland or buffer.
(c) The detrimental impact to wetlands and buffers is minimized.
(d) There will be no adverse impact on neighboring properties.
(e) The applicant provides the Planning Board and Conservation
Commission findings of a certified wetland scientist approved
by the Planning Board or its agent at the applicant's expense.
(f) The applicant provides the Planning Board and Conservation
Commission with a wetland mitigation plan which meets the
following: a minimum gain of two square feet of on-site
wetland replication for each square foot of wetland lost, except
for prime wetlands where a gain of five square feet of on-site
wetland replication shall be provided for each square foot of
wetland lost. In the case of streets, roads, accessways, and
utility crossings, such mitigation shall only be required if 3,000
square feet or more of wetland is impacted. The wetland
replication plan must be prepared by a certified wetland
scientist and detail the construction methodology, planting
plan and monitoring protocol. For impacts to wetland setbacks
and buffers, mitigation measures shall be incorporated to
minimize wetland degradation such as, but not limited to,
buffer plantings, removal of existing pavement, and increased
buffers elsewhere on the site.
§ 490-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-706
1:595
§ 490-707. Personal wireless service. [Added by the 1998 Town
Meeting; amended by the 2005 Town Meeting]
(g) A recommendation from the Conservation Commission is
submitted. [Amended by the 2017 Town Meeting]
(h) The applicant has received all necessary state and federal
permits prior to the issuance of the conditional use permit.
(2) An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit, and the
Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant it if the
Board determines such a permit is not justified or warranted in
accordance with the above criteria. Economic considerations alone
are not sufficient reason for granting a conditional use permit.
(3) This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21 and the Planning Board is vested with sole
authority to administer it and to grant the conditional use permits.
J. Special provisions.
(1) The Town of Salem, as a governmental body, shall not be exempt
from this section nor the rules and regulations found therein.
(2) Any property containing wetlands on which a conservation
easement has been obtained shall be maintained in perpetuity as
open space. Activities conducted thereon shall be limited to those
specifically allowed for in Subsection G. Conservation easement
boundaries shall be marked by the easement grantor with granite
monuments or by other durable means approved by the Planning
Board.
(3) Granting variances to this section shall be considered contrary to
its spirit and intent.
A. Purpose and intent. This section is enacted to permit the siting of
personal wireless service facilities (hereinafter PWSF) in the Town of
Salem consistent with the power granted to municipalities under
federal and New Hampshire law. [47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7); RSA 12-K:1 et
seq. and RSA 674:16 et seq.] The Town of Salem, in siting wireless
facilities, shall act consistent with the following:
(1) Avoid and mitigate adverse impacts such facilities may create,
including but not limited to the following impacts: visual,
environmental, historical, flight corridors, health, safety and
prosperity.
(2) Promote co-location for facilities when such co-location minimizes
the adverse impacts described in Subsection A above through an
assessment of technology, current location options, future available
locations, innovative siting techniques, and siting possibilities
beyond the political jurisdiction of the Town.
§ 490-706 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:596
(3) Permit the siting of facilities on new ground-mounted structures
only where all other reasonable siting opportunities have been
exhausted and encourage the siting of facilities, whether on new
structures or existing, in a way that minimizes the adverse impacts
of the facilities.
(4) Create a hierarchy of preferred locations to further the Town's
planning goals by legislatively declaring siting preferences
favoring siting first on Town-owned sites located in industrially or
commercially zoned sites and public rights-of-way and Towncontrolled
structures throughout the Town, by building permit only;
second, on industrially zoned sites; third, commercially zoned sites;
and rural or residentially zoned sites last, as well as preferring
lower or stealth towers where possible, including sensitivity to
historic locations and environmentally sensitive areas, and
aesthetic and planning concerns.
(5) Require that facilities be constructed and maintained safely.
(6) Provide for the removal of abandoned facilities, including a
mechanism for the Town to remove these abandoned facilities at
the facility owner's expense to protect the citizens from imminent
harm and danger.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Siting standards.
(1) General.
(a) Siting priority. An applicant seeking approval for a PWSF shall
comply with the following:
[1] Preference will be given to the siting of PWSF on existing
PWSF, including preexisting towers and antennas, where
such co-location can exist while preserving the character
and integrity of the existing structure and without other
adverse impacts.
[2] To the extent that there are no existing PWSF which meet
the requirements of the applicant, preference will be given
to locating facilities on Town-owned land in industrial or
commercial districts or within the public rights-of-way
throughout the Town or on Town-owned or -controlled
structures throughout the Town.
[3] To the extent existing facilities or Town-owned property or
structures under Subsection C(1)(a)[1] and [2] above are
not available, preference will be given to locating facilities
on existing structures of other kinds, such as a water
tower or church steeple, where such co-location preserves
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:597
the character and integrity of the existing structure and
does not create other adverse impacts.
[4] To the extent that siting locations under Subsection
C(1)(a)[1], [2] and [3] above are not available, preference
will be given to siting a facility within the Industrial
District.
[5] To the extent that siting locations under Subsection
C(1)(a)[1], [2], [3] and [4] above are not available,
preference will be given to siting a facility within the
Commercial District.
[6] To the extent that siting locations under C(1)(a)[1], [2], [3],
[4] and [5] above are not available, then the siting of the
PWSF shall be governed by a conditional use permit under
this section (Subsection E).
(b) Burden of proof on applicant regarding siting priority.
[1] The burden of proof that there are no existing structures
upon which an applicant may locate its PWSF and/or
transmit or receive radio signals shall include, at a
minimum:
[a] The applicant shall submit a list of all owner contacts,
including the Town, made with regard to the
availability of a site for a potential PWSF. If the
Planning Board or Town staff find additional existing
buildings and structures that may be satisfactory, the
applicant shall contact the property owners.
[b] The applicant shall provide copies of all letters of
inquiry made to owners of existing structures and
letters of rejection. If letters of rejection are not
provided, at a minimum, unanswered "return receipt
requested" forms from the U.S. Post Office shall be
provided for each owner of existing structures that
was contacted.
[c] If an applicant claims that a structure is not
structurally capable of supporting a PWSF, this claim
must be certified by a registered professional
engineer licensed in the State of New Hampshire. The
certification shall, at a minimum, explain the
structural issues and demonstrate that the structure
cannot be modified to support the PWSF at a
reasonable cost.
[2] The burden of proof that no locations in areas of the Town
identified herein as preferred siting locations to the
location proposed by the applicant are suitable for the
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:598
applicant's needs shall include, at a minimum, maps
certified by a radio frequency engineer licensed in the
State of New Hampshire showing:
[a] Coverage gaps of existing PWSF in or near Salem; and
[b] Coverage of PWSF if built on the available preferred
siting locations.
(2) Use regulations. A PWSF shall require a building permit in all cases
and may be permitted as follows:
(a) Existing personal wireless service structures. A PWSF may
locate, subject to the issuance of a building permit that
includes review of the application required by this section by
the Planning Director, on any existing personal wireless
service structure, including any guyed tower, lattice tower,
mast tower, stealth tower or monopole tower in existence prior
to the adoption of this section, so long as co-location complies
with any approved site plan. All the requirements stated in this
section at Subsection D shall be met. This provision shall apply
only so long as the height of the existing tower structure is not
increased, a security barrier already exists, and the area of the
security barrier is not increased.
(b) Town-owned or -controlled land and structures. A PWSF may
locate, subject to the issuance of a building permit that
includes review of the application required by this section by
the Planning Director, on any Town-owned land in any
Industrial or Commercial District, so long as the facility
complies with the requirements stated in this section at
Subsection D, the facility does not exceed the height
limitations in this section, and the PWSF includes a security
barrier. In addition, antennas may be located on existing
telecommunications poles or replacement poles located on
Town-owned land or in the public right-of-way throughout the
Town, subject to applicable federal and state law. In addition,
antennas may be located on existing Town-owned or -
controlled structures located throughout the Town, including
but not limited to municipal communications facilities, athletic
field lights, traffic lights, streetlights and/or other types of
utility poles. All other sitings shall require site plan review and
approval by the Planning Board.
(c) Existing structures. A PWSF may locate, subject to the
provisions of this section and site plan review, on an existing
structure other than on an existing personal wireless service or
tower structure.
(d) Industrial or Commercial District. A PWSF may locate within
the Industrial or Commercial District, subject to the provisions
of this section and subject to site plan review.
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:599
(e) Conditional use permit. A PWSF may locate in any other area
of the Town, subject to a conditional use permit granted by the
Planning Board and subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board. The elements of the conditional use permit are
described at Subsection E below.
D. General application requirements.
(1) General. Unless otherwise provided, all applicants under this
section shall apply to the Planning Board for site plan review and
comply with the requirements as provided herein in this
subsection, and as provided for in the Site Plan Review
Regulations. Applicants for conditional use permits under this
section shall also be required to submit the information provided
for in this subsection. All applications for a PWSF shall contain the
following:
(a) Appropriate application form signed by the applicant,
accompanied by the appropriate fee.
(b) Copy of lease, deed or letter of authorization from property
owner (if other than applicant) evidencing applicant's authority
to pursue the application.
(c) Copy of the applicant's FCC license(s), establishing credibility
to deploy a PWSF in the area being applied for, or a copy of a
contract between an FCC licensed carrier and the applicant,
along with a copy of that carrier's license.
(d) Detailed maps showing all the applicant's current externally
visible tower and monopole PWSF locations in New Hampshire
within a twenty-mile radius of the proposed externally visible
PWSF, both active and inactive.
(e) Site descriptions for each of those locations, including antenna
height and diameter and a depiction of all externally visible
structures.
(f) A description of why less visually intrusive alternatives for the
facility which the applicant seeks approval for were not
proposed.
(g) Drawings detailing proposed improvements related to all the
requirements specified in Subsection D(2) below.
(h) Fees to cover the Town's costs for any regional notification
required by RSA 12-K:7.
(i) Written proof that the proposed use/facility complies with the
FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines.
(j) Written proof that an evaluation has taken place, as well as the
results of such evaluation, satisfying the requirements of the
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:600
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) further referenced
in applicable FCC rules. If an environmental assessment (EA)
or an environmental impact statement (EIS) is required under
the FCC rules and NEPA, submission of the EA or EIS to the
Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty-day comment
period, and the Town process, shall become part of the
application requirements.
(2) General PWSF requirements. The requirements and limitations in
this section shall preempt all other requirements and limitations as
required by this chapter and shall apply only to PWSF.
(a) Height.
[1] Existing structures. New PWSF located on any of the
following existing structures shall be exempt from the
height restrictions of this chapter, provided that there is
no more than a twenty-foot increase in the height of the
existing structure as a result of the installation of a PWSF:
water towers, electric transmission and distribution
towers, utility poles, and similar existing utility structures,
guyed towers, lattice towers, monopoles, flagpoles,
steeples or chimneys; and
[2] Height for ground-mounted facilities. Ground-mounted
PWSF located in the Industrial District shall not exceed
150 feet in height. Ground-mounted PWSF located in the
Commercial District shall not exceed 120 feet in height. In
addition, ground-mounted PWSF located throughout the
Town may project 20 feet above the average surrounding
tree canopy height.
(b) Setbacks. All PWSF and equipment shelters shall comply with
building setback provisions of the zoning district in which the
facility is located, except that no PWSF and equipment shelter
shall be located within 200 feet of any existing residence.
(c) Fall zone. In order to ensure public safety, the minimum
distance from the ground mount of a PWSF to any property
line, road, habitable dwelling, business or institutional use or
public recreational area shall be 100% of the height of the
facility, including any antennas or other appurtenances. This
setback is considered the "fall zone." The Planning Board may
reduce the fall zone upon a showing that the technical quality
and nature of the facility do not require as large a fall zone as is
otherwise required by this section. In the event that an existing
structure is proposed as a mount for a PWSF, a fall zone shall
not be required, but the setback provisions of the zoning
district shall apply. In the case of preexisting nonconforming
structures, PWSF and equipment shelters shall not increase
any nonconformities except as provided herein.
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:601
(d) Performance standards.
[1] Visual impact and lighting. Visual impacts are measured
on the basis of change in community scale, as exhibited in
relative height, mass or proportion of the PWSF within its
proposed surroundings; new visible elements proposed on
a contrasting background; different colors and textures
proposed against a contrasting background; and use of
materials that are foreign to the existing built
environment.
[a] Enhancements. Preservation of the existing developed
and natural environments within Salem is an
enhancement to the Town. Enhancements are
measured on the basis of conservation of
opportunities to maintain community scale; amount
and type of landscaping and/or natural vegetation;
preservation of view corridors, vistas and viewsheds;
and continuation of existing colors, textures and
materials.
[b] Visibility focuses on eliminating or mitigating the
visual impact and maximizing enhancement of the
existing environment.
[c] Location. The requirements in this subsection shall
govern the location of all facilities and the installation
of all antennas. The requirements are as follows:
[i] Towers shall be located on sites where the grade/
slope and tree cover of the site and surrounding
land can be used to decrease any adverse visual
impacts;
[ii] Towers or ground mounts shall either maintain a
galvanized steel finish, subject to any applicable
standards of the FAA, or be painted a neutral
color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness;
[iii] The design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the maximum extent possible, use
materials, colors, textures, screening, and
landscaping that will blend the tower facilities
with the natural setting and built environment.
These buildings and facilities shall also be subject
to all other site plan review regulation
requirements;
[iv] If an antenna is installed on a structure other than
a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical
and mechanical equipment must be of neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:602
with, the color of the supporting structure so as
to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible;
[v] Facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
If lighting is required, the Planning Board may
review the available lighting alternatives and
approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views; and
[vi] Facilities shall not contain any permanent or
temporary signs, writing, symbols, or any graphic
representation of any kind.
[2] Federal requirements. All facilities must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC, and
any other agency of the federal government with the
authority to regulate facilities and antennas. If such
standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of
the facilities governed by this section shall bring such
facilities into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a more stringent
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling
federal agency. Failure to bring facilities into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal, in accordance with
Subsection G(2), of the facilities at the owner's expense
through the execution of the posted security required by
Subsection G(1).
[3] Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of facilities and antennas, the owner of a facility
shall certify that it is constructed and maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable local
building codes and the applicable standards for PWSF that
are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as
amended from time to time. The owner of the facility shall
initially provide proof of structural integrity by report of a
structural engineer licensed in New Hampshire and
thereafter shall provide certifying reports to the Town
every five years. All facilities shall be designed and
operated in a manner that minimizes the risk of igniting a
fire or intensifying one that otherwise occurs. If, upon
inspection, the Town concludes that a facility fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the facility, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such facility into compliance with such
standards. If the owner fails to bring such facility into
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:603
compliance within 30 days, such action shall constitute
grounds for the removal, in accordance with Subsection
G(2), of the facility at the owner's expense through
execution of the posted security required by Subsection
G(1).
[4] Additional requirements. These requirements shall
supersede any and all other applicable standards found
elsewhere in Salem ordinances or regulations that are less
strict:
[a] Landscaping.
[i] Towers or ground-mounted facilities shall be
landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that
effectively screens the view of the equipment
shelter from adjacent residential property and
public roads. The standard buffer shall consist of
a landscaped strip at least 10 feet wide outside
the perimeter of the tower compound. Natural
vegetation is preferred;
[ii] In locations where the visual impact of the tower
would be minimal, the landscaping requirement
may be reduced or waived entirely; and
[iii] Existing mature tree growth and natural land
forms on the site shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth
around the property may be deemed a sufficient
buffer.
E. Conditional use permits.
(1) General. All applicants under this section for conditional use
permits shall be required to apply to the Planning Board for site
plan review, to comply with the requirements provided herein in
Subsection D, to comply with the Site Plan Review Regulations, and
to submit the information required below in Subsection E(2).
(2) Issuance of conditional use permits. In granting the conditional use
permit, the Planning Board may impose conditions to the extent the
Board concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed siting on adjoining properties and to
preserve the intent of this section.
(a) Procedure on application. The Planning Board shall act upon
the application in accordance with the procedural
requirements of the Site Plan Review Regulations and RSA
676:4.
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:604
(b) Decisions. Possible decisions rendered by the Planning Board
include approval, approval with conditions, or denial. All
decisions shall be rendered in writing, and a denial shall be in
writing and based upon substantial evidence contained in the
written record.
(c) Elements of conditional permit. The applicant has the burden
of addressing the following:
[1] The height of the proposed tower or other structure is
necessary to provide personal wireless services;
[2] The effect of the proximity of the facility to residential
development or districts;
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
[4] Surrounding topography;
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
[6] Design of the facility, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
[7] Proposed ingress and egress to the site;
[8] Availability of suitable existing sites and other structures
as required herein in Subsection C(1)(b);
[9] Visual impacts on viewsheds, ridgelines, and other impacts
by means of cell site location, tree and foliage clearing and
placement of incidental structures; and
[10] Availability of alternative siting locations as required
herein in Subsection C(1)(b).
(3) Information required. Each applicant requesting a conditional use
permit under this section shall submit a scaled plan in accordance
with the Site Plan Review Regulations and further information,
including a scaled elevation view, topography, radio frequency
coverage, facility height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking,
fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses (up to 200 feet away), and any
other information deemed necessary by the Planning Board to
assess compliance with this section. Furthermore, the applicant
shall submit the following prior to any approval by the Board:
(a) Written proof that the proposed use/facility complies with the
FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines;
(b) Written proof that an evaluation has taken place, as well as the
results of such evaluation, satisfying the requirements of the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) further referenced
in applicable FCC rules. If an environmental assessment (EA)
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:605
or an environmental impact statement (EIS) is required under
the FCC rules and NEPA, submission of the EA or EIS to the
Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty-day comment
period, and the Town process, shall become part of the
application requirements;
(c) An inventory of its preexisting facilities that are within the
jurisdiction of the Town and those within two miles of the
border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each facility, as well as
economic and technological feasibility for co-location on the
inventoried facilities. The Planning Board may share such
information with other applicants applying for approvals or
conditional use permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that
the Planning Board is not, by sharing such information, in any
way representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.
(d) If the applicant is proposing to build a new tower or other
ground-mounted structure, the applicant shall submit written
evidence demonstrating that no existing structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed facility. This evidence
can consist of:
[1] Substantial evidence that no existing towers or structures
are located within the geographic area required to meet
the applicant's engineering requirements, provided that a
description of the geographic area required is also
submitted;
[2] Substantial evidence that existing structures, including
towers, are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's
engineering requirements, and why;
[3] Substantial evidence that the existing towers or structures
do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment;
[4] Substantial evidence that applicant's proposed antenna
would cause electromagnetic interference with the
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna;
[5] Substantial evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual
provisions required by the owner in order to share the
existing tower or structure are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable; and
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-707
1:606
[6] Substantial evidence that the applicant can demonstrate
other limiting factors that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
(e) The applicant proposing to build a tower or ground-mounted
structure shall submit an agreement with the Town that allows
for the maximum allowance of co-location upon the new
structure to the extent such co-location can exist while
minimizing adverse impacts noted in Subsection A(1). Such
statement shall become a condition to any approval. This
statement shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to supply
available co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other
telecommunications providers. Failure to provide such an
agreement is evidence of the applicant's unwillingness to
cooperate with the orderly and well-planned development of
Salem and is grounds for a denial.
(f) The applicant shall submit the engineering information
detailing the size and coverage required for the PWSF location.
The Planning Board may have any submitted information
reviewed by a consultant for verification of any claims made by
the applicant regarding technological limitations and
feasibility for alternative locations, or any other matter
required by the application. Cost for this review shall be borne
by the applicant in accordance with RSA 676:4, I(g).
F. Waivers.
(1) General. Where the Board finds that extraordinary hardships,
practical difficulties, or unnecessary and unreasonable expense
would result from strict compliance with the terms of Subsections
D and E or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve waivers
to these regulations, including waivers of the height standard in
Subsection D(2)(a). The purpose of granting waivers under
provisions of these regulations shall be to ensure that an applicant
is not unduly burdened as opposed to merely inconvenienced by
said regulations. The Board shall not approve any waiver(s) unless
a majority of those present and voting shall find that all of the
following apply:
(a) The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other property and will
promote the public interest.
(b) The waiver will not, in any manner, vary the provisions of this
chapter, the Salem Master Plan, or Official Maps.
(c) Such waiver(s) will substantially secure the objectives,
standards and requirements of these regulations.
§ 490-707 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-707
1:607
(d) A particular and identifiable hardship exists or a specific
circumstance warrants the granting of a waiver. Factors to be
considered in determining the existence of a hardship shall
include but not be limited to:
[1] Topography and other site features.
[2] Availability of alternative site locations.
[3] Geographic location of property.
[4] Size/magnitude of project being evaluated and availability
of co-location.
(2) Conditions. In approving waivers, the Board may impose such
conditions as it deems appropriate to substantially secure the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
(3) Procedures. A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in
writing by the applicant with the application for Board review. The
petition shall state fully the grounds for the waiver and all of the
facts relied upon by the applicant. Failure to submit petition in
writing shall require an automatic denial.
G. Miscellaneous.
(1) Bonding, security and insurance. Recognizing the extremely
hazardous situation presented by inadequately maintained or
abandoned and unmonitored facilities, the Planning Board shall set
the form and amount of security that represents the cost for
removal and disposal of abandoned facilities in the event that the
PWSF is abandoned or inadequately maintained and the PWSF
owner is incapable and unwilling to remove or maintain it.
Furthermore, the Planning Board shall require the submission of
proof of adequate insurance covering accident or damage.
(2) Removal of abandoned antennas and facilities. Any antenna or
PWSF that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health
and safety. The owner shall remove the abandoned PWSF within 90
days of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the Town
notifying the owner of such abandonment. A declaration of
abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing,
noticed per Town regulations, with notice to abutters and the last
known owner/operator of the facility. If the abandoned facility is not
removed within 90 days, the Town may execute the security and
have the facility removed. If there are two or more users of a single
facility, this provision shall not become effective until all users
cease using the facility.
(3) Enforcement. Enforcement of this section shall be in accordance
with RSA 676 and this chapter.
§ 490-707 SALEM CODE § 490-708
1:608
§ 490-708. Satellite earth station antennas. [Added by the 2006
Town Meeting]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to conform this chapter to
federal law requirements for the regulation of satellite earth station
antennas and to permit regulation by the Town for legitimate public
health, safety and/or historical reasons. This section is to be interpreted
to be consistent with the regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission on earth station antennas, currently located in 47 CFR
1.4000 and 25.104, as those regulations may be amended from time to
time.
B. Districts allowing satellite earth station antennas.
(1) Except as specifically allowed, federal law and regulations require
that the Town of Salem not impair the installation, maintenance or
use of:
(a) Antennas used to receive direct broadcast satellite service, or
to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite as
defined by 47 CFR 1.4000(a)(2), and that are one meter or less
in diameter.
(b) Antennas used to receive video programming services via
multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed
services, and other local multipoint distribution services, or to
receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via
satellite, and that are one meter or less in diameter or diagonal
measurement; or
(c) A mast supporting any such antennas described above.
(2) Specifically, all satellite dish antennas that are one meter or less in
diameter are permitted in any district in the Town of Salem, except
as noted below in Subsection B(3), and satellite dish antennas that
are two meters or less in diameter are permitted in any commercial
or industrial district in the Town of Salem, except as noted in
Subsection B(4).
(3) Exceptions.
(a) Satellite dish antennas one meter or less in diameter are not
permitted in residential or commercial districts when:
[1] The Code Enforcement Officer determines that:
[a] The siting of such a facility constitutes a legitimate
and clearly defined hazard to public safety, including
but not limited to fire or traffic; or
[b] Not permitting the siting is necessary to preserve a
prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure
or object included on, or eligible for inclusion on, the
§ 490-708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-708
1:609
§ 490-709. Home occupations. [Added by the 1996 Town Meeting;
amended by the 2005 Town Meeting]
Home occupations are allowed in the Residential, Rural, and Recreational
Districts.
National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in
the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as
amended, 16 U.S.C. § 470.
[2] The antenna is not located in an area within the exclusive
control of the antenna user where the user has a direct or
indirect ownership or leasehold interest in the property.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall apply the standard set
forth in Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] above in a
nondiscriminatory manner and impose no greater restrictions
on antennas covered by this rule than are imposed on the
installation, maintenance, or use of other modern
appurtenances, devices, or fixtures that are comparable in
size, weight, and appearance to these antennas. The
application of this subsection shall be no more burdensome to
affected antenna users than is necessary to achieve the
objectives described in Subsection B(3)(a)[1] and [2] of this
section.
(c) Any fee or cost imposed on a user by a rule, law, regulation or
restriction must be reasonable in light of the cost of the
equipment or services and the rule's, law's, regulation's or
restriction's treatment of comparable devices.
(4) Satellite dish antennas in commercial or industrial districts.
(a) Satellite dish antennas are not permitted in commercial or
industrial districts when the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that the siting of such a facility constitutes a
hazard to public health or safety, including but not limited to
fire or traffic.
(b) The application of this subsection shall be no more
burdensome to satellite users than is necessary to achieve the
health or safety objective.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses
permitted in residential districts;
(2) Maintain and preserve the character of the residential
neighborhood;
(3) Protect residential areas from adverse impacts of activities
associated with home occupations; and
§ 490-708 SALEM CODE § 490-709
1:610
(4) Establish criteria for home occupations.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the
Building Department on a form provided by the Building
Department and shall be accompanied by a fee as determined by
the Board of Selectmen. Home occupations complying with the
criteria established in § 490-301B(4) shall be considered minor in
character and shall receive a home occupation permit.
(2) Time limit. All home occupation permits shall be issued annually.
(3) Publication. Permits issued for home occupations shall be
published in the same manner as building permits.
(4) Inspection. Home occupation applicants shall permit a reasonable
inspection of the premises by the Building Department to
determine compliance.
(5) Renewal. Home occupation permits shall be renewed each year,
provided there has not been any violation of the provisions of
Subsections D and E. Requests for renewals shall be submitted to
the Building Department accompanied by the renewal fee prior to
expiration of the permit.
(6) Nontransferable. Home occupation permits are intended for use by
the current resident-owner or tenants with the owner's written
permission and shall not be transferred from person to person or
address to address.
(7) Voiding of permit. The Building Department may void any home
occupation permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in
Subsections D and E.
D. Criteria for home occupation.
(1) The use shall be conducted entirely within the main dwelling unit
and the total shall not exceed the maximum space of 25% of the
habitable area. Home occupations shall be permitted in all dwelling
units meeting all requirements.
(2) The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the residential use, shall not change the residential character of the
neighborhood, and shall have no visible appearance.
(3) The home occupation shall be carried on by the resident-owners or
tenants with the owner's written permission and employ no others.
(4) Multiple home occupations are permitted within the dwelling,
provided that the cumulative impact on the surrounding
§ 490-709 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-709
1:611
§ 490-710. Large-scale redevelopment projects. [Added by the 2009
Town Meeting]
The provisions of Subsections A through E of this section shall apply to
any lot in the Commercial-Industrial District C which consists of 25 acres
or more as of December 31, 2008, or any lots which are consolidated to
comprise at least 25 acres, but shall not apply to additions or expansion
of existing uses and facilities, including horse racing and/or gaming uses
neighborhood is not greater than the maximum usage of a single
home occupation.
(5) No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, products,
equipment, supplies or vehicles connected with a home occupation
shall be allowed in any accessory buildings or garages, attached or
detached, or outside the dwelling unit. No additional parking areas
will be permitted.
(6) There shall be no display of products visible in any manner from the
outside of the dwelling.
(7) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
or premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation. There shall be no entrance or exitway specifically
provided in the dwelling or on the premises for the conduct of the
home occupation.
(8) No signs or advertising display signs shall be permitted. Section
490-702D does not apply.
(9) The use shall not require additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(10)No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, or odor detectable off the
property.
(11)No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible electrical interference in any radio or television receiver off
the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
(12) The street address of a home occupation business shall not be
advertised to the general public in any commercial telephone
directory listing, newspaper, radio, or television service.
(13) The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises which is
not consistent with normal residential activities.
(14) Any unit that has day care shall not be permitted to obtain a home
occupation permit.
E. Variances. Any business not meeting the criteria of a home occupation
shall not be permitted and a variance will be required to have that use.
§ 490-709 SALEM CODE § 490-710
1:612
(as defined in Subsection G hereof). The additions or expansions of existing
uses and facilities, including horse racing and/or gaming uses, on such lots
shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection F of this section.
A. In accordance with RSA 674:21, I(i), the intent of these provisions is to
promote flexibility in certain large-scale redevelopment of larger
parcels in the Commercial-Industrial C District based upon a
conceptual development plan which is consistent with the Town of
Salem Master Plan. The process allows flexibility for the redevelopment
project to be proposed largely independent from current land use
regulations, including the selection of land uses, density, setbacks,
buffers, building heights, lot sizes, lot dimensions, and parking
requirements otherwise applicable to the property.
B. The Planning Board may grant conditional use permits to vary the
restrictions in § 490-501B (permitted uses) and C (restrictions) and
§ 490-701 (off-street parking and loading), consistent with the criteria
noted below. An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit,
and the Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant such
permit if the Board determines such permit is not justified or warranted
in accordance with the below criteria and the intent of this regulation.
This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control pursuant to
RSA 674:21, II, and the Planning Board is vested with sole authority to
administer it and to grant the conditional use permits. All other zoning
regulations shall apply.
C. As part of the site plan approval process for large-scale redevelopment
in the Commercial-Industrial C District, the applicant/owner shall be
required to prepare a conceptual development plan for the entire
parcel. The conceptual development plan shall show existing site
conditions and proposed development, including the general types,
locations and intensities of proposed land uses and proposed traffic and
pedestrian flows, and shall generally indicate how the proposed
development of the site will impact municipal services and facilities and
abutting properties.
D. Criteria.
(1) The conceptual development plan shall meet the following criteria
for redevelopment:
(a) Creating a well planned and integrated development with a
mixture of land uses, including residential, retail, office,
entertainment, hotels, restaurants, or other compatible land
uses.
(b) Mitigating negative impacts on traffic, public utilities,
municipal services, and natural resources.
(c) Limiting new access points on South and North Broadway.
§ 490-710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-710
1:613
(d) Providing transitions between existing and proposed land uses
which protect residential abutters.
(e) Providing high quality site planning and architectural,
landscaping and signage designs that meet the retail design
standards in the Site Plan Review Regulations.
(f) Minimizing views of large parking lots from existing streets.
(g) Creating pedestrian and vehicular links to abutting parcels.
(h) Establishing open space and pedestrian amenities, including
usable common land and wide sidewalks.
(2) The Planning Board shall have sole authority for approval of a
conceptual development plan based on the criteria noted above.
The Board may approve amendments or revisions to a previously
approved conceptual development plan.
E. All subsequent site plans and subdivisions submitted to the Planning
Board for approval within the parcel shall conform to the conceptual
development plan and these provisions and the Site Plan Review
Regulations. The Planning Board may adopt additional performance
standards for large-scale redevelopment projects. The construction
standards in the Subdivision Regulations, the retail design,
landscaping, exterior lighting and signage standards in the Site Plan
Review Regulations and the traffic management regulations in the Site
Plan Regulations shall apply.
F. The addition or expansion of existing uses and facilities, including horse
racing and/or gaming uses (as defined in Subsection G of this section),
shall not be subject to the provisions of Subsections A through E of this
section. The Planning Board may grant conditional use permits to vary
the restrictions in § 490-501B (permitted uses) and C (restrictions) and
§ 490-701 (off-street parking and loading) for the addition or expansion
of existing uses and facilities, including horse racing and/or gaming
uses (as defined in Subsection G of this section), consistent with the
following criteria:
(1) The proposed addition or expansion must:
(a) Mitigate negative impacts on traffic, public utilities, municipal
services, and natural resources.
(b) Limit new access points on South and North Broadway.
(c) Provide transitions for protection to residential abutters.
(d) Minimize views of large parking lots from existing streets.
(e) Be consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
(f) Not adversely affect the aesthetic character of the site and
surrounding area.
§ 490-710 SALEM CODE § 490-710
1:614
§ 490-711. Impact fees. [Added by the 2005 Town Meeting180]
(2) An applicant is not entitled to a conditional use permit, and the
Planning Board may, in its discretion, decline to grant such permit
if the Planning Board determines such permit is not justified or
warranted in accordance with these criteria.
(3) This provision is adopted as an innovative land use control
pursuant to RSA 674:21, II, and the Planning Board is vested with
sole authority to administer it and to grant the conditional use
permits.
G. For purposes of this section, the phrase "horse racing and/or gaming
uses" shall include the operation of pari-mutuel wagering on live horse
racing, simulcast horse and dog racing, charitable gaming activities,
and other gambling activities that are or may be authorized by the State
of New Hampshire, including the operation of slot machines, video
lottery terminals, electronic games of chance, racinos, and casinos. For
purposes of this section, expansion or additions to horse racing and/or
gaming uses shall include expansion of uses and accessory uses located
within existing, reconstructed, temporary, or new facilities used for
horse racing or gaming. All other accessory uses shall comply with
Subsections A through E of this section.
A. Authority and purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:21,
V, as an innovative land use control, and in order to:
(1) Promote the goals and objectives of the Salem Master Plan and the
Salem Capital Improvements Program in providing adequate public
facilities in Salem.
(2) Make adequate and appropriate public capital facilities available to
accommodate the needs of new development.
(3) Allocate an equitable share of the cost of public facilities to new
development.
(4) Require new development to provide the funds necessary to
accommodate its impact on public capital facilities in proportion to
the needs reasonably attributable to new development.
(5) Consolidate the existing authority for school and road impact fee
assessments into a single section of this chapter and enable impact
fee assessments for public recreation facilities and public safety
facilities, subject to adoption by the Planning Board of specific
methods of assessment and fee schedules therefor.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Authority to assess impact fees.
180. Editor's Note: Original Art. XXI, Impact Fee Assessment (1994), was repealed by the 2005
Town Meeting.
§ 490-710 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-711
1:615
(1) The Planning Board is hereby authorized to assess impact fees for
public capital facilities, including and limited to:
(a) Public road systems and rights-of-way;
(b) Public school facilities;
(c) Public safety facilities; and
(d) Public recreation facilities, not including public open space.
(2) The Planning Board shall have the authority to adopt regulations to
implement the provisions of this section and to delegate the
administrative functions of impact fee assessment, collection and
disbursement.
(3) The use of the following documents, as amended, provides a
proportionate basis for the assessment of impact fees in Salem:
(a) (Reserved)181
(b) Public School Impact Fees: Basis of Assessment, Town of
Salem, 2004 update, as amended;
(c) Public Recreation Impact Fees: Basis of Assessment, Salem,
New Hampshire (2004), as amended;
(d) Public Safety Impact Fees: Basis of Assessment, Town of
Salem, New Hampshire (2005), as amended;
(e) Traffic impact fee system: Town of Salem, New Hampshire,
October 2009; and [Added by the 2016 Town Meeting]
(f) Impact Fees: Basis of Assessment, 2014 Update: Schools,
Recreation and Public Safety Impact Fees, August 2014.
[Added by the 2016 Town Meeting]
D. Standards and methodology for assessment.
(1) The amount of any impact fee shall be a proportional share of
public facility improvement costs which are reasonably related to
the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits
accruing to the development from the capital improvements
financed by the fee.
(2) The Planning Board may prepare, adopt, or amend studies, reports,
or cost allocation procedures that are consistent with the above
standards and which define a basis for impact fee assessment for
public capital facilities and the impact fee assessment schedules
therefor.
181. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3)(a), regarding the Planning Board’s Cost Allocation
Procedure for Roads, was repealed by the 2016 Town Meeting.
§ 490-711 SALEM CODE § 490-711
1:616
(3) No methodology, cost allocation procedure, or other basis of
assessment, nor related impact fee schedules, or changes in the
basis of assessment or the fee schedules, shall become effective
until it shall have been the subject of a public hearing before the
Planning Board.
(4) In the case of new development created by conversion or
modification of an existing use, the impact fee shall be based upon
the net increase in the impact fee calculated for the new use as
compared to the impact fee that was, or would have been, assessed
for the previous use.
(5) Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need for
which is not created by new development, shall not be paid for by
impact fees.
E. Review and change in assessment schedules. The impact fee
assessment schedules shall be reviewed by the Planning Board in
conjunction with updates to the Master Plan, but no less frequently
than every five years, along with the foundation documents that provide
the basis for the assessment schedules. Such review may result in
recommended adjustments in one or more of the fees based on the most
recent data as they affect the variables in the fee calculations. Changes
in the impact fee assessment schedules shall be effective only where the
change in the basis of assessment or the fee schedule is adopted
following a public hearing on the proposed change.
F. Assessment and collection of impact fees.
(1) Where subdivision or site plan approval is required for new
development, impact fees shall be assessed at the time of Planning
Board approval of a subdivision plat or site plan.
(2) When no Planning Board approval is required, or has been made
prior to the adoption or amendment of this section, impact fees
shall be assessed prior to, or as a condition for, the issuance of a
building permit.
(3) Impact fees shall be collected at the time a certificate of occupancy
is issued. If no certificate of occupancy is required, impact fees
shall be collected at the time when the development is ready for its
intended use.
(4) The Planning Board and the fee payer may establish an alternate,
mutually acceptable schedule of payment of impact fees at the time
of subdivision or site plan approval by the Planning Board. If an
alternate schedule of payment is established, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to post security, in the form of a cash
bond, letter of credit, or performance bond, so as to guarantee
future payment of assessed impact fees.
§ 490-711 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-711
1:617
(5) No building permit for new development requiring payment of an
impact fee shall be issued until the amount of the impact fee
assessment has been determined by the Chief Building Official.
(6) No building permit shall be issued for new development until the
fee payer has established a mutually acceptable schedule for
payment of such fee with the Town of Salem. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for new development which is subject to
impact fee assessment until the fee is paid in full.
G. Waivers. The Planning Board may grant full or partial waivers of impact
fees where the Board finds that one or more of the following criteria are
met with respect to the particular public capital facilities for which
impact fees are normally assessed:
(1) A fee payer may request a full or partial waiver of public school and
recreation impact fees for those residential units that are lawfully
restricted to occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over in a
development that is also maintained in compliance with the
provisions of RSA 354-A:15, Housing for Older Persons. The
Planning Board may waive school impact fee assessments on such
age-restricted units where it finds that the property will be bound
by lawful deeded restrictions on occupancy by senior citizens age
62 or over for a period of at least 20 years.
(2) A person undertaking the development of in-law apartments,
accessory apartments, or projects approved under the Seniors
Housing Overlay District may apply for a waiver of school impact
fees otherwise required by this section. Prior to granting such a
waiver for certain dwelling units in such a development, the
Planning Board shall find that, due to lawful, long-term occupancy
restrictions pertaining to such units, no significant school
enrollment impacts are anticipated as a result of the construction
of those units. Public safety, recreation, and road impact fees shall
still be required for such dwelling units. [Amended by the 2011
Town Meeting]
(3) The Planning Board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee
assessment and accept, in lieu of a cash payment, a proposed
contribution of real property or facility improvements of equivalent
value and utility to the public. Prior to acting on a request for a
waiver of impact fees that would involve a contribution of real
property or the construction of capital facilities, the Planning Board
shall submit a copy of the waiver request to the Board of Selectmen
for its review and consent prior to its acceptance of the proposed
contribution. The value of contributions or improvements shall be
credited only toward facilities of like kind and may not be credited
to other categories of impact fee assessment. All costs incurred by
the Town for the review of such proposal, including consultant and
counsel fees, shall be paid by the fee payer.
§ 490-711 SALEM CODE § 490-711
1:618
H. Appeals under this section.
(1) If a fee payer elects to dispute the amount of the impact fee, the fee
payer may prepare and submit to the Planning Board an
independent fee calculation study for the new development activity
which is proposed. The Planning Board shall review such study and
render its decision. All costs incurred by the Town for the review of
such study shall be paid by the fee payer.
(2) A party aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board under this
section may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as provided
by RSA 677:15, as amended.
I. Administration of impact fees.
(1) All funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly
transferred for deposit to the appropriate capital facility impact fee
account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified in the
basis of assessment adopted by the Planning Board for that capital
facility category. Impact fee accounts shall be special revenue fund
accounts and under no circumstances shall such revenues accrue
to the general fund.
(2) The Town Treasurer shall have custody of all fee accounts and shall
pay out the same only upon written orders of the Board of
Selectmen and they shall be used solely for the reimbursement of
the Town and School District for the cost of public capital
improvements for which they were collected or to recoup the cost
of capital improvements made by the Town or School District in
anticipation of the needs for which the impact fee was collected.
The Board of Selectmen shall annually order the release of school
impact fee accounts to the Salem School District, upon a
demonstration by the District of programmed expenditures eligible
for reimbursement by impact fees.
(3) The Town Treasurer shall record all fees paid, by date of payment
and the name of the person making payment, and shall maintain an
updated record of the current ownership, Tax Map and lot
reference number of properties for which fees have been paid
under this section for a period of at least nine years.
(4) At the end of each fiscal year, the Town Treasurer shall make a
report to the Board of Selectmen and the Salem School District,
giving an account of all impact fee transactions during the year.
(5) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been
issued for capital facilities that are the subject of impact fee
assessments, and where improvements have been constructed in
anticipation of new development, impact fees may be used to pay
debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments.
§ 490-711 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-711
1:619
§ 490-712. Small wind energy systems. [Adopted by the 2010 Town
Meeting]
J. Refund of fees paid. The owner of record of property for which an
impact fee has been paid shall be entitled to a refund of that fee, plus
accrued interest, where:
(1) The impact fee has not been encumbered or legally bound to be
spent for the purpose for which it was collected within a period of
six years from the date of the final payment of the fee; or
(2) The Town or, in the case of school impact fees, the Salem School
District has failed, within the period of six years from the date of
the final payment of such fee, to appropriate the nonimpact fee
share of related capital improvement costs.
K. Other authority retained. This section shall not be deemed to affect
other authority of the Planning Board over subdivisions and site plans,
including but not limited to:
(1) The authority of the Planning Board to declare a development to be
premature or scattered in accordance with the regulations of the
Board and in accordance with RSA 674:36, II(a);
(2) The authority of the Planning Board to require the payment of
exactions for off-site improvements for highway, drainage, sewer
and water upgrades necessitated by the development, in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21, V(j); or
(3) Other authority of the Town of Salem to assess other fees under the
authority of other statutes, ordinances of the Town of Salem, or the
Salem Planning Board Site Plan Review and Subdivision
Regulations.
L. Impact fee schedules. The documents referenced in Subsection C(3)
support the impact fee schedules listed in the latest impact fee schedule
adopted by the Planning Board and available at Town Hall. Land uses
that are not within the categories listed in the schedules may require
special calculations using a comparable basis of assessment, or the
application of an assessment amount based on a land use of similar
impact. Fees shall be based on the principal use of the structure.
[Amended by the 2016 Town Meeting]
A. Purpose. This section is enacted in accordance with RSA 674:62 to
674:66 and the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1, III-a. The purpose of
this section is to accommodate small wind energy systems (SWES) in
appropriate locations while protecting the public's health, safety and
welfare. In addition, this section provides a permitting process for
SWES to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements
and standards established herein.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
§ 490-711 SALEM CODE § 490-712
1:620
C. Procedure for review.
(1) Building permit. SWES and MET towers are an accessory use
permitted in all zoning districts where structures of any sort are
allowed. No SWES shall be erected, constructed, or installed
without first receiving a building permit from the Building
Inspector. A building permit shall be required for any physical
modification to an existing small wind energy system. MET towers
that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary
basis not to exceed three years from the date the building permit
was issued.
(2) Application. Applications submitted to the Building Inspector shall
contain a site plan with the following information:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant's
property.
(b) Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on
the property.
(c) Location of the proposed small wind energy system,
foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment.
(d) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
(e) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(f) Setback requirements as outlined in this section.
(g) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(h) Any overhead utility lines.
(i) SWES specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor
diameter, tower height, tower type, and nameplate generation
capacity.
(j) SWES that will be connected to the power grid shall include a
copy of the application for interconnection with their electric
utility provider.
(k) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator
manufacturer or qualified engineer.
(l) Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
New Hampshire State Building Code.
(m) Evidence of compliance with or nonapplicability of Federal
Aviation Administration requirements.
(n) List of abutters to the applicant's property.
§ 490-712 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-712
1:621
(3) Abutter and regional notification. In accordance with RSA 674:66,
the Building Inspector shall notify, at the applicant's expense, all
abutters and the local governing body by certified mail upon
application for a building permit to construct a small wind energy
system. The public will be afforded 30 days to submit comments to
the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of the building permit.
The Building Inspector shall review the application for regional
impacts per RSA 36:55. If the proposal is determined to have
potential regional impacts, the Building Inspector shall follow the
procedures set forth in RSA 36:57, IV.
D. Standards. The Building Inspector shall evaluate the application for
compliance with the following standards:
(1) Setbacks. The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the
minimum setback requirement number by the system height and
measured from the center of the tower base to property line, public
roads, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building.
Minimum Setback Requirements
Occupied
Buildings on
Participating
Landowner
Property
Occupied
Buildings on
Abutting
Property
Property Lines
of Abutting
Property and
Utility Lines
Public
Roads
0 1.5 1.5 1.5
(a) SWES must meet all setbacks for principal structures for the
zoning district in which the system is located.
(b) Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the
SWES setback requirements.
(2) Tower. The maximum tower height shall be restricted to 35 feet
above the tree canopy within 300 feet of the small wind energy
system. In no situation shall the tower height exceed 150 feet.
(3) Sound level. The SWES shall not exceed 55 decibels using the A
scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line, except during
short-term events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
(4) Shadow flicker. SWES shall be sited in a manner that does not
result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow
flicker is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting
occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that
the shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker will be
addressed either through siting or mitigation measures.
(5) Signs. All signs, including flags, streamers and decorative items,
both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind
§ 490-712 SALEM CODE § 490-712
1:622
energy system, except for manufacturer identification or
appropriate warning signs.
(6) Code compliance. The SWES shall comply with all applicable
sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code.
(7) Aviation. The SWES shall be built to comply with all applicable FAA
regulations, including but not limited to 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B,
regarding installations close to airports, and the New Hampshire
aviation regulations, including but not limited to RSA 422-b and
RSA 424.
(8) Visual impacts. It is inherent that SWES may pose some visual
impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind resources.
The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual impacts without
restricting the owner's access to the optimal wind resources on the
property.
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning
and proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's
visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors
and the community. This may include but not be limited to
information regarding site selection, wind generator design or
appearance, buffering, and screening of ground-mounted
electrical and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall
be underground, except when the financial costs are
prohibitive.
(b) The color of the SWES shall either be the stock color from the
manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective, unobtrusive
color that blends in with the surrounding environment.
Approved colors include but are not limited to white, off-white
or gray.
(c) A SWES shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is
required by the FAA. If lighting is required, the applicant shall
provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the
required markings and/or lights for the small wind energy
system.
(9) Approved wind generators. The manufacturer and model of the
wind generator to be used in the proposed SWES must have been
approved by the California Energy Commission or the New York
State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar list
approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available.
(10) Utility connection. If the proposed SWES is to be connected to the
power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to RSA 362-A:9.
(11) Access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to
provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a
minimum height of eight feet above the ground. All ground-
§ 490-712 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-712
1:623
mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and
secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(12) Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the SWES and as otherwise prescribed by
applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances.
E. Abandonment.
(1) At such time that a SWES is scheduled to be abandoned or
discontinued, the applicant will notify the Building Inspector by
certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations.
(2) Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the SWES within 90 days from the date of
abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be
extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the
Building Inspector. "Physically remove" shall include but not be
limited to:
(a) Removal of the wind generator and tower and related abovegrade
structures.
(b) Restoration of the location of the SWES to its natural
condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below-grade
foundation may remain in its same condition at initiation of
abandonment.
(3) In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system
shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out
of service for a continuous twelve-month period. After the 12
months of inoperability, the Building Inspector may issue a notice
of abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The
owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment
within 30 days from notice receipt date. After review of the
information provided by the owner, the Building Inspector shall
determine if the SWES has been abandoned. If it is determined that
the SWES has not been abandoned, the Building Inspector shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner of the
withdrawal.
(4) If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if,
after review by the Building Inspector, it is determined that the
SWES has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the SWES
shall remove the wind generator and tower at the owner's sole
expense within three months of receipt of the notice of
abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the SWES
after the notice of abandonment procedure, the Building Inspector
may pursue legal action to have the SWES removed at the owner's
expense.
§ 490-712 SALEM CODE § 490-712
1:624
§ 490-713. Noncommercial keeping of chickens. [Added by the 2016
Town Meeting]
F. Violation. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a
SWES that is not in compliance with this section. SWES installed prior
to the adoption of this section are exempt from this section except when
modifications are proposed to the small wind energy system.
G. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this
section or a building permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by RSA 676:17.
A. Purpose. Recognizing the importance of sustainable and locally sourced
food, the following regulations will govern the keeping of chickens and
are designed to prevent nuisances and conditions that are unsanitary or
unsafe.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 490-301B and 490-302B of this
chapter, the noncommercial raising and keeping of chickens shall be
permitted on all lots of at least one acre in size in the Rural District
under the following conditions:
(1) Number. No more than six hens shall be allowed for each lot.
(2) Setbacks. Coops or cages housing chickens and manure storage
areas shall be kept at least 25 feet from any property line. Coops
and cages shall not be located in the front yard.
(3) Enclosure. Hens shall be provided with a covered, predator-proof
coop or cage that is well ventilated and designed to be easily
accessed for cleaning. The coop shall allow at least two square feet
per hen. Hens shall have access to an outdoor enclosure that is
adequately fenced to contain the birds on the property and to
prevent predators from access to the birds. Hens shall not be
allowed out of these enclosures unless an individual, over 18 years
of age, is directly monitoring the hens and able to immediately
return the hens to the cage or coop if necessary.
(4) Sanitation. The coop and outdoor enclosure must be kept in a
sanitary condition and free from offensive odors. The coop and
outdoor enclosure must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent
the accumulation of waste. Manure storage must comply with Best
Management Practices published by the New Hampshire
Department of Agriculture.
(5) Slaughtering. There shall be no outdoor slaughtering of chickens.
(6) Roosters. It is unlawful for any person to keep roosters.
(7) Permit. A permit shall not be required unless the coop is greater
than 200 square feet.
§ 490-712 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-713
1:625
(8) Chickens may only be kept as an accessory use to, and on the
premises with, a single-family residence. No commercial activity
related to the keeping of chickens, such as selling products or
breeding, is allowed.
§ 490-713 SALEM CODE § 490-713
1:626
ARTICLE VIII
Supplemental Regulations
§ 490-801. Accessory apartments. [Added by the 1989 Town
Meeting; amended by the 2017 Town Meeting]
§ 490-802. In-law apartments. [Amended by the 1993 and 2000
Town Meetings]
A. Accessory apartments are allowed in all districts that permit singlefamily
dwellings.
B. To increase housing alternatives while maintaining neighborhood
aesthetics and quality, one accessory apartment within a detached
single-family dwelling shall be permitted, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) Maximum of one accessory apartment per single-family dwelling.
(2) The property owner must occupy one of the two units.
(3) The exterior appearance and entrances of the dwelling shall be
consistent with a single-family residence.
(4) Only two bedrooms are permitted in the accessory apartment, and
the apartment may not exceed 750 square feet of floor space. The
limit of 750 square feet shall not apply to conversion of in-law
apartments having a permit as of December 28, 1988, provided
they meet all other requirements of this section.
(5) Adequate provisions for water supply and sewage disposal for the
accessory unit shall be made in accordance with RSA 485-A:38.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided for at least four vehicles.
Garage and "piggy-back" parking is encouraged.
(7) The structure and lot shall not be converted to a condominium or
any other form of legal ownership distinct from the ownership of
the existing single-family dwelling. Accessory apartment use shall
be recorded by deed addendum.
(8) An accessory apartment shall not be permitted in addition to an inlaw
apartment or a family day-care center.
(9) Variances from this section shall be contrary to the spirit and intent
of this chapter.
(10) Detached accessory apartments are not allowed.
(11) An interior door shall be provided between the principal dwelling
unit and the accessory dwelling unit.
A. In-law apartments are allowed in the Residential, Rural and
Recreational Districts.
§ 490-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-802
1:627
§ 490-803. Obstructed view.
No wall, fence or other structure* and no tree, shrub or other growth on
the property shall so obstruct the view as to cause danger to traffic in the
street. (*Note: Includes recreational vehicles in the Residential and Rural
Districts.)
§ 490-804. Proximity to water bodies. [Amended by the 2010 and
2015 Town Meetings]
No structure shall be constructed within 40 feet from the high-water mark
of any lake, stream, or surface water system, except that no structure shall
be constructed within 50 feet from the high-water mark for the protected
shorelands defined by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services in accordance with RSA 483-B. The high-water mark shall not be
B. In-law use within a single-family dwelling shall meet the following
criteria:
(1) In-law use shall be recorded by deed addendum.
(2) Separate utility service connections shall not be allowed.
(3) Common access between units shall be provided.
(4) The structure's exterior appearance and the entrances to the
dwelling shall be consistent with a single-family residence.
(5) Where municipal sewer is not provided, the septic system shall
meet requirements for the combined use. In new construction, the
septic system shall be designed for duplex use.
(6) Use shall be by members of the immediate family of the principal
owner-occupant of the dwelling.
(7) It shall be contrary to this chapter to provide in-law use in duplexes
or multifamily dwellings.
(8) The apartment shall not exceed 950 square feet of floor space.
[Amended by the 2006 Town Meeting]
C. In the Recreational District, the following additional criteria shall be
met:
(1) A septic system site assessment which meets the requirements of
RSA 485-A:39 and Part Env-Ws 1025182 shall be submitted to the
Engineering Department prior to issuance of a permit for the in-law
apartment.
(2) In-law use may occur only on those lots having not less than 10,000
square feet.
182. Editor's Note: See now Part Env-Wq 1025.
§ 490-802 SALEM CODE § 490-804
1:628
moved or disturbed without Planning Board approval. No septic tank or
leach field may be constructed closer than 75 feet to any surface water body,
as defined by NHDES. The minimum distance between a septic tank and
surface water may be reduced to 50 feet if NHDES regulations are met.
§ 490-805. Building identification. [Added by the 1983 Town
Meeting]
§ 490-806. Unregistered motor vehicles and boats. [Amended by the
1988 Town Meeting]
No lot in the Residential, Garden Apartment, Rural, Recreational, or
Manufactured Housing Park Districts may be used for the outside storage
of more than one unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle. No more
than one unregistered boat shall be permitted on a lot.
§ 490-807. Placement of recreational vehicles on residential lots.
[Added by the 1983 Town Meeting]
The parking, but not occupation, of one recreational vehicle shall be
permitted in the Residential, Rural, and Recreational Districts, subject to
the following requirements:
A. In the interest of public safety, all homes, buildings and other structures
shall clearly display, at a location that provides for unobstructed
viewing from the street, the identifying building name and/or street
address as recorded in the Town Assessor's office.
B. The size, type and location of the identifying building name and/or
street address must be approved by the Salem Fire Chief or his
designee and must conform to § 490-702, Signs, of this chapter.
C. Effective April 1, 1983, any home, building or other structure which
requires a permit from the Building Department shall be required to
comply with the building identification requirements of this section.
Any property which is transferred after April 1, 1983, shall be required
to comply with the building identification requirements of this section
within 60 days of the date of the transfer.
A. Parking is permitted inside any enclosed structure, which structure
otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular district
where located.
B. Parking is permitted in the rear yard or side yard, provided that the
recreational vehicle is located such that it conforms to the lot line
setbacks of the particular district where located.
C. Parking is permitted outside on a driveway, provided that:
(1) Space is not available in the rear yard or side yard or there is no
reasonable access to either the rear yard or side yard.
§ 490-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-807
1:629
§ 490-808. Temporary occupancy of house trailer or mobile home.
In instances where a dwelling located in the Residential, Rural, or
Recreational District has been damaged by fire or other catastrophe and is
being rebuilt or repaired, it shall be permissible to occupy one house trailer
or motor home on that lot for a period not exceeding 90 days while the
dwelling remains unoccupied, and up to an additional 90 days if the Building
Inspector deems it advisable.
§ 490-809. Curing minor setback violations. [Added by the 1994
Town Meeting; amended by the 2005 Town Meeting]
(2) No part of the recreational vehicle may be any closer than five feet
to the street line.
(3) The recreational vehicle shall be parked perpendicular to the street
line.
D. Parking is permitted for storage purposes, and any recreational vehicle
shall not be:
(1) Used for dwelling purposes.
(2) Used for storage of goods, material or equipment other than those
items considered to be part of the recreational vehicle or essential
for its immediate use.
E. The recreational vehicle shall be owned by the resident on whose
property it is parked for storage.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, for any singlefamily
or duplex dwelling originally constructed by a lawfully issued
building permit issued prior to January 1, 2000, the Chief Building
Official, or his designated agent, may issue an administrative waiver of
any setback violations, provided that the waiver may not be issued for
any encroachment exceeding 10% of the required setback distance.
(1) In determining whether to issue such a waiver, the Chief Building
Official shall consider the following factors:
(a) The potential causes for the original noncompliance.
(b) The effect on public health, safety and welfare created by the
encroachment.
(c) The effect of nonenforcement of the required provisions on
surrounding complying properties.
(2) No approval may be given for setback encroachments on both of
the opposite sides of any structure.
B. If the Chief Building Official should deny such waiver request, the
property owner may file an administrative appeal of such a decision
§ 490-807 SALEM CODE § 490-809
1:630
§ 490-810. Expansion of certain nonconforming uses. [Added by the
1992 Town Meeting]
§ 490-811. Protection of dwellings from noise. [Added by the 1992
Town Meeting]
Regular or sustained operation of equipment or unattended operation of
vehicles which causes noise exceeding 45 dBA between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or 55 dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. at any
dwelling (house, apartment or other permanent residence) in any district
wherein such dwelling is a permitted use shall not be permitted in any
district. Site development and construction, agriculture, forestry,
maintenance of real property, and government operations are exempt from
this requirement.
§ 490-812. Residential exterior lighting. [Added by the 1997 Town
Meeting]
Residential exterior lighting shall be installed or arranged in a manner
which prevents direct light or glare, vertical or angled, from shining onto
any public street or adjacent property so as to constitute a nuisance. Direct
or indirect lighting shall not cause illumination in excess of 1.0 footcandle
when measured at any point vertically above the boundary of any residential
property or right-of-way of any public way.
with the Zoning Board of Adjustment or may alternatively seek a
variance from the terms of the underlying setback requirement.
A. A person shall be permitted to expand otherwise permitted uses on
premises subject to site plan jurisdiction of the Planning Board,
notwithstanding the fact that said premises may not conform to lot
coverage or setback requirements otherwise applicable to new uses,
provided such expansion does not further diminish the lot coverage or
increase the area or volume of the structure or uses which encroach
into required setback areas.
B. Alteration or expansion of nonconforming structures. Alteration or
expansion of a structure which is nonconforming solely because of
dimensional requirements is permitted without Zoning Board of
Adjustment approval, provided that: [Added by the 2016 Town
Meeting]
(1) The present use, a changed use, or an additional use is permitted in
the district; and
(2) The alteration or expansion will not further violate setback
dimensional requirements. Any new encroachment cannot come
closer to a property line than the encroachment into the normal
setback area made by the existing structure.
§ 490-809 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-813
1:631
§ 490-813. Motor vehicle fuel storage and dispensing facilities.
Motor vehicle fuel may not be stored or dispensed in any district, except as
follows:
§ 490-814. Phasing requirement for multifamily housing. [Added by
the 2008 Town Meeting]
Pursuant to RSA 674:21, I(b), to ensure that the rate of growth of new
dwelling units does not unreasonably interfere with the Town's capacity for
planned, orderly, and sensible expansion of its services to accommodate
such growth, the construction of new nonsenior multifamily housing units
shall be phased so that no more than 50 units shall be built in any one
project per year.
§ 490-815. Restrictions on motel uses.
The following additional restrictions shall govern motel uses in the
Commercial-Industrial Subdistrict B and the Industrial District:
A. Motor vehicle fuel may be stored and dispensed in Commercial-
Industrial Subdistricts A, B, and C and in the Industrial District, at:
(1) Motor vehicle service or filling stations which serve the general
public, except that no new motor vehicle filling stations may be
constructed or installed or located within 1,320 feet of the Surface
Source Water Protection Area as delineated by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services on a plan titled "Public
Water Supply and Drinking Water Protection Areas of the Town of
Salem." [Amended by the 2003 Town Meeting]
(2) Commercial enterprises, for vehicles owned or operated by that
enterprise for business purposes. The provisions regarding filling
stations contained in § 490-501B(3)(b) shall not apply to such fuel
dispensing facilities operated by such commercial enterprises.
B. The Board of Adjustment may grant special exceptions to permit
storage and dispensing of motor vehicle fuel in any district, for the
exclusive purpose of fueling motor vehicles (and equipment) operated
on the same lot for agricultural purposes, provided that the Board of
Adjustment finds that such storage and dispensing will not adversely
affect the public health, safety or welfare.
A. The minimum lot and land area shall be three acres.
B. The minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet, and the minimum lot depth
200 feet.
C. No building or structure shall be closer than 50 feet to any lot line.
D. A space of not less than 20 feet wide, grassed or shrubbed and
prohibited for parking, shall be maintained along each lot line, except at
driveways.
§ 490-813 SALEM CODE § 490-815
1:632
§ 490-816. Restrictions on child-care centers. [Added by the 1988
Town Meeting]
The following restrictions apply to child-care centers in Commercial-
Industrial Subdistrict B:
§ 490-817. Restrictions on sexually oriented businesses. [Added by
the 1992 Town Meeting; amended by the 2007 Town Meeting]
E. The maximum percentage of land area of each lot which may be
occupied by buildings shall be 25%.
F. Each motel shall consist of not more than 20 units per acre of land area.
G. Each motel unit shall have one paved parking space adjoining its
entrance.
A. Planning Board site plan approval is required.
B. Stockade fence and/or evergreen vegetation shall buffer all neighbors
from children play areas as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Where municipal sewer is not provided, the septic system shall meet
State Water Supply and Pollution Control Division (WSPCD)
requirements for the permitted use.
D. An off-street area shall be provided for the loading and unloading of five
vehicles.
E. The number of students attending the center is limited to 35.
F. All relevant state laws shall be complied with.
G. All other restrictions for the district shall be complied with.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the Town of Salem, and it is the
intent to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens
of the Town of Salem through regulation of the location of adult retail
establishments, and it is the intent of this section that the regulations
be utilized to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which
accompany and are brought about by the concentration of sexually
oriented businesses, and it is the intent of this section to address
secondary effects of increased crime, urban blight, public lewdness,
and spread of sexually transmitted diseases, and it is the intent of this
section that the regulations be utilized to preserve quality of life and
preserve property values and the character of the surrounding
neighborhoods, and the provisions of this amendment have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the
content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials, and it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
§ 490-815 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-817
1:633
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market, and
neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.
B. Definitions. See § 490-107.
C. Allowed locations and location restrictions of sexually oriented
businesses.
(1) Sexually oriented businesses, as defined, shall be permitted only in
Commercial-Industrial Subdistricts B and C, provided that all other
regulations, requirements, and restrictions for the district in which
the sexually oriented business is to be located are met, and no
sexually oriented business shall be permitted:
(a) Within 1,000 feet of another existing sexually oriented
business or one for which a building permit has been applied
for, on the date of the passage of this amendment;
(b) Within 750 feet of any Residential, Rural, Garden Apartment,
Manufactured Housing or Recreational District;
(c) Within 750 feet of any church, place of worship, parish house,
convent, public, parochial, or private school, kindergarten,
state-approved day-care center or public sports/recreation
parks;
(d) Within 750 feet of the Town boundaries; and
(e) Within a building, premises, structure or other facility that
contains a sexually oriented business as defined in § 490-107.
(2) Measure of distance. The distance between any two sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior
structural wall or temporary or permanent physical divider
between each business.
D. Additional reasonable regulations. The Planning Board is empowered
hereunder to review and approve permit applications for sexually
oriented businesses and impose reasonable restrictions for buffering,
outdoor lighting, parking, adequate ingress and egress from the site off
of and onto public roads, and pedestrian movement and to provide for
appropriate landscaping and building aesthetics in the Site Plan Review
Regulations of the Town of Salem, New Hampshire, and to avoid site
development layout which may result in negative environmental
impacts.
§ 490-817 SALEM CODE § 490-817
1:634
ARTICLE IX
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Enforcement
§ 490-901. Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA).
A. Membership; appointment. The ZBA shall consist of five members and
requisite alternates as permitted by New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated and shall be elected in accordance with RSA 673:3, II.
[Amended by the 2007 Town Meeting]
B. Duties. The duties of the ZBA shall be as specified in the New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated as amended from time to time.
C. Persons authorized to appeal; procedure. Appeals to the ZBA may be
taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or
bureau of Salem affected by any decision of the Building Inspector.
Such appeal shall be taken within 10 days of the Building Inspector's
decision by filing with the Building Inspector and with the ZBA a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The Building Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the ZBA all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
D. Notice of hearing; hearing procedure. Notice of the time and place of
any hearing of the ZBA shall be published in a paper of general
circulation in the Town of Salem and given to all parties in interest. The
Planning Board and the Building Inspector shall be notified. All
hearings and meetings of the ZBA, including executive sessions, shall
be public, except meetings or conferences solely for the purpose of
granting or denying motions for rehearing. Any person shall have a
right to have a stenographer or recording device present. The ZBA shall
adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings
of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other
times as the ZBA may determine. The Chairman or in his absence the
Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses and shall administer oaths and require that any or all
evidence be under oath whenever requested by any party. The ZBA shall
keep minutes of its proceedings and shall show the vote of each
member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and all other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Town office
and shall be a public record.
E. Publication of description of work required. The ZBA shall require as a
condition of the effectiveness of any permit, exception, or variance
granted by it or any action taken by it that a person requesting such
action shall cause to be published such description of the act as the
Chairman of the ZBA shall determine, including a description of the
location and the construction, alteration or use, in a paper of general
circulation in Salem within five days of such action, the permit or action
to become effective only upon such publication.
§ 490-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-901
1:635
F. Rehearing. Within 30 days after any order of the ZBA, any person
affected by such order may apply for a rehearing in respect to any
matter determined in the proceedings. Appeals from action on such
rehearing shall be in accordance with New Hampshire statutes.
[Amended by the 2015 Town Meeting]
G. Application for rehearing. Such application shall set forth fully every
ground upon which it is claimed that the decision or order complained
of is unlawful or unreasonable. No appeal from any order or decision of
the ZBA shall be taken unless the appellant shall have made application
for rehearing as herein provided, and when such application shall have
been made, no ground not set forth therein shall be urged, relied on or
given any consideration by the court unless the court for good cause
shown shall allow the appellant to specify additional grounds.
H. Action on rehearing application; subsequent appeals. Upon the filing of
such application for rehearing, the ZBA shall within 30 days either
grant or deny the same or suspend the order or decision complained of
pending further consideration, and any order of suspension may be
upon such terms and conditions as the ZBA may prescribe. Failure to
take any action within 30 days shall constitute a denial of the rehearing.
Within 30 days after the application for a rehearing is denied or, if the
application is granted, within 30 days after the decision on such
application, the applicant, or any other person or party affected, may
appeal by petition to the Superior Court. [Amended by the 2015
Town Meeting]
I. Persons who may be part of proceedings. Any party whose rights may
be directly affected by any action of the ZBA may appear and become a
party in any proceeding before it.
J. Criteria for granting exceptions. Exceptions shall be granted by the
ZBA if, but only if, the ZBA finds that the conditions of this chapter
relating to such permitted exceptions have been or will be met. No
other criteria shall be imposed by the ZBA, and no other considerations
shall govern its determinations. The burden of proving that such
conditions have been or will be met shall be upon the applicant.
K. Criteria for granting variances.
(1) Variances shall be granted by the ZBA if, but only if, the ZBA shall
find all five of the following:
(a) No diminution of surrounding property values would be
suffered.
(b) Granting the permit would be of benefit to the public interest.
(c) Denial of the permit would result in unnecessary hardship to
the owner seeking it. "Financial hardship" in this connection
does not mean personal financial hardship of the owner but
means that the land, building or structure, if required to be
§ 490-901 SALEM CODE § 490-901
1:636
§ 490-902. Enforcement.
constructed or used literally in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, would produce unnecessary hardship to the
owner, whoever that might be.
(d) By granting the permit, substantial justice will be done.
(e) The use, construction or alteration would not be contrary to
the spirit of this chapter.
(2) No other criteria shall be imposed by the ZBA, and no other
considerations shall govern its deliberations on variances. The
burden of proving that such criteria have been or will be met shall
be upon the applicant. The ZBA may attach reasonable conditions
to the granting of any variance.
L. Conduct of deliberations; public access to information. In making its
deliberations, the ZBA shall not receive or consider any evidence not
submitted to it in public hearing. Any party to a hearing before the ZBA
shall have a right to request in writing specific findings of fact and
specific rulings. No action of the ZBA shall be effective unless and until
it has passed upon and duly recorded its decision on each and every
such request submitted to it in the public hearing upon such matter.
M. Termination of variances and exceptions. Any variance or exception
granted by the ZBA shall be terminated two years from its issuance by
the ZBA unless the variance or exception granted has been exercised by
the recipient. However, this subsection shall not preclude the earlier
invalidity of a variance or exception if, prior to its exercise by the
recipient, the circumstances in existence at the time of its issuance
have altered appreciably. [Amended by the 2015 Town Meeting]
N. Inspection of sites. The ZBA may only turn down a request for a
proposed project after making a physical inspection of the site. [Added
by the 1992 Town Meeting]
A. Designation of enforcement authority.
(1) Authority to issue building permits. It shall be the duty of the Board
of Selectmen and the Board of Selectmen is hereby given power
and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Board of
Selectmen shall appoint a Building Inspector, who shall hold office
at the pleasure of the Selectmen and who shall take all action
necessary for the initial issuance or denial of permits under the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Enforcement of land use regulations. The Board of Selectmen shall
appoint a Chief Building Official who is the lead official responsible
for the enforcement of this chapter, the Site Plan Review
Regulations, and the Subdivision Regulations, together with the
current Building Code as adopted by the Town. The Chief Building
§ 490-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-902
1:637
Official may call upon the police, fire, engineer, health officer,
public works, or any other appropriate Town officials to assist in
enforcement and investigation of an alleged violation. The Planning
Director shall assist in inspection, research, and response to
reports of violations relating to site plans or subdivision
regulations. The Chief Building Official shall inspect private
property and notify owners of code violations; issue summons for
violations of building codes, housing, zoning codes, excavation,
regulations, violations of the conditions or terms of Planning Board
site plan or subdivision approval, and other related Town land
use regulations; conduct research of records to identify and locate
owners of property where violations occur; conduct field surveys
for code compliance; and interact with the public on issues of
code compliance. The Chief Building Official also shall have the
authority to seek injunctions in Superior Court, as deemed
appropriate. Town officials shall be guided in their duties to enforce
by the provisions contained in RSA 676. [Added by the 1999
Town Meeting]
B. Building permit required. Except for building structures and uses to
which the regulations herein do not apply, no building, structure,
trailer, mobile home or sign shall be erected or altered and no use of
any building, structure or land shall be made until there has been
obtained a building permit from the Building Inspector authorizing such
construction, alteration or use. A permit may be obtained and shall, if
appropriate, be granted upon the application of any person for
construction, alteration or use which is excepted from the regulations
herein.
C. Building permit application procedure. Applications for building
permits shall be filed with the Building Inspector and shall include a
plot plan and shall contain such information as the Building Inspector
may require to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building
or structure and its intended use comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Permit fee. A fee of $1 for each $1,000 of construction costs shall be
paid to the Building Inspector at the time of application, which shall be
paid into the Town treasury. This fee schedule shall only be operable in
the absence of a Building Code (see Chapter 210) and fee schedule
otherwise enacted.
E. Failure to issue permit deemed a denial. If the Building Inspector shall
fail to grant the application within 15 days of the filing thereof, the
application shall be considered denied as of that date unless an
extension of time is agreed upon, in writing, by the applicant and the
Building Inspector.
F. Notice of application. The Building Inspector, within three business
days of granting a permit, shall post a description of the location and
the nature of the construction, alteration or use applied for in two
§ 490-902 SALEM CODE § 490-902
1:638
§ 490-903. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other remedies authorized by law, in case any building
or structure is erected, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the owner or owners of the building, structure or land, and any
other person violating the provisions of this chapter, may be punished by
a fine up to the maximum permitted by statute in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 676:17 as it may be amended.
public locations, one of which shall be the Town of Salem's Internet
website. [Amended by the 2014 Town Meeting]
§ 490-902 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 490-903
1:639

ZONING
490 Attachment 2
Town of Salem
Zoning Dimension Restrictions Table
[Amended by the 2022 Town Meeting]
District
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Notes: A B B C and D E F
Residential
Ref: § 490-301
25,000 single with sewer
or 37,500 duplex with
sewer
150 single +
40 extra unit;
125 curved street
+ 40 extra unit
100 at
building line
Front: 30
Side: 15
Rear: 30
30% building
1 unit/lot
35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
Rural
Ref: § 490-302
87,120 single with sewer
or 174,240 duplex with
sewer or 5 acres (see
notes)
150 single +
20 extra unit;
125 curved street
+ 40 extra unit
Front: 30
Side: 30
Rear: 30
30% building
1 unit/lot
35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
Recreational
Ref: § 490-303
25,000 single with sewer 100 100 at
building line
Front: 30
Side: 15
Rear: 15
35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
Garden Apartment
Ref: § 490-304
2 acres Front: 40
Side: 30
Rear: 30
25% building 35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
Manufactured Housing
Park
Ref: § 490-305
15,000 with public water
supply or else 25,000
100 with public
water supply, or
else 150
Front: 30
Side: 30
Rear: 30
30% building
1 unit/lot
Business Office I and
II
Ref: § 490-401
25,000 single or business
use or 37,500 duplex or
mixed office/residential
150 single +
40 extra unit;
125 curved street
+ 40 extra unit
Front: 30
Side: 15
Rear: 30
50% lot I: 35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
II: 35 feet
490 Attachment 2:1 Supp 8, Apr 2022
SALEM CODE
District
Minimum Lot Size
(square feet)
Minimum
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Setbacks
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
Maximum
Height
Notes: A B B C and D E F
LCSV
Ref: § 490-402
1.5 acres 150 Front: 50
Side: 25
Rear: 25
30% building 35 feet or
2 1/2 stories
Town Center
Ref: § 490-403
3 acres 150 Front: 100
Side: 75
Rear: 75
30% building
Commercial-Industrial
A
Ref: § 490-501
90% lot 35 feet, 45 feet
or 3 stories
Commercial-Industrial
B, C
Ref: § 490-501
Front: 30
Side: 20
Rear: 20
70% lot 35 feet, 45 feet
or 3 stories
Industrial
Ref: § 490-502
300 Front: 50
Side: 40
Rear: 40
30% building 35 feet or
3 stories
Seniors Housing
Overlay
Ref: § 490-601
10 acres 200 Front: 50
Side: 50
Rear: 50
35 feet
490 Attachment 2:2 Supp 8, Apr 2022
ZONING
Notes for Zoning Dimension Restrictions Table:
A. Minimum lot size.
Residential, Rural, Recreational, and Business Office Districts: If a lot is not served by the
municipal sewerage system, the minimum lot size shall be as set forth in the table above or the
minimum lot size determined by the lot's soil type and slope as set forth in the Subdivision
Control Regulations, whichever is greater. [Amended by the 1984 Town Meeting]
Rural District: Some agriculture or other activities may require five acres. See § 490-302B(2).
Garden Apartment District: See § 490-304B for additional restrictions.
B. Minimum frontage.
Recreational District: In the area of Lot 6601, Map 41, each lot shall have a one-hundred-fiftyfoot minimum frontage and a one-hundred-fifty-foot minimum width at the building line.
Business Office Districts: The minimum frontage for each lot is for one unit for all permitted
uses. The added feet requirement is for each additional family unit.
Industrial District: See § 490-502C for additional restrictions.
C. Setbacks are for structures and are from any street or streets on which a lot abuts and from
other lot lines. The following structures may be erected to within:
Residential District
1. Swimming pool 15 feet of the rear lot line
2. Garage 10 feet of the rear lot line
Residential and Rural Districts [Amended by the 2013 Town Meeting]
3. Utility shed
(up to 100 square feet, 7 feet high)
1 foot of the rear or side lot lines
4. Utility shed
(up to 200 square feet, 10 feet high)
10 feet of the rear lot line
Rural District
5. Swimming pool 15 feet of the side or rear lot line
Recreational District
6. Utility shed
(up to 100 square feet, 7 feet high)
1 foot of the rear or side lot line
The rear lot line will not be construed to be a property line fronting on a body of water or
fronting on a street.
Garden Apartment District: see § 490-304B for additional restrictions
Manufactured Housing District
7. Garage 10 feet of the rear lot line
Limited Community Shopping Village District: see § 490-402D for additional restrictions
Commercial-Industrial Districts: see § 490-501C(4)(a) for additional restrictions
D. Other restrictions (for all districts, when applicable).
490 Attachment 2:3 Supp 8, Apr 2022
SALEM CODE
1. Wetland (see § 490-706) 40 feet from edge of wetland
2. Prime wetland (see § 490-706) 100 feet from edge of prime wetland
3. Proximity to water bodies (see § 490-804) 40 or 50 feet
4. Leach fields 75 feet
E. Maximum coverage applies to principal and accessory buildings (see definition for "lot
occupation," § 490-107).
Residential and Rural Districts: one residential structure allowed. However, the Chief Building
Official may authorize an existing dwelling or mobile home to remain on a lot while a new
dwelling is constructed on the same lot in the Rural and Residential Districts, provided that the
existing dwelling or mobile home is removed no more than 30 days after issuance of an
occupancy permit for the new dwelling and that a suitable performance guarantee or legal
agreement is submitted to ensure such removal. [Amended by the 2004 Town Meeting]
Manufactured Housing District: one housing unit allowed, plus garage, carport, tool or utility
building, awning or entry. [Amended by the 1982 Town Meeting]
F. Maximum height.
Garden Apartment District: see § 490-304B(1)(c) for additional restrictions.
Commercial-Industrial Districts: see § 490-501C(1)(d) for additional restrictions.
Business Office Districts: height restrictions apply to new buildings or additions to existing
buildings.
Limited Community Shopping Village District: [Amended by the 2012 Town Meeting]
490 Attachment 2:4 Supp 8, Apr 2022

ZONING
490 Attachment 1
Town of Salem
Permitted Uses Table
Note: This table provides the user with a quick reference in order to determine uses permitted in a particular zoning district. For details and restrictions
regarding a particular land use, consult the appropriate text in the Salem Zoning Ordinance.
Abbreviations:
DU = Dwelling unit P = Permitted use SE = Use permitted by special exception — = Use not permitted
R = Residential GA = Garden Apartment BO-II = Business Office II CI-A = Comm.-Ind. A
RU = Rural MFG = Manufactured Housing LCSV = Limited Community Shopping Village CI-BC = Comm.-Ind. B and C
REC = Recreational BO-I = Business Office I TC = Town Center I = Industrial
Principal Use R RU REC GA MFG BO-I BO-II LCSV TC CI-A CI-BC I
Residential
One-family DU P P P P P P P P P — — —
Two-family DU P P — P P P P P — — — —
Two or more families — — — P — — — — — — — —
In-law apartment P P P — — — — P — — — —
Accessory apartment P P — — — — — — — — — —
Home occupation P P P — — — — P — — — —
Private garage P P P P P — — P — — — —
Manufactured housing — — — — P — — — — — — —
Community residential — — — — — P — — — — — —
Gardens, orchards: residential
use
P — P — — — — — — — — —
Casual sales P P — P P — — P — — — —
Use accessory to permitted use — — — P — P P — P P P P
490 Attachment 1:1 10 - 01 - 2015
SALEM CODE
Principal Use R RU REC GA MFG BO-I BO-II LCSV TC CI-A CI-BC I
Educational and Institutional
Public and parochial schools P P — P P — — P — — P —
Secondary schools — — — — — — — — P — P —
Postsecondary/university — — — — — — — — P P P —
Family day-care home P P P P P — — P — — — —
Other private schools SE SE — SE — — — — — P P —
Day-care facilities — — — — — — — P — — — —
Child care, nursery, nursery
school
— — — — — — — — P — P (CIB)
—
Group day-care center — — — — — P P — — — — —
Churches P P P P P — — P — — P —
Parish houses, convents P P P P P — — P — — — —
Religious institutions — — — — — — — — P — — —
Municipal buildings P P P P P P — P P P P P
Libraries P P — P P — — P P — — —
Parks and playgrounds SE SE — SE — — — — P — — —
Community service center — — — — — — — — P — — —
Services — Entertainment and Recreation
Commercial activities common
to recreation areas
— — SE — — — — — — — — —
Golf course — SE — — — — — — — — — —
Indoor skating, tennis — — — — — — — — — — — P
Amusement park — — — — — — — — — — P —
Racetrack — — — — — — — — — — P —
Bowling alley, golf driving,
dance hall, drive-in, movie
theater
— — — — — — — — — — P —
Sexually oriented business — — — — — — — — — — P —
490 Attachment 1:2 10 - 01 - 2015
ZONING
Principal Use R RU REC GA MFG BO-I BO-II LCSV TC CI-A CI-BC I
Health clubs, recreation and
sports facilities
— — — — — — — — — — P —
Services — Medical
Hospital SE SE — SE — — — — P — P —
Adult care agency — — — — — — — — P — — —
Nursing, convalescent home — — — — — — — — P — — —
Continuing care — — — — — — — — P — — —
Assisted living facility — — — — — — — — P — — —
Health care facilities — — — — — P P — P — P P
Services — Transportation
Parking facility, public and
private
— — — — — SE — — P P P —
Public garages, repair shops — — — — — — — — — — P —
Passenger/taxi services — — — — — — — — — P P P
Services — Retail and Commercial
Retail stores — — — — — — — P — P P —
Business/professional offices — — — P — P P P P P P P
Mixed office residential — — — — — P — — — — — —
Funeral establishment — — — — — P — — — — P —
Banks — — — — — — — P — P P P
Studios — — — — — — — P — P P P
Restaurants — — — — — — — P — P P —
Personal services — — — — — — — P — P P —
Feed, hay, grain and building
materials sales
— — — — — — — — — — P —
Motor vehicle fuels,
storage/dispensing
— — — — — — — — — P P P
Gasoline station — — — — — — — — — — P —
490 Attachment 1:3 10 - 01 - 2015
SALEM CODE
Principal Use R RU REC GA MFG BO-I BO-II LCSV TC CI-A CI-BC I
Sales/repair for autos, boats,
industrial, farm, construction
equipment
— — — — — — — — — — P —
Monument storage, sales — — — — — — — — — — P —
Liquor storage, sales — — — — — — — — — — P —
Furniture storage, sales — — — — — — — — — — P —
Construction, plumbing sales — — — — — — — — — — P —
Energy sales — — — — — — — — — — P —
Veterinarian facility — — — — — — — — — — P —
Animal hospital — — — — — — — — — — P —
Printing plants — — — — — — — — — — P —
Laundry, commercial — — — — — — — — — — P —
Laundry, self-serve — — — — — — — — — P P —
Motels and hotels — — — — — — — — — — P P
Community shop village — — — — — — — P — — — —
Agriculture
Farming/agriculture — P — — — — — — — P P —
Forestry — P — — — — — — — — — —
Keeping of cows, goats, sheep,
horses, etc.
— P — — — — — — — — — —
Greenhouses/nurseries — P — — — — — — — — P —
Kennels/animal shelters — — — — — — — — — — P —
Roadside stands — — — — — — — — — — P —
Research and Manufacturing
Facilities for research and
manufacture, assembly, storage,
etc.
— — — — — — — — — — P P
490 Attachment 1:4 10 - 01 - 2015