Zoning Ordinance 

1 Authority & Purpose Z-3 2 Definitions Z-3 3 Zoning Districts Z-19 4 Smithtown Village and North Village Z-20 5 Buildings per Lot Z-21 6 Permitted Land Uses Z-22 7 Dimensional Requirements Z-26 8 Special Exceptions & Conditional Use Z-28 9 Open Space Development Z-29 10 Junkyards Z-31 11 General Provisions Z-32 12 Earth Excavation Z-33 13 Signs Z-34 14 Non-Conforming Property Z-36 15 Surface Water Protection Z-37 16 Aquifer Protection Z-39 17 Telecommunication Facilities Z-41 18 Traffic Mitigation Z-42 19 Small Wind Energy Systems Z-43 20 Impact Fees Z-49 21 Administration Z-55 22 Pollution Control Z-56 23 Sexually Oriented Businesses Z-57 24 Floodplain Regulations Z-59 

Zoning Ordinance 

Section 1 -Authority & Purpose
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Seabrook, New Hampshire." The purposes of this chapter are to promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Seabrook, to protect and conserve the value of property, to promote economic development of the town's resources and to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town of Seabrook. 
Any terms not defined in Section 2 Definitions shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflicts between Section 2-Definitions and Section 4 – Smithtown Village, those of Section 4 shall take precedence. 

Section 2 -Definitions 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Accessory Building: A non-residential building with no habitable space, the use of which is subordinate to that of the main building. It may be separate from or attached to the main building. For the purpose of this ordinance, a garage or a carport that is attached directly to the main building by a breeze way shall be regarded as an integral part of the main building. An accessory building shall be no larger than the standard two-car garage, not to exceed 1,080 square feet, and must conform to the general building design of the neighborhood. 
Accessory Use: Any subordinate use of premises that is customarily accepted as a reasonable corollary to the principal use thereof and which is neither injurious nor detrimental to the neighborhood. 
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store: A business that devotes more than 15% of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area, utilized for the display and sale of the following: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, CD-ROMs or other forms of visual or audio representations which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1 or, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "sexual conduct" as defined in RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices. An adult bookstore or adult video store does not include an establishment that sells books or periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock and trade and does not devote more than 15% of the total floor area of the establishment to the sale of books and periodicals. 
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment which during a substantial portion of the total presentation time features live performances which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1, and/or feature films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is devoted to showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Adult Drive-In Theater: An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time being presented for observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Adult Motel: A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slices or other photographic reproductions a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of materials which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Adult Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time of the images so displayed is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1 Adult Motion Picture Theater: An establishment with a capacity of five or more persons, where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexually content" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1, for observation by patrons. For the purposes of this ordinance, substantial portion of the total presentation time shall mean the presentation of films or shows described above for viewing on more than seven days within any 56 consecutive day period. 
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Alteration of a Building or a Fabricated Structure: A change, rearrangement or addition involving the original structural parts or significant changes or additions to the plumbing, gas piping, electrical wiring, ventilation or heating installations. Such alterations are not to be confused with replacements or repairs. 
Apartment: A dwelling unit in a structure containing more than two dwelling units, or a dwelling unit in a commercial or industrial building. 
Assessed Property means the land or buildings comprising new development that is subject to an impact fee assessment under this Section. 
Assessment, with respect to an impact fee, means a notification issued by the Town of Seabrook, its Planning Board, or its Building Inspector, stating the amount of an impact fee due from an assessed property, and the conditions or schedule for its collection. 
Buildable Area: Land within the Net Tract Area that is not dedicated to open space preservation. 
Building: Any permanent structure occupied or intended to shelter any occupancy. For the purposes of this ordinance, a multi-unit building, with or without firewalls, shall be considered one building. 
Building Height: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the main mean height between the plate and the ridge of a pitched or a hip roof. 
Cargo Container: Standardized reusable vessel that was originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities. This definition includes containers that have a similar appearance to cargo containers. 
Collection, with respect to an impact fee, means the actual delivery of payment of the fee to the Town of Seabrook on behalf of an assessed property. 
Commercial Amusements means any game or amusement that is provided in exchange for value received or pledged. Such game or amusement shall not necessarily require any skill on the part of the participant. Commercial amusements shall not include the dissemination of any material which is obscene, as those terms are defined by Chapter 650 of the Revised Statutes Annotated of New Hampshire. 
Commercial Entertainment means any show or display, whether live, by film or by other means of presentation, which is provided in exchange for value received or pledged. Commercial entertainment does not include the dissemination of material that is obscene, as those terms are defined by Chapter 650 of the Revised Statutes Annotated of New Hampshire. 
Commercial-General means any retail, sales, service or office uses, and not including heavy or light industrial uses. 
Commercial Recreation means any game or amusement that is provided in exchange for value received or pledged. Such game or amusement shall not necessarily require any skill on the part of any participant. Commercial recreation shall not include the dissemination of any material which is obscene, as those terms are defined by Chapter 650 of the Revised Statutes Annotated of New Hampshire. 
District: A division of the total area of the town, including all the land, water, streets and buildings within the designated boundaries. 
Dwelling Building: A building exclusively designed or used for one or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling Unit: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Single-Family Dwelling: A detached building containing one primary 
dwelling unit. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU): A residential living unit that is within or attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. ADU’s are subject to the following restrictions: 
• 	
An ADU may not be converted to a condominium; 

• 	
An ADU may not be detached from the Single-Family Dwelling; 

• 	
Two off-street parking spaces are required for the ADU; 

• 	
There shall be no more than one ADU per lot; 

• 	
Either the ADU or the Single-Family Dwelling shall be owner occupied; 

• 	
The ADU shall be no larger than 750 square feet; and 

• 	
The ADU shall contain no more than two bedrooms. 

• 	
An interior door shall be provided between the primary dwelling unit and the ADU. 

• 	
The ADU shall maintain an aesthetic continuity with the primary dwelling unit. 


Two-Attached Primary Dwelling Units (TAPDU): A building containing two primary dwelling units. The two dwellings must share a common wall, and each dwelling must be architecturally consistent with the other. Two attached mobile homes shall not be deemed a TAPDU, but rather, they shall be deemed to be two separate dwelling buildings. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building containing more than 2 dwelling units. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following as they relate to a sexually oriented business: 
• 	
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 

• 	
The conversion of an existing business whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 

• 	
The relocation of any sexually oriented business; 

• 	
The substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business, which means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as a floor area exists on the date of the adoption of this ordinance; or 

• 	
The transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business, which means and includes any of the following: A) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business; B) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; C) the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 


Fee Payer is the party from whom an impact fee payment has been received on behalf of an assessed property. 
Fireworks Sales: The sale of fireworks as defined in NH RSA 160-B:1 
Foundation: The structural materials supporting a building. 
Frontage: Line separating private property from a public right-of-way or street. 
Gasoline Station -A retail establishment at which motor vehicles are refueled, serviced, and sometimes repaired. Also called a filling station, a service station, or a retail motor fuel outlet. 
Greenbelt: A vegetative area in which no parking lots or buildings are permitted. The only permitted structures shall be utility poles, sidewalks, signs, bicycle paths, and access driveways. 
Hazardous Waste: A solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous waste, or any combination of these wastes: 
A) Which, because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, 
or infectious characteristics may: 
• 	
Cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 

• 	
Pose a present or potential threat to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise mismanaged. 


B) Or which has been identified as a hazardous waste by NH DES using the criteria established under RSA 147-A:3, I or as listed under RSA 147­A:3, II. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, those that are reactive, toxic, corrosive, ignitable, irritants, strong sensitizers or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat or other means. Such wastes do not include radioactive substances that are regulated by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Home Occupation is a home-based business that has no noticeable impact on the quality and character of Seabrook’s residential districts. In order to qualify as a Home Occupation, the business must meet all of the following standards: 
1) no more than two non-resident employees; 
2) it is not a nuisance; 
3) it is conducted within a pre-existing building; 
4) parking is located off the street, and the vehicles are subject to zoning 

setbacks for structures; 

5) no emission of odor, smoke, dust, vibration, or noise that is discernable from the property line; 6) no on-site storage of hazardous, flammable, or explosive materials 
other than small quantities of products that are intended for normal household use; and 7) deliveries are permitted only between 7AM and 7PM. 
Home Office: A home-based business that has no noticeable impact on the quality and character of Seabrook’s residential districts. In order to qualify for Home Office use, the business must meet all of the following standards: 
1) Be situated in a dwelling in which the business proprietor resides; 
2) No changes are made to the building exterior that would reveal home 
office use; 
3) No outdoor activity related to the office use; 
4) No more than one vehicle used in the business shall be parked on the 

premises, and that vehicle shall be no more than 10,000 lbs. GVWR; 
5) No non-resident employees shall utilize the office; 
6) No outdoor storage of equipment; 
7) No retail sales on the premises, and 
8) Delivery of packages by commercial vehicles shall not exceed two 

vehicles per day. 

Hotel, Motel -A building designed for or used commercially in which the room or rooms are designed to provide living and sleeping accommodations for temporary lodgers. For the purposes of this ordinance, buildings used to lodge the same tenants for more than thirty days within the same calendar year are to be considered multi-family buildings. 
House, Guest or Rooming: A building in which bedrooms are rented to semi­permanent guests whose meals, when consumed on the premises, are prepared only by the proprietor or his employees. 
Impacted Area: Any area altered from its current state. 
Impervious surface means any area that is paved, compacted, or otherwise modified to prevent or restrict the infiltration of storm water. Examples of impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: roofs, decks, patios, and pavement, and walkways. 
Industrial-Heavy means any use having to do with the business of manufacturing products using regulated substances and/or heavy machinery. 
Industrial-Light means any production and/or manufacturing activity that uses moderate amounts of partially processed materials to produce finished goods or product parts and components with no significant environmental pollution or risk of contamination. 
Junkyard (Machinery Junkyard): Any place of storage in which there is displayed to public view junk machinery of any kind or scrap metals, wood, glass, fabric or other materials commonly called "junk". 
Junkyard (Motor Vehicle Junkyard): Includes any business, whether conducted in connection with any other business and any place of storage or deposit, whether conducted in connection with any other business such as garage, auto repairs, new or secondhand auto sales, service station, etc. or not, which has stored, deposited or abandoned: 
• 	
Two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in a condition conforming to legal requirements for use on the public highways; or 

• 	
Used parts of motor vehicles or such pieces of iron, bronze or other metals, glass, paper, rubber or other discarded or secondhand material as has been a part or intended to be part of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or materials shall be the equivalent, in bulk, of two or more passenger car motor vehicles. 

• 	
The term "motor vehicle junkyard" shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit of motor vehicles purchased or acquired otherwise for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for their parts or for use of the metals for sale as scrap materials as well as those places where scrap metals are salvaged by burning the motor vehicles or where motor vehicle parts are cut up for the salvage of metals in more convenient sizes. 


Land: Includes all the surface of the earth within the limits of the Town of Seabrook, including all land, ground and subsurface deposits, all the air space above the land to the limits of the town's jurisdiction thereof and all water, tidewaters, marshes, flats and underwater lands to the limits of the town's jurisdiction thereof; provided, however, that as to a lot and its area, the bounds as defined herein, the term "land" shall not include water or underwater lands, whether tidal or otherwise, unless otherwise provided herein. 
Limited-Cut Buffer: A healthy, well-distributed stand of trees, saplings, shrubs and ground cover that must be maintained, and which leaves an intact vegetated buffer. Tree cutting shall be limited to 50% of the basal area of trees, and 50% of the total number of saplings over a 20-year period. 
Lot: One parcel of land set off as a unit and either occupied by or intended to be occupied by a building or fabricated structure and including the open spaces required by law. 
Lot Area: The extent in square feet of the surface of a lot. The "lot area" shall not include any part of the street upon which the lot fronts or abuts. 
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot and dividing the lot from other lots, streets, land or water. 
Lot of Record: A lot which has its principal frontage upon a street and is described in a deed which has been lawfully recorded in the Registry of Deeds, or which, if not so deeded, is a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plan of which has been lawfully recorded in the Registry of Deeds. 
Meteorological Tower (Met Tower). Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the purpose of this ordinance, met towers shall refer only to those whose purpose are to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to install, construct or erect a small wind energy system. 
Mixed Use -A building or parcel that incorporates some combination of residential and non-residential uses or functions. Mixed use also includes elements of pedestrian-oriented access and site design, non-vehicular and transit accommodations, public space, and open space. A mixed-use building or parcel shall have no less than 50 percent of the gross floor area for non-residential use, and with no more than five dwelling units per building. 
Mobile Home or House Trailer: A prefabricated dwelling unit which: 
• 	
is designed for long-term and continuous residential occupancy, 

• 	
is designed to be moved on wheels, as a whole or in sections, or 


• 	on arrival on the site, is complete and ready for occupancy, except for incidental unpacking, assembly, connection with utilities and placing on supports or a permanent structure. 
Mobile Home Park or House Trailer Park: Any parcel of land under single or common ownership or control which contains or is designed, laid out or adapted to accommodate three or more mobile homes. 
Modification. Any change to the small wind energy system that materially alters the size, type or location of the small wind energy system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification. 
Motor Vehicle Re-Manufacturing: The storage, dismantling, and re-assembly of motor vehicles within a building and as a subordinate accessory use to an authorized motor vehicle dealership or repair facility. 
Motor Vehicle Repair: A business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, repair, servicing, or painting of motor vehicles. 
Natural Ground Cover means any herbaceous plant or any woody seedling or shrub less than 3 feet in height. Natural ground cover shall also include naturally occurring leaf or needle litter, stumps, decaying woody debris, stones, and boulders. Natural ground cover shall not include lawns, invasive species as listed by the department of agriculture, imported organic or stone mulches, or other artificial materials. 
Neighborhood: An area of land local to the use concerned, generally lying within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of such use for the purposes of this ordinance, but including all areas farther away from such use whenever the use creates a condition which, by reason of noise, smoke, vibration, lighting or other cause, creates a detriment, hazard or injury to an area more extensive in size. 
Net Metering. The difference between the electricity supplied to a customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated by the customer’s small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric distribution system over a billing period. 
Net Tract Area: The area of a parcel less all non-buildable land such as wetlands and land encumbered by utilities such as electrical transmission lines. 
New Development, for the purpose of impact fee assessment, may include the following land use changes: 
• 	
The construction of a new dwelling unit; or 

• 	
Changes to an existing structure that would result in a net increase in the number of dwelling units; or 

• 	
Construction of a new commercial/industrial building or any net increase in the gross floor area of an existing commercial/industrial building; or 

• 	
The conversion of an existing use to another use that is determined by the Planning Board, with consultation/advice of the Building Inspector, to result in a measurable net increase in the demand on the public capital facilities that are the subject of impact fee assessment; however, 

• 	
New development shall not include the replacement of an existing manufactured housing unit or the reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster where there is no change in size, density, or type of use that would increase the demand on capital facilities for which impact fees are assessed. 


No-Disturb Buffer: An area where activities that disrupt, move or disturb the soil are prohibited. 
Nonconforming Structure: A structure that does not comply with the terms of the ordinance. 
Nonconforming Use: A use of the land that is not permitted by the ordinance in the zoning district in which the use occurs. 
Nude Model Studio: A place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals, and is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration or such display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Off-Site Improvements means highway, drainage, and sewer and water upgrades or improvements that are necessitated by a development but which are located outside the boundaries of the property, as determined by the Planning Board during the course of subdivision plat or site plan approval. 
Open Space: Land area not covered by pavement or buildings. Solar panels are not subject to open space restrictions. 
Power Grid. The transmission system, managed by ISO New England, created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers in New England. 
Privately Maintained Dedicated Public Way is a street built to Town standards that has been approved by the Planning Board, and the plan has been recorded at the Registry of Deeds. 
Regulated Substance: As defined in NH Administrative Rules Env-Wq 401, any of the following, with the exclusion of ammonia, sodium hypochlorite, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, sulfuric acid, potassium hydroxide, and potassium permanganate: 
A) Oil as defined in RSA 146-A:2, III. 
B) Any substance that contains a regulated containment for which an 
ambient groundwater quality standard has been established pursuant to 
RSA 485-C:6. 
C) Any substance listed in 40 CFR 302, 7-1-05 edition. 
Repair: Replacement or mending of parts already existing but in a state of deterioration with equivalent materials and for the purpose of maintaining their quality. 
Restaurant: A commercial use with the primary function of food service that may also serve alcohol and provide entertainment. 
Retail: A use devoted to the sale, rent or lease of merchandise directly to the consumer for use off premises. For the purposes of this ordinance, wholesale clubs shall be considered a retail use. 
School District includes the Seabrook School District, and the Winnacunnet Cooperative School District, or any other regional or cooperative school district of which the Town of Seabrook becomes a member municipality. 
Schools: Places for systematic instruction in any branch or branches of knowledge and which promotes the academic interests rather than commercial interests. 
Sexual Encounter Center: A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 1) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 2) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more persons is in the state of nudity; and 3) when the activities in sections A or B above are characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1. 
Sexually Oriented Business: any place of business in which any of the following activities are conducted: adult bookstore or adult video store, adult motion picture theater, adult drive-in theater, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Shadow Flicker. The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow. 
Sign: Any device, structure, banner, fixture, awning or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishments product, goods, service or activity. 
• 	
Freestanding Sign: A sign supported by poles or braces that are permanently attached in the ground or attached to something buried in the ground and not supported by any building or structure. 

• 	
Non-Accessory Sign & Billboard: Any sign that does not advertise the name, address, business or products of the site on which it is located. 

• 	
Non-Conforming Sign: Any signs that predate this ordinance and do not comply with the guidelines set forth herein. 

• 	
Off-Premise Directional Sign: A sign designed to aid the traveling public to locate a business not on a state highway. 

• 	
Roof Sign: A sign erected over or on the roof of any building. 

• 	
Temporary Sign: A sign not intended for long-term use and that is not permanently attached to the ground. 

• 	
Wall Sign: A sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the outside wall of any building. 


Small Wind Energy System: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind generator and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption. 
Solar Farm: A photovoltaic power station. 
Special Event: A temporary event such as a tent sale, carnival, circus, outdoor auction in which: 1) Duration shall not exceed one month; 2) Prior written approval is issued by the Fire Chief; and 3) The Building Inspector issues written findings that the event will not create a traffic safety hazard, that there will be no unreasonable impact on nearby residents, and that the proposal complies with all applicable building and safety codes. 
Story: That part of a building or structure comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above it. 
Structure: Any structure constructed or erected by human means, whether on land or water, the use of which requires location on the ground or bed of water or which requires attachment to something having location on the ground or water. Fences; stonewalls; retaining walls; driveways; and steps, porches, and piazzas smaller than 24 square feet are not to be construed as "structures" for purposes of side line and setback requirements, however for safety reasons, opaque fences shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from street pavement. 
Substantially Complete: A project is considered substantially complete when all utilities and storm water infrastructure are installed, the ground surface is stabilized, and the binder course is in place on all paved areas. 
System Height: The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point. 
Tattoo Establishment: Any room or space where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted, or any part thereof. 
Telecommunications Facility: any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which provides commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), personal communications service (PCS), and common carrier wireless exchange access services. 
Tower: The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports a wind generator. 
Tower Height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind generator. 
Trailer, Travel-Trailer Type: A fabricated structure with a maximum floor area of 319 square feet, mounted on wheels and designed for being hauled on highways and to be used as temporary living quarters during travel, camping, recreational, or vacation trips (synonymous with "trailer coach"). 
Travel Trailer Park: A parcel of land in which two or more spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by vehicles and/or tents for recreational dwelling purposes and not for permanent year-round residence. 
Undisturbed State means native vegetation allowed to grow without interference. 
Variance: A variation from the terms of this ordinance, not otherwise permitted within the district concerned which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to its discretionary power where the Board finds that the granting of such variance will do substantial justice and the intent of the ordinance will be still observed. The Board of Adjustment may, in such case, waive the literal enforcement of the applicable provisions(s) of this ordinance and grant a variance only where such literal enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
Vernal Pools are as defined by the NH Code of Administrative Rules – part Env-Wt 101.106. 
Wetlands means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual (January 1987). 
Wholesale – The selling of goods in large quantities to be retailed by others. 
Wind Generator: The blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to generate electricity. 

Section 3 -Zoning Districts 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Town of Seabrook is hereby divided into eight use districts: 
Zone 1 (Rural) 
Zone 2 (Commercial) 
Zone 2R (Residential) 
Zone 3 (Industrial) 
Zone 4 (Conservation) 
Zone 5 (Harbor Commercial) 
Zone 6R (Smithtown Village -Residential) 
Zone 6M (Smithtown Village and North Village -Mixed Use) 
These districts and the boundaries of such districts are shown on the official Zoning Map of the Town of Seabrook, which map is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. This official Zoning Map shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land in the town. In the event that uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules of interpretation shall be applied: 
3.100 Landmarks: Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, railroad or such other landmark, it shall be construed to be the centerline thereof unless otherwise indicated on the Zoning Map. Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a highway, railroad or such other landmark, it shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distance there from as shown on the Zoning Map. 
3.200 Lots Divided by Zoning Boundaries: When a boundary between two zoning districts divides a lot, the Planning Board may, upon application of the lot owner, grant a Conditional Use Permit in order to permit a use that would be permitted in either zoning district. The Conditional Use Permit shall only be granted following a Planning Board finding that the proposed use will cause no substantial increase in motor vehicle traffic, or such increase will be mitigated to the Planning Board’s satisfaction. 
3.300 Map Scale: If no dimension is given on the Zoning Map, the location of any boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map. 
3.400 Planning Board Determinations: Where not otherwise provided for or a question exists, the Planning Board shall determine the exact boundary line. 

Section 4 – Smithtown & North Village 
4.100 Authority: The purpose of this ordinance is to establish Smithtown Village and North Village, mixed use and residential districts focused on creating a diverse service and pedestrian oriented, economically viable development center in Seabrook as authorized under RSA 674:21 II Innovative Land Use Controls and RSA 674:16 Grant of Power. This Section was adopted as one of the instruments to implement the public purposes and objectives of the Town’s Master Plan. This Ordinance is declared to be in accord with the Master Plan, as required by RSA 674:2. 
4.200 Purpose: The purpose of the Smithtown Village and North Village is to enhance economic vitality, business diversity, accessibility, and visual appeal in a manner that is consistent with the landscape and architecture of the Town’s historic village tradition. This Ordinance was adopted to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Seabrook and its citizens, including protection of the environment, conservation of land, energy and natural resources, reduction in vehicular traffic congestion, more efficient use of public funds, health benefits of a pedestrian environment, preservation of community character, civic and recreational use, reduction in sprawl development, and improvement of the built environment. 
4.300 Intent: The intent of the Smithtown Village and North Village is to foster development of a vibrant mixed use district with a cohesive street layout and architectural character that includes commercial, residential and civic uses and integration of open spaces, transit, bicycle and pedestrian accommodations. 
4.400 Goals: The overarching goals of the Smithtown Village and North Village are to enhance the economic development potential of properties; encourage mixed uses that support one another; provide services and employment opportunities; create pedestrian and bicycle friendly neighborhoods; respect the historical nature of Smithtown Village and North Village; and create a gateway into the Town of Seabrook. 
4.500 Defining Elements: Development shall incorporate the following concepts to preserve and complement elements of the historic tradition of Seabrook, and local and regional village character: 
4.501 Comprised of compact, pedestrian-oriented development; 
4.502 Mixed-use pattern of development where development specializing in a single use should be the exception; 
4.503 Encourage a range of housing choices and price levels to accommodate diverse populations; 
4.504 Diversity of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds distributed within neighborhoods and throughout the district; 
4.505 Expansion and provision of public transportation facilities that promote use and access; 
4.506 Provide improved visibility and access to and use of conservation lands, where appropriate; and 
4.507 Opportunities for agrarian activities such as farmers markets and community gardens. 


Section 5 -Buildings per Lot 
Every building hereinafter erected shall be located on a lot, as herein defined, in no case shall there be more than one principal building on one lot, except as follows: 
1) Commercial development in Zone 2 within 500 feet of Lafayette Road that exceeds a lot area greater than 60,000 square feet; and 
2) Zone 6M Smithtown Village and North Village -Mixed Use, and 
3) In Zone 2R, a second dwelling building, containing one dwelling unit, may be placed on a lot, providing that the lot is 45,000 square feet or larger; and the number of dwelling units on the lot does not exceed two. 

Section 6 -Permitted Land Uses 
No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which such building or land is located. No building, structure or portion thereof shall be erected, altered, moved or used, and no land or building or part thereof shall be used arranged, or designed to be used except in conformance with Tables 1 & 2. 
Table 1 
P = Permitted S = Special Exception -only permitted if granted by Board of Adjust. N = Not Permitted C = Conditional Use -only permitted if granted by Planning Board 
Uses  Zoning Districts  
1  2  2R  3  4  5  6R  6M  
Accessory uses and buildings not for human habitation and which are normally incidental to the permitted principal use of the premises.  P  P  P  P  N  P  P  P  
Agricultural  P  P  P  N  N  N  P  C1  
Boat Charters and Excursions  N  N  N  N  N  P  N  P  
Boating Supplies  N  P  N  N  N  P  N  P  
Cargo Containers2  N  C  N  C  N  N  N  C  
Churches  P  P  P  N  N  N  N  P  
Day Care  P  P  P  S  N  N  C  P  
Fireworks Sales  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Fish and Shellfish: wholesale and retail sales  N  P  N  N  N  P  N  P3  
Fishing Equipment: fabrication, storage and repair  P  P  P  N  N  P  P  P  
Gasoline Stations, subject to the limitations specified in Section 6.200  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Guest Houses  P  P  P  N  N  N  C  P  
Home Occupations  C  C  C  C  N  C  C  C  
Home Offices  P  P  P  P  N  P  P  P  
Hotels and Motels  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  P  
Industrial-Heavy  N  N  N  C  N  N  N  N  
Industrial-Light  N  P  N  P  N  N  N  P  
Manufacturing -as a Subordinate Use, and clearly subordinate and incidental to the permitted principal use of the premises.  N  P  C  C  N  N  C  C  
Marinas and Related Services such as sail lofts, boat brokerage, boat building & repair, retail boat & motor sales, boat storage, and boat refueling.  N  P  N  P  N  P  C  N  
Methadone Clinic  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Mixed Use  N  C  N  N  N  N  N  P  
Motor Vehicle Repair  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  N  

1 Livestock, foul and animal husbandry are not permitted in Zone 6M. 
2 No more than 2 cargo containers per business are permitted, and for a duration not to exceed 3 months. 
Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or hazardous material storage. 
3 Wholesale sales of fish and shellfish are not permitted in Zone 6M 

Uses  Zoning Districts  
1  2  2R  3  4  5  6R  6M  
Motor Vehicle Re-Manufacturing provided that 1) No more than 20 vehicles are stored on-site at one time; and 2) all salvaged parts shall be used to repair vehicles on-site.  N  S  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Nursing or Convalescent Homes -not more than 20 patients.  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  P  
Offices -Professional offices which are incidental to a residence, and which conform in design to the structures in the area. There shall be no more than one office per single-family house, and no such office shall have more than three employees.  P  P  P  P  N  N  P  P  
Offices for maritime activities  N  P  P  N  N  P  P  P  
Offices -All other offices, including banks  N  P  N  P  N  N  N  P  
Outdoor Storage of more than one inoperative and unregistered automobile  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Outside Commercial Amusements and Entertainment, including, but not limited to helicopter & airplane rides, and bungee jumping.  N  S  N  S  N  N  N  N  
Recreation -Commercial amusements and entertainment which is conducted within the confines of a building.  N  P  N  S  N  N  N  C  
Recreation -Non-commercial passive recreation  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Residential4 Mobile Home Park Multi-Family Dwelling Mixed Use with no more than 5 dwelling units Single Family Dwelling Single Family Dwelling + ADU Two Attached Primary Dwelling Units  N N N P P P  N N C P P P  N N N P P P  N N N N N N  N N N N N N  N N N P P N  N N N P P P  N N P N N N  
Restaurants  N  P  N  N  N  P  N  P  
Restaurants that have drive-up windows  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  N5  
Retail and Service Businesses -floor area of 1,000 sq ft or more  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  P  
Retail and Service Businesses -floor area less than 1,000 sq ft  N  P  P  N  N  N  P  P  
School Bus Shelters  S  S  S  S  N  S  S  P  
Schools  P  P  P  N  N  N  N  P  


4 In North Village, existing residential uses are grandfathered and can be redeveloped and expanded as the 
same use while conforming to all other requirements.
5 In Zone 6M North Village, restaurants that have drive-up windows are permitted if the Planning Board 
grants a conditional use permit. 

March 12, 2019 Z -23 
Uses  Zoning Districts  
1  2  2R  3  4  5  6R  6M  
Sexually Oriented Businesses as regulated, restricted and defined by this ordinance, Section 21 hereof and such other ordinances adopted by the Town regulating sexually oriented businesses.  Specifically, without limitation, sexually oriented businesses shall not be permitted with 1,000 feet of a church, or place of worship, parish house, or convent, a public, parochial or private school, a state approved day care center, another sexually oriented business, a sexually oriented business for which a building permit has been applied for, or within 300 feet from a residence, or 500 feet from a public sports/recreation park, any establishment in which minors constitute more than 50% of the Town boundaries or within 500 feet of such businesses or buildings owned by the Town of Seabrook and operated for government use.  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Solar Farms  C  P  N  P  N  N  N  N  
Special Events  N  P  N  P  N  N  N  P  
Swimming Pools  P  P  P  N  N  N  P  P  
Tattoo Establishment  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Telecommunications Facilities permitted only on land west of I-95 and within 3,500' of the centerline of I-95. These facilities are subject to the provisions of Section 16.  P  P  N  P  N  N  N  N  
Theaters and Halls  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  P  
Trailers and Boats -Dead storage of travel trailers & boats used by residents of the property  P  P  P  P  N  P  P  P  
Travel Trailer Parks  N  P  N  N  N  N  N  N  
Utilities: Public Utility Buildings  N  P  P  P  N  N  P  C  
Wholesale  N  P  N  P  N  N  N  N  

6.200 Gasoline Stations: In order to prevent an excessive concentration of petroleum products that may pose a threat to Seabrook’s vital groundwater resources, no gasoline station shall be erected or operated within 1,000 feet of another such station, as measured from the closest property lines. 
Seabrook’s twelve existing gasoline stations in an operable condition in 2012 are grandfathered, and thus are not required to conform to the 1,000-foot setback, and are situated on the following parcels: 
Map 5  Lot 11  Name O’Brien  Address 8 Batchelder  
7 7  62 87  Extra Mart Getty North  762 Lafayette 663 Lafayette  
7 7  94-5 126  Prime Gas Sunoco  843 Lafayette 720 Lafayette  
8 8  110 4  Richdale Getty South  472 Lafayette 587 Lafayette  
9 9  62 67-0  Irving 361 Lafayette Seacoast One-Stop 265 Lafayette  
10 17  20-1 48-1  Gateway O’Keefe  3 Lafayette 445 Route 286  
26  98  Yankee Fishermen 725 Ocean Boulevard  

Should a gasoline station cease to operate for one year, and should its NH gasoline station operator’s license expire, the facility will no longer be grandfathered from the 1,000-foot setback requirement. 


Section 7 -Dimensional Requirements
No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height herein established for the districts in which such building is located. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the table set forth below. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building. In order to demonstrate the minimum required lot depth and lot width, lots in Zones 2R, 5 & 6R must be able to accommodate a 100’ by 100’ square; lots in Zones 1, 2, 3 & 6M must be able to accommodate a 125’ by 125’ square. 
Dimensional Requirements  Zoning Districts  
1  2  2R  3  4  5  6R  6M  
Minimum Lot Area (in thousands of sq ft)  
Single Family Dwelling6  20  30  15  30  -­ 20  15  30  
Single Family Dwelling + ADU6  20  30  15  30  -­ 20  15  30  
Two Attached Primary Dwelling Units  30  30  30  -­ -­ -­ 20  -­ 
Non-Residential Buildings  20  30  15  30  -­ 20  15  30  
Maximum # of Primary Structures7 (Residential) Buildings per lot8 (Residential) Dwelling Units per lot3 Mixed Use (maximum dwelling units per building)  1 2 -­ 1 2 -­ 1 2 -­ 0 0 -­ 0 0 -­ 1 2 -­ 1 2 -­ -­2 5  
Minimum Lot Dimensions1  
Continuous Road Frontage9 (i.e. uninterrupted frontage)  125’  125’  100’  125’  -­ 100’  100  125  
Depth and Width  125’  125’  100’  125’  -­ 100’  100  125  
Minimum Setbacks10  
Front  20’  30’  20’  50’  -­ 30’  20’  15’  
Frontage abutting Route 1  30’  30’  30’  30’  -­ 30’  30’  30’  
Side and Rear  10’  15’  10’  15’  -­ 15’  10’  15’  
Side and Rear for sheds less than 100 sq ft  2’  2’  2’  2’  -­ 2’  2’  2’  
From ponds & streams Bus and Transit Shelters:  50’  50’  50’  50’  -­ 50’  50’  50’  
setback from roadway pavement  8’  8’  8’  8’  -­ 8’  8’  8’  
setback from roadway intersections Side and rear setbacks for commercial uses  20’  20’  20’  20’  -­ 20’  20’  20’  
from land utilized or zoned Residential  30’  30’  30’  30’  -­ 30’  20’  30’  

6 
This requirement shall not apply to lots of record that were recorded at the Registry of Deeds prior to 1974. 7 
Note exceptions for lots in Zone 2, per Section 5 of this ordinance. 8 
A second dwelling building, containing one dwelling unit, may be placed on a lot in Zones 2R & 6R, pro­viding that the lot is 45,000 sq ft or larger; and the number of dwelling units on the lot does not exceed two. 9 
Parcels dedicated for conveyance to the Town of Seabrook for conservation purposes shall be exempt from the roadway frontage requirement. 10 
On corner lots where the side yard abuts a street, the side yard shall be subject to the minimum setback requirements for front yards. 
Dimensional Requirements  Zoning Districts  
1  2  2R  3  4  5  6R  6M  
Minimum Buffers See Section 15 for buffer and setback requirements for wetlands and surface waters.  
Maximum Height11 In 6M -with parking on first floor In 6M -without parking on first floor  35’  35’  35’  50’  -­ 35’  35”  -­45’ 40’  
Minimum Width of Greenbelt along Lafayette Road12  20’  -­ 20’  
Minimum % of Open Space  25%  25%  25%  25%  100%  25%  25%  20%  
Maximum Building Footprint (in square feet)13 Mixed Use Building (with no more than 5 dwelling units per building permitted) In 6M-Smithtown In 6M North Village west of Route 1 In 6M North Village east of Route 1  - - - - - - - 7,500 7,500 7,500 20,00014  

11 Utility structures such as radio/television towers are exempt from this height limit. For wind systems, see Section 19. The maximum height limit for all other structures on properties that abut Lafayette Road in Zone 2 is 50 feet (not 35 feet). 
12 The minimum 20-foot Lafayette greenbelt shall be measured from the edge of the widest proposed right­of-way currently under consideration by NH DOT. 
13 In Zone 6-M North Village, existing lots of record as of adoption of the 6-M North Village zoning district are allowed to redevelop the square footage of their existing building footprint(s) on that property. 
14 Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board rquired to permit structures greater than20,000 square feet on the east side of Route 1 in 6-M North Village for Industrial-Light uses. 

Section 8 -Special Exceptions & Conditional Use Permits 
8.100 Special Exceptions shall be granted by the Board of Adjustment, and Conditional Use Permits shall be granted by the Planning Board, if in the board's judgment, the proposed use: 
• 	
Does not have an adverse effect on surrounding properties or on 
environmentally sensitive areas; 


• 	
Does not at any time of day decrease the existing level of service of roads and intersections servicing the property and any other road or intersection to be determined by the Planning Board; 

• 	
Implements mitigation measures that retain the existing and/or improve the level of service of roads and intersections servicing the property including other affected components of the roadways network identified by the Planning Board; 

• 	
Does not cause erosion, or discharge of chemicals or other pollutants into stormwater; 

• 	
Does not emit odors, noise, dust, vibration, smoke or fumes which travel beyond the boundary lines of the subject property; and 

• 	
Does not interfere with or decrease safety and access for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians and residents. 


The Special Exceptions and Conditional Use Permits shall run with the land, that is to say, the restrictions and stipulations will apply to subsequent owners of the property. 

Section 9 – Open Space Development 
9.100 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to encourage flexibility in design and development of land in order to promote the conservation of open space and the efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features. 
9.200 Objectives
9.201 To stimulate imaginative and economical approaches to land use and community development. 
9.202 To facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets, utilities and public spaces. 
9.203 To preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas. 
9.204 To establish living areas that provide a diversity of housing opportunities while ensuring adequate standards for public health, safety, welfare and convenience. 
9.205 To encourage the conveyance of land and easements for use by the general public for recreational and or conservation purposes, 
9.206 To preserve those areas of the site that have the highest ecological value, for example, wildlife habitat including rare and exemplary species and habitats, water resources, wetlands, streams and rivers. 
9.207 To create a contiguous network of open spaces or “greenways” by linking the common open spaces within the subdivision and to open space on adjoining lands wherever possible. 

9.300 Locations: Such development shall only be permitted in Zones 1, 2R & 6R 
9.400 Procedure: Applications shall follow the procedures and standards of the Subdivision Regulations. Open Space subdivisions, as described herein, are strictly optional, that us to say, applicants are free to pursue conventional subdivisions pursuant to Seabrook’s Subdivision Regulations. 
9.500 Dimensional Requirements: Within the Buildable Area, residential development may be built in any configuration or combination of dwelling types and lot sizes, subject to the following: 
9.501 A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the land identified as Net Tract Area shall be set aside as open space. 
9.502 Residential density for the Buildable Area shall not exceed 7,500 square feet per dwelling. 

9.503 The height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet. 
9.504 Ten foot structural setbacks shall be maintained from all abutters who are situated outside of the Open Space Development. 
9.505 The Planning Board finds that the proposal is consistent with the purposes of this section. 


9.600 Open Space Guarantees 
9.601 Contiguous Open Space: Reasonable efforts shall be made to locate open space adjacent to protected open space in adjoining property or properties to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. This open space shall be permanently restricted for recreation, open space and conservation uses and protected by a homeowners or condominium association. Upon mutual agreement of the Town, the developer and/or the homeowners or condominium association, a portion of the open space may be permanently protected by a public body which shall maintain the land for the benefit of the general public. 
9.602 Enforceability: The Town and the property owners within the development shall be assured of enforceable rights with respect to such preservation. 
9.603  Non-Divisible: Such open space shall not be re-subdivided further, but may contain accessory structures and improvements appropriate for educational, recreational or social uses. 
9.604 Legal Guarantees: The developer shall submit, prior to final approval, such legal instruments as the Planning Board may require to prescribe the manner of ownership, maintenance and obligations of the developer and future residents, including the articles of incorporation and charter in a form and manner approved by the Board necessary to ensure the intent and purpose of this section. 
9.605 Municipal Rights: In the event the party entrusted with ownership of the open space within the development shall fail to maintain such open space in a reasonable order and condition, the Town may, through court action, be authorized to assess the costs incurred by the municipality to maintain this open space against the owners as a lien on their properties. 
9.606 Dissolution: Should the organization managing said open space dissolve, all assets shall be turned over to the public or a non-profit organization dedicated to the preservation of open space. Any such transfer shall be approved by the Planning Board. 


Section 10 -Junkyards 
In pursuance of the authority conferred by RSA 236, as amended, the following regulations shall govern the upkeep of motor vehicle and machinery junkyards. No new junkyards, as herein before defined shall be established, opened or operated within the town. No existing junkyard within the town shall be expanded or in any way enlarged unless a variance is granted by the Board of Adjustment. No person, corporation or association shall locate or maintain a motor vehicle junkyard or a machinery junkyard within a distance of 150 feet from the surface of any public highway, unless such yard is fenced or screened so as to be completely hidden from view of the highway. Yards currently in operation shall be a period of 60 days grace in which to complete the actions necessary for compliance with these regulations before violators may be prosecuted. Any motor vehicle junkyard or machinery junkyard located or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section is hereby declared a nuisance, and the same may be abated on complaint of any prosecuting officer. Whoever violates any of the provisions of these regulations governing junkyards shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 

Section 11 -General Provisions 
11.100 Mobile Home Parks: No mobile home park or house trailer park shall be established, or be allowed to expand if already established, within the confines of the town.  
11.200 Nuisances: The occurrence of activities that may be obnoxious or injurious by reason of the production or the emission of odor, dust, smoke, fumes, refuse matter, noise, vibration or similar conditions or that are dangerous to the health, safety or value of property of the community or that lend otherwise to the annoyance or disturbance of a neighborhood shall be prohibited. 
11.300 Dumping and waste disposal: No land in any district shall be used for a dumping place for garbage and refuse from either private or from commercial or from industrial sources except the public dump as provided by the town and except with the approval, in writing, of the Public Health Officer or the Board of Adjustment upon such conditions as they may require. 
11.400 Housing Authority Exempted: The use of land by the Seabrook Housing Authority shall be exempt from all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
11.500 Historic Stone Walls – No person shall deface, alter, the location of or remove any stone wall which was made for the purpose of marking the boundary of lots or recording lots of record, or which borders any road in the Town of Seabrook except upon written permission of the Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen. 

Section 12 -Sand, Topsoil & Gravel Removal 
It shall be unlawful to excavate and remove from any premises, sand, topsoil, gravel or rock, excepting such surpluses of topsoil, sand, gravel or rock as may result from excavations when constructing basements or foundations for buildings or when excavating for driveways, parking lots and streets, except in accordance with the following conditions: 
12.100 Permit Application: A permit has first been obtained from the Board of Adjustment, following written application therefore, and said Board has held a public hearing thereon. 
12.200 BOA Findings: The Board of Adjustment must first find that such use is not detrimental, injurious or dangerous to public health and the welfare of the district or town and shall not constitute a nuisance due to noise, vibration, erosion, the discharge of chemical and other pollutants from stormwater runoff, smoke, odor or other objectionable features nor adversely affect the economic status of the district or town. The Board shall consult with the Planning Board of the town as a resource for making these findings. 
12.300 Permit to Operate: Both existing and proposed uses must have a permit to operate. A permit so issued shall be issued for an initial period of not more than one year and to be subject to renewal upon application to and at the option of the Board of Adjustment for successive periods of not more than one year, provided that a bond is posted in the name of the Town assuring satisfaction of any requirements of the Board of Adjustment which it may require to safeguard the interest of the town. 
12.400 Inspections: The Code Enforcement Officer will arrange inspections of the site to ensure that the Board’s requirements and those of the NPDES Construction Permit are being followed. If an outside consultant is necessary to make a report, the cost shall be paid by the permit holder. 

Section 13 -Signs 
13.100 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to minimize distractions to motorists that could adversely affect traffic safety, and also to minimize unsightly signs that could diminish the value of nearby properties. 
13.200 Dimensional Limits: All signs, other than temporary political campaign signs and real estate sales signs, require a permit issued by the Building Inspector. All signs shall adhere to the requirements set forth in the table below: 
Zoning District:  1, 2R & 5  2&3  4  6R  6M Smith­town  6M North Village  
Maximum Cumulative Surface Area (in square feet) of all free-standing signs  16  10015  0  16  55  100  
Maximum area of all roof signs  0  32  0  0  0  0  
Maximum number of free-standing signs per lot16  1  1  0  1  1  1  
Maximum area of entrance & exit signs  4  4  0  4  4  4  
Maximum height of entrance & exit signs above grade  3  3  - 3  3  3  
Maximum number of roof signs per business  0  1  0  0  0  0  
Height of free-standing sign above grade  
Maximum  15’  20’  - 15’  20’  20’  
Minimum for signs within 30' of street pavement  6’  6’  - 6’  6’  6’  
Minimum for signs beyond 30' of street pavement  0  0  - 0  0  0  
Minimum Setback for free-standing signs from edge of pavement17  10’  15’  - 10’  15’  15’  
Wall Sign: Maximum coverage of wall surface  10%  10%  - 10%  10 sf  10%  
Suspended Sign: Placed no higher than 2nd floor sill  - - - - 8 sf  - 
Maximum area of a temporary sign  16  16  - 16  16  16  

15 100 square feet plus an additional 24 square feet for every business on the premises, not to exceed a total of 400 square feet. No one side of any sign shall exceed 200 square feet. 
16 Entrance & exit signs, and temporary signs are exempt from the limit on the number of free­standing signs per lot. 
17 Entrance & exit signs are exempt from this setback requirement. 
13.300 Temporary Signs: The maximum duration for the display of temporary signs shall be 90 days per sign, within any calendar year. 
13.400 Prohibited signs: In order to minimize driver distraction, the following signs are prohibited in the Town of Seabrook: 
• 	
Animated, moving, flashing, spinning, revolving, scrolling, orintensely lighted signs and signs that emit audible sounds or noise are prohibited in order to enhance traffic safety. 

• 	
Digital Display signs that change their message more frequently than once per hour. The display of time, temperature, public service announcements, and Amber Alerts are exempt from this prohibition. 

• 	
Off-Premise signs and billboards, except as noted in Section 13.600 below. 

• 	
Signs painted on or attached to a vehicle or trailer parked on private property for the purpose of providing advertisement of products or directing people or a business or activity located on the property. 

• 	
Signs that block the view of traffic, street signs or traffic signals; 

• 	
Signs which bear or contain statements, words, or pictures which constitute the dissemination of any material which is obscene as those terms are defined by Chapter 650 of the Revised Statutes Annotated of New Hampshire; 

• 	
Roof signs made of combustible material; 

• 	
Visual Story Signs that convey a sequence of messages. 

• 	
Illumination that interferes with traffic controls devices. 


13.500 Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signs: In order to minimize driver distraction, LED signs shall adhere to the following standards: 
• 	
LED signs shall be permanently affixed to the ground; 

• 	
Maximum luminance shall not exceed 5,000 nits (candela per square meter) during daylight hours, and 300 nits after sunset. 

• 	
LED signs shall not be illuminated between the hours of 12AM and 5AM. 

• 	
LED signs shall only be erected within Zones 2 and 6M North Village. 

• 	
Text shall be sufficiently large enough so as not to require additional attention from passing motorists. 


13.600 For businesses that are not located along State highways, one Off-Premise Directional Sign per business shall be permitted, providing that: 
• 	
the sign complies with the provisions of this ordinance in all other respects; 

• 	
the sign face does not exceed six square feet; 


13.700 Non-conforming signs in place prior to this ordinance may not be altered or replaced, however a change to the message is permitted. 

Section 14 -Non-Conforming Property 
14.100 Expansion: Non-conforming uses and non-conforming structures shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended, nor changed to another non-conforming use. Note Section 6 Permitted Land Uses and Section 7 Dimensional Requirements for exceptions relating to continuance and expansion of non­conforming uses in 6-M North Village. 
14.200 Cessation: If a non-conforming use ceases for a period of one year, all subsequent uses shall conform to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. 
14.300 Restoration: Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent restoration within one year and continued non-conforming use of a building that has been damaged by fire, water or other casualty. 
14.400 Mobile Homes: A non-conforming mobile home may be replaced with a new mobile home at the same locations. 

Section 15 – Surface Water Protection 
15.100 Purpose: to protect the larger expanses of wetlands in Seabrook, to minimize flooding, to protect wildlife habitats, to protect groundwater quality, and to prevent damage to structures and property. 
15.200 Minimum Lot Sizes: Wetlands shall not be utilized to satisfy more than 20% of the minimum lot size requirement specified in Section 6 of this ordinance. Tracts of land that were less than five acres as of January 1, 1998 are exempt from this requirement. For the construction of single-family homes, a minimum of 7,500 square feet of contiguous uplands (non-wetlands) shall be available on the lot; For duplexes, 15,000 square feet of contiguous uplands shall be available. 
15.300 Vegetation: In order to ensure that wetlands remain well vegetated, no natural herbaceous vegetation and no more than fifty percent (50%) of trees, saplings, or shrubs shall be removed from wetlands. Vegetation shall only be removed during the dry season or when the ground is frozen. 
• 	
Not more than a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the basal area of trees, and a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total number of saplings shall be removed for any purpose in a 15-year period. Any subsequent cutting requires prior approval by the Planning Board. A healthy, well-distributed stand of trees, saplings, shrubs, ground cover, and their living, undamaged root systems shall be left in place. 

• 	
Dead, diseased, unsafe, or fallen trees, saplings, shrubs, or ground cover may be removed. Their removal shall not be used in computing the percentage limitations. 

• 	
Stumps and their root systems shall be left intact in the ground. 

• 	
Preservation of dead and living trees that provide dens and nesting places for wildlife is encouraged. 

• 	
Planting efforts that are beneficial to wildlife are encouraged. 


15.400 Buffers & Setbacks: The following vegetative buffers and structural setbacks shall be observed in order to protect the integrity and functionality of Seabrook’s water resources: 
Water Resource  Minimum Buffer  Minimum Setback  
Wetlands less than 5,000 sq ft  None  10 feet  
Vernal Pools of any size, and Wetlands greater than 5,000 sq ft  25 feet limited-cut, consistent with Paragraph D above.  25 feet  
Ponds & Streams  25 feet limited-cut, consistent with Paragraph D above.  50 feet  

Parking lots shall observe a minimum setback of 25 feet. 
15.500 Violations: Any water resource or its buffer altered in violation of this ordinance shall be restored at the expense of the violator(s) as provided by RSA 483-A:5 and under the direction of a New Hampshire certified wetland scientist, and said restoration shall be subject to review by the Seabrook Conservation Commission. When appropriate, injunctive relief shall be sought by the Town as per RSA 676:15, and civil fines imposed as per RSA 676:17. 
15.600 In all water resource areas such as ponds, streams, wetlands, and their associated buffers, only potash and slow release lime shall be used for soil amenities. 

Section 16-Aquifer Protection 
16.100 Purpose: The purpose of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District is to protect future ground water sources from potential contaminants and human intervention that might limit recharge. The intent of this Overlay District is to provide for the overall health and safety to the public by preserving and maintaining existing aquifers. The Aquifer Protection Overlay District is a zoning overlay district that imposes additional requirements and restrictions in addition to those of the underlying district zone. The goals of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District are to: 
16.101 Achieve runoff volume control to maintain pre-development hydrology functions, including holding surface runoff volume, infiltration, and aquifer recharge volumes reasonably constant. These standards help maintain aquatic habitats, wetlands, stream base flow and prevent increased frequency of damaging bank full flows and floods. 
16.102 Protect, maintain, and improve stream uses and the surface water and groundwater quality (including temperature regimes) that sustains these uses. 
16.103 Prevent any increase in peak runoff rate and total volume of discharge from a site for a range of frequent to large storms. Where appropriate, additional release rate and volume controls may be required to reduce cumulative flooding impacts downstream and to water bodies containing sensitive species or habitats. 
16.200 Aquifer Protection Overlay District extends over all land within the political boundaries of the Town of Seabrook located west of I-95. 
16.300 Applicability: The Aquifer Protection Overlay District standards shall apply fully to new development projects, and redevelopment projects that expand by more than 25 percent the total footprint of development on a site or add more than 10,000 square feet of new impervious surface cover to a site, whichever is smaller. For site development that does not meet these redevelopment thresholds, the standards shall be applied to the maximum extent practicable at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
16.400 Prohibited Uses: The following uses are not permitted in the Aquifer Overlay Protection District. 
16.401 Storage, use, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste as defined under RSA 147-A, and Section 2 herein: 
16.402 Storage, use, treatment or disposal of solid waste and sludge; 
16.403 Disposal of solid waste. Brush and stumps may not be disposed of on-site; 
16.404 Disposal of septic waste; 
16.405 Dumping of snow or stockpiling of snow brought from outside the Aquifer Protection Overlay District; 
16.406 Storage of road salt, salted sand or other deicing materials and chemicals in bulk except in lined and enclosed covered storage constructed in accordance with the standards of NH DES; 
16.407 Subsurface storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products for commercial sale and industrial use; 
16.408 Motor vehicle service and repair shops, gasoline stations, car washes, junk, reclamation and salvage yards; 
16.49 Facilities for the bulk storage of petroleum products; 
16.410 Industrial and commercial uses that discharge contact type process and cooling waters on site; 
16.411 Commercial livestock stockyards, feedlots, and manure storage; 
16.412 Mining of land and excavation of sand or gravel; 
16.413 Septage or wastewater lagoons. 
16.450 Regulated Substances: The handling, storage, processing or recycling of regulated substances and toxic materials in storage containers greater than five gallons shall only be permitted if the Planning Board and Fire Chief approve the applicant’s plan for Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC). 
16.500 Exemptions: The following uses are exempt from this ordinance as long as they are in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements: 
16.501 Storage of heating fuels for on-site residential and non-residential use or fuels for emergency electric generation, provided that storage tanks are above ground on a concrete pad or floor and have corrosion control, leak detection, and secondary containment in place. 
16.502 Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with permanent fuel lines to enable the fuel to be used by that vehicle. 
16.303 Storage and use of office supplies. 


Section 17 -Telecommunications Facilities 

17.100 Signs: Telecommunication towers shall not contain signs or graphic representation of any kind. 
17.200 Fall Zone: A circular fall zone shall be depicted on the site plan. The radius of said zone shall equal the height of the proposed tower. This zone shall not include any buildings or public ways. Easements shall be required if the fall zone extends onto other properties. 
17.300 Evidence that Co-Location is not Feasible: If a new tower is being proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence which is satisfactory to the Planning Board, that no existing structure can accommodate the applicant’s antenna(s). 
17.400 Cooperation: An applicant proposing to build a new tower shall submit a binding agreement that provides for the maximum allowance of antenna co-location on the new structure. This agreement shall obligate the applicant to supply antenna co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other telecommunications providers. Failure to provide an agreement that is satisfactory to the Planning Board is grounds for denial. 
17.500 A Bond shall be submitted by the applicant to cover the costs of tower removal in the case of abandonment. The applicant shall submit a written agreement, the terms of which are to be satisfactory to the Town of Seabrook, which governs the bond. 
17.600 Abandoned Telecommunications Facilities are those that have not operated for a period of twelve consecutive months. 

Section 18 – Traffic Mitigation 
The construction or redevelopment of any building in excess of 50,000 square feet may be approved only after a finding by the Planning Board that the following conditions will be met at the time of opening of the building and that they will continue to be met for at least five years from the time of building opening: 
18.100 Visibility: Line of sight distance shall meet or exceed New Hampshire DOT standards for entrances and exits to commercial sites. 
18.200 Access: Access to the site shall be directly from a Town road or State highway or through a private roadway built to Town standards and approved by the Planning Board. 
18.300 Traffic Controls: Adequate traffic controls exist to ensure safe access and on-site circulation of vehicle and pedestrian traffic. If traffic signals are required, signalization shall be interconnected with other traffic signals in the Town if such interconnection is found to be appropriate by the Planning Board. 
18.400 Acceleration/Deceleration lanes or suitable alternate roadway improvements are provided on State and Town roads where the Planning Board finds out such lanes are necessary to provide safe site access based on sound engineering principles and practice. 
18.500 Review Costs: The costs incurred by the Town in reviewing traffic studies of applicants, calculating the fair share of off-site improvements and/or in developing mitigation plans shall be borne by applicants. 
18.600 Construction Standards: All improvements required by this ordinance shall be built in accordance with local, State and ASHTO standards. 

Section 19 -Small Wind Energy Systems 
19.100 Purpose: This small wind energy systems ordinance is enacted in accordance with RSA 674:62-66, and the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1-III-a.  The purpose of this ordinance is to accommodate small wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare. In addition, this ordinance provides a permitting process for small wind energy systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established herein. 
19.200 Procedure for Review: 
19.210 Location: Small wind energy systems and met towers are an accessory use, and are permitted in all zoning districts where structures of any sort are allowed. 
19.220 Building Permit: No small wind energy system shall be erected, constructed, or installed without first receiving a building permit from the building inspector. A building permit shall be required for any physical modification to an existing small wind energy system. Met towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed 3 years from the date the building permit was issued. 
19.230 Application: Applications submitted to the building inspector shall contain a site plan with the following information: 
19.231 Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property. 
19.232 Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property. 
19.233 Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment. 
19.234 Tower foundation blueprints or drawings. 
19.235 Tower blueprints or drawings. 
19.236 Setback requirements as outlined in this ordinance. 
19.237 The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property. 

19.238 Any overhead utility lines. 
19.239 Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer, model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate generation capacity. 
19.240 Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid shall include a copy of the application for interconnection with their electric utility provider. 
19.241 Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer or qualified engineer. 
19.242 Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the NH State Building Code. 

19.243 List of abutters to the applicant’s property. 
19.240 Abutter and Regional Notification: In accordance with RSA 674:66, the building inspector shall notify all abutters and the local governing body by certified mail upon application for a building permit to construct a small wind energy system. The public will be afforded 30 days to submit comments to the building inspector prior to the issuance of the building permit. The building inspector shall review the application for regional impacts per RSA 36:55. If the proposal is determined to have potential regional impacts, the building inspector shall follow the procedures set forth in RSA 36:57, IV. 
19.300 Standards: The building inspector shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following standards; 
19.310 Setbacks: The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum setback requirement number by the system height and measured from the center of the tower base to property line, public roads, or nearest point on the foundation of an occupied building. 
19.311 Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal structures for the zoning district in which the system is located. 
19.312 Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind energy system setback requirements. 
Minimum Setback Requirements Indicated as a % of Tower Height  
Occupied Buildings on Participating Landowner Property  Occupied Buildings on Abutting Property  Property Lines of Abutting Property and Utility Lines  Public Roads  
0  150%  110%  150%  

19.320 Tower: The maximum tower height shall be restricted to 35 feet above the tree canopy within 300 feet of the small wind energy system. In no situation shall the tower height exceed 150 feet. 
19.330 The Sound Level of the small wind energy system shall not be discernible at the property line. 
19.340 Shadow Flicker: Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does not result in shadow flicker impacts on abutting properties. 
19.350 Signs: All signs including flags streamers and decorative items, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy system, except for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning signs. 
19.360 Code Compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code. 
19.370 Visual Impacts: It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind resources. The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual impacts, without restricting the owner’s access to the optimal wind resources on the property. 
19.371 The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system’s visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the community. This may include, but not be limited to information regarding site selection, wind generator design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground mounted electrical and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground, except when the financial costs are prohibitive. 
19.372 The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock color from the manufacturer or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment. Approved colors include but are not limited to white, off-white or gray. 
19.373 A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small wind energy system. 
19.380 Approved Wind Generators: The manufacturer and model of the wind generator to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the California Energy Commission or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar list approved by the state of New Hampshire, if available. 
19.390 Utility Connection: If the proposed small wind energy system is to be connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to RSA362-A:9. 
19.392 Access: The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of 8 feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
19.394 Clearing: Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
19.396 Impact on Wildlife: Only wind energy system models that have a minimal negative impact on birds, said impact as determined by the Seabrook Conservation Commission, shall be permitted. 


19.400  Abandonment 
19.410 Notification: At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the building inspector by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. 
19.420 Removal: Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the building inspector. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to: 
19.421 Removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade structures. 
19.422 Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may remain in its same condition at initiation of abandonment. 
19.430 Failure to Notify: In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service for a continuous 12-month period. After the 12 months of inoperability, the building inspector may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from Notice receipt date. After review of the information provided by the owner, the building inspector shall determine if the small wind energy system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the small wind energy system has not been abandoned, the building inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the owner of the withdrawal. 
19.440 Legal Action: If the owner fails to respond to the Notice of Abandonment or if, after review by the building inspector, it is determined that the small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and tower at the owner’s sole expense within 3 months of receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small wind energy system after the Notice of Abandonment procedure, the building inspector may pursue legal action to have the small wind energy system removed at the owner’s expense. 
19.500 Violation: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this ordinance. 
19.600 Penalties: Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance or a building permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by NH Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter 676:17. 


Section 20 -Impact Fees 

20.100 Authority 
20.110 This Section is authorized by New Hampshire RSA 674:21, V, and other pertinent state law, as an innovative land use control. Under this authority, new development in Seabrook may be assessed impact fees in proportion to its demand on the public capital facilities of the Town or the School Districts serving Seabrook. 
20.120 The public facilities for which impact fees may be assessed in Seabrook may include municipal office facilities; public school facilities; public safety facilities; public road systems and rights-of-way; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public library facilities; public recreation facilities, not including public open space; water treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; and storm water, drainage and flood control facilities. 
The Planning Board is hereby authorized to assess impact fees in accordance with the standards set forth in this Section. The Planning Board shall have the authority to adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this Section and to delegate the administrative functions of impact fee assessment, collection and disbursement as necessary. 
20.200 Purpose: Impact fees may be used to assess an equitable share of the cost of public facility capacity to new development in proportion to the facility demands created by that development. The purpose of this Section is to: 
• 	
Assist in the implementation of the Master Plan and Capital Improvements Program; 

• 	
Enable the Town of Seabrook to assess an equitable share of the cost of public capital facilities to new development in proportion to its demand on those facilities; and 

• 	
Provide authority to the Planning Board to adopt appropriate methods that support proportionate impact fee assessments, and to provide for the administration thereof. 



20.300 Standards for Assessment 

20.310 The amount of each impact fee shall be assessed in accordance with written procedures or methodologies adopted and amended by the Planning Board for the purpose of capital facility impact fee assessment in Seabrook. These methodologies shall set forth the assumptions and formulas comprising the basis for impact fee assessment, and shall include documentation of the procedures and calculations used to establish impact fee schedules. Such documentation shall be available for public inspection at the Planning office of the Town of Seabrook. 
20.320 The amount of any impact fee shall be a proportional share of public facility improvement costs that are reasonably related to the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the development from the capital improvements financed by the fee. 
20.330 The Planning Board may prepare, adopt, or amend studies, reports, or cost allocation procedures that are consistent with the above standards, and which define a basis for impact fee assessment for public capital facilities, and the impact fee assessment schedules thereof. 
20.340 No methodology, cost allocation procedure, or other basis of assessment, nor related impact fee schedules, or changes in the basis of assessment or the fee schedules, shall become effective until it shall have been the subject of a public hearing before the Planning Board. 
20.400 Waiver of Impact Fees: The Planning Board may grant full or partial waivers of impact fees to an assessed property, subject to its finding that the proposed development meets one or more of the applicable conditions set forth below:     
20.410 A full or partial waiver of public school impact fees may be granted for residential units that are lawfully restricted to exclusive occupancy by persons age 55 or older within a development that is maintained in compliance with the provisions of RSA 354-A: 15, Housing For Older Persons. The Planning Board may waive school impact fee assessments for the age-restricted units within a development that are subject to deeded restrictions that limit occupancy to persons age 55 or older. Should these occupancy restrictions be rescinded subsequent to the construction of the affected units, the units shall be subject to the school impact fee assessment in effect at the time the age restriction on occupancy is removed. 
20.420 The Planning Board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee assessment and accept in lieu of a cash payment, a proposed contribution of real property or facility improvements of equivalent value and utility to the public. Prior to acting on a request for a waiver of impact fees under this provision that involves a contribution of real property or the construction of capital facilities, the Planning Board shall submit a copy of the waiver request to the Board of Selectmen for its review and consent prior to its acceptance of the proposed contribution. The value of contributions or improvements shall be credited only toward facilities of like kind, and may not be credited to other categories of impact fee assessment. Full or partial waivers of impact fees may not be based on the value of exactions for off-site improvements required by the Planning Board as a result of subdivision or site plan review, and which would be required of the developer regardless of the impact fee assessments authorized by this Section. 
20.430  The applicant for development of an assessed property may apply for a full or partial waiver of the amount of the impact fee based on the results of an independent study of the demand on capital facility capacity and related costs attributable to the development. In support of such request, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the Planning Board an independent fee calculation or other relevant study and supporting documentation of the capital facility impact of the proposed development. The independent calculation or study shall set forth the specific reasons for departing from the methodologies and schedules adopted by the Town. The Planning Board shall review such study and render its decision. All costs incurred by the Town for the review of such study, including consultant and counsel fees, shall be paid by the applicant. 
20.500 Assessment and Collection of Impact Fees: The administrative process of assessment and collection of impact fees will be the delegated to the Building Inspector. The management and disbursement of impact fee accounts will be the responsibility of the Treasurer. 
20.510 Where subdivision or site plan approval is required for new development, impact fees shall be assessed at the time of Planning Board approval of a subdivision plat or site plan. The amount of such assessment shall be applicable to subsequent building construction within the approved subdivision or site plan for a period of five years from the date of Planning Board approval. Once this five-year period has expired, remaining construction for which no building permit has been obtained shall be subject to the adopted fee schedule in force at the time of the building permit application. 
20.520 With the exception of those plats and site plans meeting the conditions in (A) above, and when no other Planning Board approval is required, or has been made prior to the adoption or amendment of the impact fee ordinance, impact fees shall be assessed prior to, or as a condition for, the issuance of a building permit. The impact fee schedule in force at the time of the building permit application shall apply. 
20.530 Unless an impact fee is inapplicable to a particular development or has been waived by the Planning Board, no permit shall be issued for new development as defined in this Section until the applicable impact fees have been assessed. The Building Inspector shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the development on which the fee is assessed until the impact fee has been paid in full.   
20.540 In the case of new development created by conversion or modification of an existing use, the impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee assessment applicable to the new use as compared to the highest impact fee that was or would have been assessed to the previous use in existence on or after the effective date of the assessment. 
20.550 The Planning Board and applicant may agree to another mutually acceptable schedule for payment. If an alternate schedule of payment is established, the Planning Board shall require the deposit of an irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable performance and payment guarantee with the Town of Seabrook. 
20.600 Accounting and Disbursement of Impact Fees: Impact fees shall be held in the custody of the Town Treasurer. Impact fees shall be held in separate, non-lapsing, interest-bearing accounts and not co-mingled with other municipal funds. 
20.610 Impact fee expenditures shall be paid by the Treasurer upon order of the Board of Selectmen or its designated agent, without further approval of the legislative body. Impact fees shall be expended only for the purpose for which they were assessed. 
20.620 Impact fees may be used to reimburse any account from which an amount has been expended in anticipation of the receipt of said fees. Impact fees assessed to recoup the cost of existing capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs of new development may be applied as revenue against any outstanding debt for those capital improvements. 
20.630 In the absence of outstanding debt service obligations for a particular capital facility, the recoupment may be applied to offset the cost of other capital expenditures within the same facility category where the Planning Board finds that there is sufficient facility capacity to accommodate new development. 
20.640 Impact fee revenue shall be earmarked for the specific purpose of which it was assessed and shall be accounted for in separate municipal impact fee accounts. Seabrook’s annual financial statements shall include an accounting for each impact fee, showing the source and amount of fees assessed, the amount of fees expended for capital improvements funded in whole or in part by impact fees, and the balance remaining at year end. The annual statements shall show the capital improvement category for which the fees were assessed and the date of assessment and collection of the fee. The report shall be sufficiently detailed as to allow the public to determine how the fees were applied, and whether the fees were expended, retained, or refunded. 
20.700 Refund of Impact Fee: Impact fees are assessed to specific properties to offset the capital cost impact of new development within the property. Impact fees received by the Town from all fee payers shall be recognized as payments made on behalf of the assessed property, its owner, or successors in interest in the assessed property. 
20.710 Impact fees are collected to offset the capital facility impacts associated with the occupancy or use of the assessed property. Therefore impact fee refunds shall be made to the owner of record of the assessed property at the time a refund becomes due. 
20.720 The owner of record of an assessed property for which an impact fee has been paid shall be entitled to a refund of that fee, plus accrued interest where: 
• 	
The impact fee has not been encumbered or legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected within a period of six (6) years from the date of the final payment of the fee; or 

• 	
The Town, or in the case of school impact fees the School District has failed, within the period of six (6) years from the date of the final payment of such fee, to appropriate the non-impact fee share of related capital improvement costs. 


20.800 Review and Change in Assessment Schedules: An impact fee assessment schedule adopted by the Planning Board shall be reviewed not more than five years following its adoption. The fee schedule may also be revised periodically upon the Board’s adoption of revisions to a Capital Improvement Program if its adoption would affect the facility standards or capital cost assumptions used to define the fee schedules. Periodic review of fee schedules may result in recommended adjustments in one or more of the fees or the basis of assessment, using the most recent data that affect the variables in the fee calculations. A proposed change in the impact fee assessment schedules or the basis of assessment shall be effective only where such change is adopted by the Planning Board following a public hearing. Failure to conduct a periodic review of the methodology shall not, in and of itself, invalidate any fee imposed. 

20.900 Appeals Under this Section 
20.9100 A party aggrieved by a decision made by the Building Inspector or other Town official relating to an administrative decision in the assessment, collection, or refunding of impact fees authorized by this Section may appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided by RSA 676:5, as amended. 
20.9200  A party aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board under this Section may appeal such decision to the Rockingham County Superior Court as provided by RSA 677:15, as amended. 
20.930 Other Authority Retained: This Section shall not affect other authority of the Town of Seabrook or its Planning Board governing subdivisions and site plans, or ordinances and regulations on public water or sewer utilities, including but not limited to: 
20.931 The authority of the Planning Board to declare a development to be premature or scattered in accordance with the regulations of the Board and in accordance with RSA 674:36, II(a); or 
20.932 The authority of the Planning Board to require the payment of exactions for off-site improvements for highway, drainage, sewer and water upgrades necessitated by the development, in accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:21, V (j); or 
20.933 Other authority of the Town of Seabrook to assess system development charges for water and sewer utilities, or fees authorized by other statutory authority as provided within the ordinances of the Town of Seabrook or the Seabrook Planning Board Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations. 
20.940 Effective Date: This Section shall become effective upon adoption. Specific Impact fee schedules applicable to new development shall not become effective until the Planning Board has adopted a basis of assessment and fee schedule for capital facilities under the procedures provided for in this Section. 


Section 21 – Administrative Provisions 
21.100 Board of Adjustment: A Board of Adjustment, as established, is hereby continued as such, and its membership and duties shall conform to the provisions of RSA 676:5-7, or any amendments or additions made thereto. 
21.200 Enforcement procedures: Upon receipt of information from any source that any provision of this ordinance is being violated, the Building Inspector, Health Officer, or Police Chief shall promptly investigate the alleged violation at its site and, through the Board of Selectmen, shall undertake the following actions to enforce the provisions of this ordinance: 
21.210 Notify the owner of his agent, in writing, of the nature of the violation and order immediate correction of it;  
21.220 When satisfactory compliance has not been obtained following such notification, the Selectmen shall have a complaint prepared against the offending party who shall be summoned to appear in court to answer such complaint or the Selectmen may take any other action that may be appropriate or in accordance with the advice of Town Counsel. 
21.300 Violations and penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or decisions issued by any local administrator(s) or land use board acting under authority of this ordinance: 
21.310 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any other person; 
21.320 shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $275 for each day that such violation is found to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator received written notice from the Selectmen or their representative that he is in violation, whichever is earlier. 
Any such violation, once commenced, shall constitute a continuing violation until it is terminated and continuing violation may be prosecuted as a single violation or a series of separate violations. 
21.400 Amendments: The provisions of this ordinance or any part thereof may be amended, supplemented or repealed in the manner set forth by RSA 675, as amended. 
21.500 More restrictive standards to prevail: Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those described by any statute, ordinance or other regulation, that provision which imposes the greater restriction or the higher standard shall prevail. 
21.600 Severability: Should any section or provision of this ordinance be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent authority and jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other provision of this ordinance, and to such end, all sections and provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
21.700 Effective date: This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and shall thereupon supersede all prior zoning ordinances of the Town of Seabrook. 
21.800 Effect on power of Planning Board: No provision of this ordinance however shall limit or affect the power of the Planning Board as authorized by the Town on March 7, 1972 under former RSA 36:19 and its amendments and replacements. 

Section 22 – Pollution Control 
Developers of all land activities that disturb 1 acre or more (or are a part of a larger development that disturbs 1 acre or more) shall submit to the Building Inspector a plan for erosion and pollution control measures that meet the EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Activities. These projects shall be subject to review, inspection, and enforcement by the Town. The project plan shall include appropriate stormwater and erosion BMP’s (Best Management Practices), provisions to provide minimized land disturbance, an outline of measures to control construction wastes, and a spill control plan. 

Section 23 -Sexually Oriented Businesses 

It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town of Seabrook; and, it is the intent to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Seabrook; and, it is the intent of this section that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of sexually oriented businesses; and, the provisions of this amendment have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials; and, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market; and, neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
23.100 Permitted Locations: Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in Zone 2 provided all regulations, requirements and restrictions pertaining to that zone are met, and sexually oriented businesses shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or place of worship, parish house or convent, a public, parochial or private school, a state approved day care center, another sexual oriented business, a sexually oriented business for which a building permit has been applied for, or 300 feet from a residence, or 500 feet from any establishment in which minors constitute more than 50% of the patrons or 500 feet from public sports, recreation park or 500 feet from Town boundaries or 500 feet from buildings owned by the Town of Seabrook and operated for government use. 
23.200 Measure of Distance: The measure of distance between any sexually oriented business and other named point of reference shall be measured in a straight line. 
23.300 Site Plan Approval: Site Plan Approval by the Seabrook Planning Board shall be a prerequisite for the establishment of a sexually oriented business. The Planning Board may impose reasonable restrictions relative to buffers, outdoor lighting, signs, parking, egress and ingress, pedestrian movement, landscaping, building aesthetics, and measures to ensure that displays of merchandise conform with NH RSA 571-B. 
23.400 Non-Conforming Sexually Oriented Businesses: Sexually oriented businesses which have been established at their existing locations prior to the effective date of this ordinance and which are not in conformity with the requirements of this ordinance, may continue to operate. Once established in a permitted location under this ordinance, a sexually oriented business operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non conforming use by the subsequent location of: 
• 	
A church or place of worship, parish house or convent within 1,000'; 

• 	
A state approved day care center within 1,000 feet; 

• 	
A public sports, recreation park with 500 feet; 

• 	
A residence with 300 feet; 

• 	
A public, parochial or private school within 1,000 feet; 

• 	
Any establishment in which minors constitute more than 50% of the patrons with 500 feet; or 

• 	
The location within 500 feet of such business or buildings owned by the Town of Seabrook and operated for government use. 


23.500 Public Nuisance Per Se: Violation of the use provisions of this ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the Town by way of civil abatement procedures. 
23.600 Limiting Clause: Nothing in this ordinance is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any Town of Seabrook ordinance or statute of the State of New Hampshire regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
23.700 Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The legislative body of the Town of Seabrook hereby declares that it would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentence, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 

Section 24 -Floodplain Regulations 
This ordinance, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16 shall be known as the Town of Seabrook Floodplain Development Ordinance. The regulations in this ordinance shall overlay and supplement the regulations in the Town of Seabrook Zoning Ordinance, and shall be considered part of the Zoning Ordinance for purposes of administration and appeals under state law. If any provision of this ordinance differs or appears to conflict with any provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be controlling. 
24.110 Purpose: Whereas the flood hazard areas of Seabrook are subject to 
periodic flooding from streams, rivers, lakes, and oceans, etc., which result in 
loss of life and property, health and safety, disruption of commerce and 
government services, public expenditure for flood protection and relief and 
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affects the public health, 
safety, and general welfare; and whereas the relief is available in the form of 
federally subsidized flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood 
Insurance Act of 1968, which Act requires the implementation of certain 
regulations by the Town prior to June 17, 1986, regarding the building 
regulations within identified flood hazard areas.  

24.120 Affected Land Areas: The following regulations are hereby adopted so as to comply with requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968; These regulations shall apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for Rockingham County, New Hampshire. dated May 17, 2005 or as amended, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels numbered 420, 438, 439,626 and 627, dated May 17, 2005 or as amended, which are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance and are hereby incorporated by reference. 
24.130 Definition of Terms: the following definitions shall apply only to this 
Floodplain Development Ordinance, and shall not be affected by, the 
provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Seabrook. 

Area of Special Flood Hazard is the land in the floodplain within the Town of Seabrook subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year. The area is designated on the FIRM as zones A, AE and VE. 
Base Flood means the flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation means the water surface elevation having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub graded on all sides. 
Building: See Structure. 
Breakaway Wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operation or storage of equipment materials. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
• 
the overflow of inland or tidal waters. 

• 
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 


Flood Insurance Study means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination and determination of mudslide or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map incorporated with this ordinance, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Seabrook. 
Flood Plain or Flood-Prone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flooding"). 
Flood Proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, change, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway: See Regulatory Floodway. 
Functionally Dependent Use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary for the loading/unloading of cargo or passenger, and ship building/repair facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic Structure means any structure that is listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
• 	
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 

• 	
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 


Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision. 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean Sea Level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New Construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle that is 
• 	
built on a single chassis; 

• 	
319 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 

• 	
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 

• 	
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 


Regulatory Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Special Flood Hazard Area: See Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
Structure means for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Start of Construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary form; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should equal: 
(1) 
the appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 

(2) 
in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 


For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required under this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water Surface Elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains. 
24.140 Permit Required: All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a permit. 
24.150 Application Review: The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all new construction or substantial improvements shall: 
• 	
be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, 

• 	
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, 

• 	
be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 

• 	
be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 


24.160 Water & Sewer Systems: Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area the applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with assurance that these systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during periods of flooding. 
24.170 Information to be Submitted: For all new or substantially improved 
structures located in zones A, or AE, the applicant shall furnish the following 
information to the Building Inspector: 

• 	
the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) and include whether or not such structures contain a basement; 

• 	
if the structure has been flood-proofed, the as-built (elevation in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed; 

• 	
any certification of flood-proofing. 


For all new construction or substantially improved buildings located in Zone VE, the applicant shall furnish the Building Inspector records indicating the as-built elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) in relation to mean sea level and whether or not the structure contains a basement. The Building Inspector shall maintain the above information for public inspection, and shall furnish it upon request. 
24.180 Other Permits Required: The Building Inspector shall not grant a 
permit until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been 
received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required 
by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution 
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 

24.190 Alteration of Watercourses: In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Inspector, in addition to the copies required by the RSA 482-A:3. Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau. The applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector, certification provided by a registered professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained. The Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any floodway data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that all development located Zone A meet the following floodway requirement: No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge. Along watercourses that have not had a Regulatory Floodway designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
24.200 Method for Determining Base Flood Elevations: In special flood hazard areas the Building Inspector shall determine the base flood elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data available: 
• 	
In zones AE, and VE refer to the base flood elevation data provided in the community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM. 

• 	
In Zone A the Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the community, i.e. subdivisions, site approvals. 

• 	
In Zone A when a base flood elevation is not available, the base flood elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 


24.210 Construction Requirements: The Building Inspector's base flood elevation determination will be used as criteria for requiring in zones A and AE, that: 
• 	
all new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation; 

• 	
that all new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 

• 	
be flood-proofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 

• 	
have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 


• 	
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. 


24.220 Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
24.230 Recreational Vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE shall either: 
• 	
be on the site for fewer than 180 days; 

• 	
be fully licensed and ready for highway use; 

• 	
meet all standards of Section 23.140 of this ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Section 24.220 of this ordinance. 


24.240 Areas Subject to Flooding: For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted provided they meet the following requirements: 
• 	
the enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage; 

• 	
the area is not a basement; 

• 	
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 


24.250 Coastal High Hazard Areas: The following regulations shall apply to all new construction and substantial improvements including all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in a coastal high hazard area, designated as Zone VE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. All new construction or substantial improvements are to be elevated on pilings and columns so that: 
• 	
The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation; 

• 	
The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state and local building standards. 

• 	
A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards or practice for meeting the provisions of this section. 

• 	
The space below the lowest floor must be free of obstructions or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purposes of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. 

• 	
The use of fill for the structural support of buildings is prohibited. 

• 	
Man-made alterations of sand dunes that would increase potential flood damage are prohibited. 

• 	
All new construction or substantial improvements within zone VE on the FIRM shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 

• 	
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zone VE shall either:  be on the site for fewer than 180 days; be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or meet all standards of Section 24.140 of this ordinance and all of the above requirements of Section 24.250. 


24.270 Variances and Appeals: Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector made under this ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5. If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by RSA 674:33, I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing in addition to the usual variance standards under state law: 
• 	
That the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense. 

• 	
That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result. 

• 	
That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood 
hazard, to afford relief. 



24.280 The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that: 
• 	
the issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and 

• 	
such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 



24.290 The community shall: 
• 	
Maintain a record of all variance actions, including their justification for their issuance, and 

• 	
Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator. 




Seabrook NH Impact Fee Schedule
For New and Expanded Development
Effective 1/1/2017 

Development Category  School Facilities  Town Facilities  Total School & Town  
Schools K-8  Winnacun net HS  Total Schools  Police  Fire  Total Town  
Residential per Sq. Ft Living Area  
Single Family Detached  $2.20  $1.17  $3.37  $0.34  $0.87  $1.21  $4.58  
Attached and 2 + More Family  $1.54  $0.78  $2.32  $0.37  $0.96  $1.33  $3.65  
Manufactured Housing  $1.75  $0.97  $2.72  $0.47  $1.20  $1.67  $4.39  

Commercial Per Square Foot  
Retail, Restaurant, Lodging, Entertainment, Office, Inst.  -­ -­ -­ $0.58  $0.59  $1.17  $1.17  
Industrial, Whse, Storage, Transportation, Other  -­ -­ -­ $0.24  $0.28  $0.52  $0.52  

Impact Fee Ordinance: 
• 	
Adopted by Town Meeting 3/10/2015. 

• 	
Applies to Building Permit Applications dated 1/1/2017 and after. 


Residential Impact Fee based on Sq Ft of Living Area: 
• 	
Maximum living area subject to the impact fee is 2,500 sf per dwelling unit. 

• 	
Living area is calculated using outside building dimensions. 

• 	
Living area includes heated, finished space with ceiling heights of 7 ft or more which is directly accessible from other living area. 

• 	
Living area does not include unheated and unfinished basements, garages, attics and porches. 


Commercial Impact Fee 
• 	Total based on square footage of enclosed building area 
Assessment and Collection of Impact Fee: 
• 	
The Code Enforcement Officer will assess and collect the impact fee. 

• 	
Fee is assessed prior to or as a condition for the issuance of a building permit. 

• 	
The fee is payable in full before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. 



TOWN OF SEABROOK 
PLANNING BOARD 
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS 

PURPOSE 
The purpose of these regulations is to promote the orderly and planned growth of developed and undeveloped areas of the Town of Seabrook. Driveway review will protect the interests of the general public, citizens and taxpayers of the community by establishing selected locations for driveways that will protect the safety of the traveling public, establishing grades that adequately protect and promote highway drainage, and permit a safe and controlled approach to highways in all season of the year. 
SECTION 1. BASIS OF THESE REGULATIONS 
A. Authority 
The following regulations governing the construction, alteration, location and relocation of driveways, entrances, exits and approaches within the limits of the Town highways and public right-of-ways are adopted by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 236, Sections 13 and 14. 

B. Issuing Authority 
It is intended that when applications for driveway permits are received hereunder, that comply with all of the regulations enacted herein, that the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board’s designed representative, shall have full authority to issue such requested permit without further action by the Planning Board. 
Applications received that do not comply with all of the requirements of these regulations may likewise be rejected by the Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee, without further action by the Planning Board, except as specified in these regulations for appeals and public hearings. 

C. Permit Required 
A permit issued under these regulations shall be required to: 
1. 	
Construct, alter, locate or relocate a driveway within the limits of the right-of-way of any public highway (town roadway) under the jurisdiction of the Town of Seabrook. 

2. 	
Impact the size or grade of any driveway, entrance, exit or approach within the limits of the right-of-way of any highway under the jurisdiction of the Town of Seabrook. 



D. Prohibited 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to develop, construct, alter, locate, or relocate a driveway within the limits of the right-of-way of any highway under the jurisdiction of the Town of Seabrook that does not meet or exceed the terms of a written permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 

E. Pre-Existing Driveways to be Issued Driveway Permits 
Any owner of property with an existing driveway on the date of enactment of these regulations shall be entitled to the issuance of a driveway permit for the existing driveway at its current location for a width not to exceed twenty feet, whether or not it meets all of the other terms and conditions of these regulations. 

F. Application Assistance 
All employees and officials of the Town of Seabrook are requested to assist applicants for a permit under these regulations, in the process of completing an application hereunder, and locating a driveway in accordance with the requirements included herein. 

G. Separability 
If any section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of these regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent authority, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of these regulations. 

H. Definition 
Highway or Public Right-of-Way shall mean a Town road, street, terrace, drive, boulevard, place or way that has been accepted as a Town highway or public right-of-way by acceptance, dedication, layout or by acceptance of maintenance. 
I. Procedure 
1. Application Form: Any person wishing to construct, alter, locate or relocate a driveway shall obtain a construction permit application from the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board and shall file that completed application, with an accurate drawing of the proposed physical location and details of the construction, alteration, location or relocation, with the Public Works Manager. 
(a). The following information shall be provided on the application. 
1. 	
The name, address and telephone number(s) of the owner of the property the driveway is to serve. 

2. 	
The names and addresses of the owners of the property directly across the street from the proposed driveway, of the abutters on either side of the lot where the driveway will be located. 

3. 	
Lengths of the street frontages of the property serviced by the proposed driveway. 


4. The use to be served by the driveway. (b). The following information shall be provided on the drawing. 
1. 	
The location and dimensions of the proposed driveway (width may not exceed 20 feet). 

2. 	
Property boundaries of the property served. 

3. 	
Distances to the nearest street intersection, if the property abuts a street intersection. 

4. 	
Location of any existing driveways serving the property. 

5. 	
Dimensions of the proposed driveway within the limits of the highway right-of-way. 

6. 	
Dimensions and specifications of the driveway’s paved apron. 

7. 	
Lengths of the sight distances in both directions along the street. 

8. 	
Descriptions (including dimensions) of any culverts, swales or other drainage structures, traffic control devices, and 


channelization islands to be constructed, also the depth of fill 
over any culverts. 
9. Grade of the driveway. 
10.Location of any visual obstructions to the required sight lines. 
11.Location and pole number of the closest utility pole(s) on the property or across the street from the driveway. 
12.Description of any proposed changes or proposed alteration or relocation of an existing driveway. 
Failure of the applicant to supply the information and the drawing requested shall be sufficient grounds for denial of the application. 
The Planning Board or the Public Works Manage may require the preparation of plans by a licensed engineer, when deemed necessary, at the expense of the applicant(s). 
2. Inspections and Approval 
The Public Works Manager, or Planning Board designee shall review the application and site for compliance with the Standards outlined in Section J below. The Planning Board authorizes the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board designee to approve the application, if the application complies with all of the Standards outlined in Section J below. 
If the application is approved, a written driveway permit shall be issued to the applicant stating the terms and specifications for the construction, alteration, location or relocation of the driveway. If the application is disapproved, written notification shall be sent to the applicant stating the reason(s) for disapproval. 
3. Planning Board Appeal 
Driveway permit applications disapproved by the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board designee may be revised to comply with the Standards outlined in Section J below and resubmitted to the Public Works Manager or Planning Board designee for review and approval or the applicant may appeal to the decision of disapproval by the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board designee to the Planning Board. The applicant shall outline in a letter to the Planning Board why the Standards cannot be met. The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal after giving abutters 10 days notice and posting notice in two public places. The Planning Board shall, after considering the application, the recommendations of the Public Works Manager or Planning Board designee, comments from the applicant and comments from abutters or other interested parties, approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the driveway permit application. If disapproved, written notification outlining the reasons for disapproval shall be sent to the applicant. 
Applications or appeals requiring a public hearing shall be filed with the Planning Board not less than fifteen (15) days before any regular meeting, if the application or appeal is to be placed upon the agenda for consideration at that meeting. The applicant shall submit a list of the names and addresses of owners of record of all abutting properties as indicated in the Towns records not more than five days before the date of filing of an application or appeal hereunder, identified by the map and lot numbers as shown on the Seabrook Tax Map(s). Abutters should be verified with the Town’s Assessing Office. 
The applicant or appellant shall also pay an application fee in the form required by the Planning Board’s regulations for the sum stated in the Non Refundable Fee Schedule for the notification of abutters and for filing an application or appeal. 

J. Standards 
1. 
Number: No more than one driveway (curb cut) shall be constructed from any one street to any one property or residence, unless frontage along that street exceeds 500 feet or the property is in the commercial or industrial zones in which case up to two (2) driveways may be permitted. 

2. 
Location: The location shall be selected to provide the most adequate degree of safety for the traveling public. The driveway shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest street intersection and not less than ten (10) feet from the nearest property line. 

3. 
Sight Distance: The location shall be selected to provide safe sight distances, based on the following standards developed by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation in its Highway Design Manual (1983), shall be ten times the posted speed on the existing Town highway (e.g., 30 mph = 300 feet; 35 mph = 350 feet, etc.). 


For properties where the minimum sight distances described above cannot be met, the driveway shall be placed at the safest possible location and the speed posted on the Town highway shall be reduced accordingly, by the Public Works Manager, but not less then that specified in State statute. If a lesser speed is indicated, a yellow warning sign indicating the hazard to be encountered (e.g., Blind Drive) with an Advisory Speed Sign mounted directly below showing the indicated speed to the nearest 5 mph multiple may be required by the Planning Board, the Public Works Manager or the Planning Board’s designee. The cost of all necessary warning and advisory signs, including replacements and maintenance, shall be borne by the applicant and subsequent owners of the property and shall be a condition of the driveway permit. 
Driveways located within urban areas or in areas where the property frontage is less than 150 feet shall be granted for each lot irrespective of sight distances but such driveways shall be placed at the safest possible location. No legal lot shall be denied a driveway permit. 
4. 
Width: No driveway on any lot shall exceed 20 feet in width as specified in Town ordinances. 

5. 
Paved Apron: Driveways that abut paved highways shall be constructed with paved aprons that shall be as wide as the driveway and shall run from the edge of the highway pavement to the edge of the applicant’s property line, and deeper if deemed necessary by the Planning Board, Public Works Manager or the Planning Board’s designee. The paved apron shall be constructed and maintained is such a way as to protect the edge of the highway pavement from deterioration. 

6. 
Drainage: The driveway shall not interfere with the highway drainage. Where necessary, culverts, water bars, ditches, swales and other drainage structures shall be installed and maintained by the applicant and his successors in title to insure adequate drainage of the street and to prevent excessive drainage from the driveway or the abutting property into the highway. Culverts shall be at least twelve (12) inches in diameter, or larger if considered necessary by the Planning Board, Public Works Manager or the Planning Board’s designee. A minimum of twelve (12) inches of compacted fill shall be placed over culverts before pavement is applied. Culverts shall be approved plastic smooth bore pipe and shall have protective headwalls. 

7. 
Sidewalks and Road Repair: When the construction of a driveway would require the disturbance of a Town highway or a sidewalk, the applicant shall obtain a street opening permit from the Public Works Manager before proceeding with any work or construction. The permittee is responsible to provide, during construction, any and all required protection to pedestrians, vehicles and abutting buildings and properties, including barriers during the day and night, required traffic control, including Police Officers, at his own expense. Any highway or sidewalk disturbed during the construction of a driveway shall be restored to the satisfaction of the Public Works Manager, including the complete clean-up and restoration of the public highway (right-of-way). 

8. 
Intersection: The driveway shall be laid out so as to intersect with the highway as nearly as possible at right angles. 

9. 
Grade: The grade of entrances and exits shall be constructed to slope down and away from the Town highway surface for a distance equivalent to the existing Town highway ditch or drainage line. 

10. 
Performance Security: The applicant may be required by the Planning Board, the Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee to file a cash bond or a self-calling letter of credit in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the construction of that portion of the driveway within the right-of-way of the highway, including the culverts, ditches, swales, or other drainage structures and the paved apron, and to cover the cost of repairing public sidewalks and highways disturbed by the construction. The cash bond or self-calling letter of credit shall be in the form approved by the Planning Board. The amount of the security shall be based upon a contractor’s or an engineer’s written cost estimate of the necessary construction and repair. The estimate shall be approved by the Planning Board, Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee prior to obtaining the driveway permit. All security accepted shall be for 100% of the estimated costs of construction. The security shall not be released until the Planning Board, Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee has certified completion of the construction and repairs in accordance with the Standards stated in these regulations and in accordance with the plans approved for the construction by the Planning Board, Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee. 



K. Administration 
1. 
Enforcement: Upon determination by the Planning Board that a violation of these regulations has occurred, notice shall be given to the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager recommending appropriate enforcement procedures. The Board of Selectmen is responsible with the Planning Board for the enforcement of these regulations. 

2. 
Penalty: As provided under RSA 236:14, any person who violates any provision of RSA 236:13 or these regulations shall be guilty of a violation or a misdemeanor and shall be liable for the cost of restoration of the Town highway and public right-of-way to the satisfaction of the Public Works Manager and for the costs of enforcement including attorney fees. 

3. 
Waiver: Where conformity to these regulations would cause undue hardship (other than financial) or injustice to the owner of the land, the Planning Board may, upon recommendation of the Public Works Manager, or the Planning Board’s designee, waive any of the above regulations or standards, provided that the spirit of the regulations and standards will be respected and that the public convenience and safety will not be affected. 


SECTION 2. INTERPRETATIION 
In matters of judgment or interpretation of the above general requirements, the opinion of the Planning Board shall prevail. 
SECTION 3. AMENDMENTS 
These regulations may be amended by the Planning Board, but only following a public hearing. 


SECTION 4. NUMBERING 
After amendments are adopted, the Planning Board shall have the authority to renumber the sections of these regulations consecutively without further amendment. 
SECTION 5. ADOPTION 
These regulations shall become effective after a public hearing, adoption and certification by the Planning Board and placement on file the Town clerk and the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 



Building Code 

Section Title Page 
1.1 Appointment of Inspector B-3 
1.2 Building Permit Required B-3 
1.3 Building Codes B-3 
1.4 Compliance Required B-3 
1.5 Fee Adjustment B-3 
1.6 Applications B-4 
1.7 Markers B-4 
1.8 Compliance with Ordinance B-4 
1.9 Conditions on Permits B-4 
2.0 Permit Limits B-4 
2.1 Permit Suspension B-5 
2.2 Other Permits B-5 
2.3 Duties of the Building Inspector B-5 
2.4 Reports to NH DES B-5 
2.5 Enforcement B-5 
2.6 Appeals B-5 



Seabrook Building Code 

The dates of the first enactment of any building code regulations in the Town of Seabrook, and of each subsequent amendment thereto, are set forth at the end of the land use regulations booklet for the Town of Seabrook, NH in a section entitled “Revisions to the Seabrook Building Code since 2006.” 
1.100 Appointment of Building Inspector and Deputy: The Board of Selectmen is hereby given the power and the authority to appoint a Building Inspector and a Deputy Building Inspector, who shall act in the absence, disability or unavailability of the Building Inspector, and to delegate to such Building Inspector the power and authority to administer the provisions of this ordinance that require use of the building permit. 
1.200 Building permit required: No person or entity shall undertake any construction, development or alteration of any building, structure or use of land without a written building permit issued by the Building Inspector, unless such undertaking is for normal maintenance or emergency repairs. 
1.300 Building Codes: All buildings, building components, and structures constructed in the Town Of Seabrook shall comply with the state building code and state fire code. The construction, design, structure, maintenance, and use of all buildings or structures to be erected and the alteration, renovation, rehabilitation, repair, removal, or demolition of all buildings and structures previously erected shall be governed by the provisions of the state building code. Additional codes adopted by reference herein, pursuant to NH RSA 674:51 and NH RSA 674:51-a, include: 
• International Property Maintenance Code 2009; 
1.400 Compliance required for permit issuance: No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector until all applicable provisions of this ordinance have been complied with. 
1.500 Fee Adjustment: Building permit fees, inspection fees and fees for certificates of occupancy may be established by and increased, if circumstances warrant, by the Board of Selectmen. 
1.600 Format of Application: No application for a building permit shall be received or approved unless it is filed in writing on a form prescribed by the Selectmen, accompanied by the required permit fee and accompanied by a drawing or plat, in duplicate, showing all information requested on the application form, including but not limited to: the lot plan, the location of the building or use on the lot, accurate dimensions of the lot and building or use and, where for human habitation or use, showing location and specifications and means of waste and sewage disposal, means of access to such lot or use and such other information as the Building Inspector may deem necessary to provide for the observance of the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.700 Lot, building, structure and land use markers required: No building permit for any work or project estimated to cost more than $10,000 shall be issued until the Building Inspector has inspected the premises and has satisfied himself that all lot, building, structure and land use stakes or markers are in place and comply with the provisions of this ordinance. No application for a building permit shall be approved until stakes or markers shall be fixed on the lot to indicate the location of lot lines and all corners of buildings(s), structure(s) and alterations proposed, and where the Building Inspector deems it necessary or desirable, of the means of access thereto. Where the application is for land use not involving excavations, grading, or other development or use of the ground or landscape concerned, stakes or markers shall be fixed on the lot to indicate the location of lot lines and bounds of all such excavations, grading or land development(s) proposed. 
1.800 Compliance required for issuance of building permit: No land shall hereafter be used for building or development and no building or structure hereafter erected, enlarged, materially altered or move, in whole or in part, for any purpose until a building permit shall have been issued by the Building Inspector showing that the use and development of the land, building or structure complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
1.900 
Conditions on permits: A building permit may be issued upon such conditions as the Building Inspector or, when applicable, as the Board of Adjustment may deem necessary to assure the observance of the provisions of this ordinance. 

2.000 
Permit Limits: Any building permit issued shall authorize only such work or project as the application and the permit, taken together, reasonably allow. Unless otherwise noted, a building permit expires 24 months after the date of issue. An applicant may request an extension of 12 months from the Building Inspector before the permit expires. 


2.100 Permit Suspension: The Building Inspector or the Selectmen may suspend or revoke any building permit upon determining that the work or project in process is not in conformity with the permit as granted or is otherwise in violation of the terms of this ordinance. In the event of such suspension or revocation of a building permit, the work or project concerned shall immediately cease or legal action to enforce such cessation shall forthwith be taken by the Selectmen. 
2.200 Review of proposal for other necessary permits: The Building Inspector shall review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
2.300 Duties of Building Inspector: The Building Inspector shall: 
• 	
Conform with Code: conform to the provisions of this ordinance; 

• 	
Monitor Construction: determine at the site of work operations whether these follow the plans and specifications as proposed in the application for a Building Permit and the extent of compliance with the Building Code Ordinance of the town; 

• 	
Maintain Records: maintain a complete and accurate record of the work performed by the Building Inspector, keeping such records as are required for this purpose in files at the Office of the Board of Selectmen; and 

• 	
Enforce the Code: assist the Selectmen in the enforcement of this ordinance. 


2.400 Reports to NH DES: The Building Inspector shall maintain a complete record of all building permits granted under the terms of this ordinance and shall send a monthly report to the NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission, with a copy to the Planning Board, of all permits which have been granted during the previous month which, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, involve construction falling within the jurisdiction of review of said Commission. 

2.500 Enforcement: This code shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen. 
2.600 Appeals: All appeals taken as a result of action authorized by this Town of Seabrook Building Code shall be made to the Town of Seabrook Zoning Board of Adjustment, and not to any separate Building Code Board of Appeals. Said appeals shall be made in compliance with state law, Town Ordinances and regulations, and the Zoning Board of Adjustment Rules of Procedure. 


Subdivision Regulations 

1 S-3 
Authority & Purpose 
2 Definitions S-3 
3 Overview of Application Process S-7 Administrative Review Determination of Application Completeness Technical Review Committee Final Review by Planning Board Applicant’s Follow-up Responsibilities 
4 Application Submittal S-9 Submittal Deadlines Application Fees Additional Fees Required Plan Exhibits Required Documentation 
5 Application Acceptance S-19 
6 Plan Review S-20 Standards for Expedited Applications Standards for Non-Expedited Applications Standards for Roadways & Sidewalks 
7 Stormwater Management S-25 
8 Planning Board Decision S-28 
9 Responsibilities After Plan Approval S-28 Prior to Construction During Construction After Construction Applicants Failure to Comply 
10 S-31 
Administrative Provisions 
Appendix A – Stormwater Maintenance S-32 
S -1 
S -2 

Subdivision Regulations 

Section 1 -Authority & Purpose
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Seabrook Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Seabrook, and in accordance with the provisions of RSA 672-677, the Seabrook Planning Board hereby adopts the following regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Seabrook. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the development of an economically sound and stable community and to provide uniform procedures and standards for land development. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land within the boundaries of Seabrook. 

Section 2 -Definitions 
The meanings of terms defined in the Seabrook Zoning Ordinance apply also to these regulations. Additional terms are defined as follows: 
Abutter: Any person whose property adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Seabrook Planning Board. In the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA 356-B. 
Access Streets are the lowest-order streets, and usually carry no through traffic. Access streets are designed to provide access from residences to higher-order streets. These streets usually serve relatively few dwelling units. Examples are short streets, cul-de-sacs, and courts. 
S -3 
Active & Substantial Development or Building: 
• 	
Construction of and/or installation of basic infrastructure to support the development (including all of the following: footings and foundation walls of proposed buildings; roadways, access ways, parking lots, etc. to a minimum of gravel base; and utilities placed in underground conduit ready for connection to proposed buildings/structures) in accordance with the approved plans, as applicable; and 

• 	
Construction and completion of drainage improvements to service the development (including all of the following: detention/retention basins, treatment swales, pipes, underdrains, catch basins, etc.) in accordance with the approved plans as applicable; and 

• 	
All erosion control measures (as specified on the approved plans) must be in place and maintained on the site. 


Movement of earth, excavation, or logging of a site without completion of items 1, 2 and 3 above shall not be considered “active and substantial development.” Plans approved in phases shall be subject to this definition for the phase currently being developed. 
Application Acceptance occurs upon a majority vote of the Planning Board after said board determines that a proposal constitutes a substantially complete application. 
Arterial is a high-volume street that conducts traffic between communities and activity centers, and connects communities to major state and interstate highways. 
Bank means the transitional slope immediately adjacent to the edge of a surface water body, the upper limit of which is usually defined by a break in slope, or, for a wetland, where a line delineated in accordance with NH Wt301.01 indicates a change from wetland to upland. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practice to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage, and measures recommended by Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control for Urban & Developing Areas in New Hampshire, published by the Rockingham County Conservation District in 1992. 
Board: The Seabrook Planning Board 
S -4 
Collector is the principal traffic conveyor within commercial or residential areas. The collector carries relatively high traffic volumes from arterials to lower-order streets. Its function in the road system is to promote free traffic flow, but may also serve abutting land uses. 
Complete Application is one that meets the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Regulations (as per Sections 4 & 5) and the Site Plan Review Regulations (Sections 3-5), as determined by the Planning Board. 
Direct Glare: The sensation produced by insufficiently shielded light sources within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss of visual performance and visibility. 
Fully Shielded Fixture: An outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner that all light emitted from the fixture either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected at a minimum below the horizontal plane of the fixture lower face (equivalent to a 90. or less angle of cut off). 
Impacted Area: Any area altered from its current state. For the purpose of calculating application fees, an application for building re-modeling shall calculate, at a minimum, the area of the building’s footprint. 
Interior Parking Area: That area that lies within an imaginary perimeter envelope drawn around the outermost reaches of a parking lot. 
Intermittent Stream means a stream that flows for sufficient time to develop and maintain a defined channel, but which might not flow during dry portions of the year. 
Light Trespass: Light that is distributed where it is not wanted or needed, beyond the intended target and onto adjacent properties where it creates a nuisance. 
Minor Subdivision: The subdivision of an existing lot of record located on an existing public right of way which does not require the creation of a new road. 
Off-Site Improvements: Infrastructure improvements that are determined by the Planning Board to be necessary for the public health and safety; and are located outside the boundaries of the property that is subject to site plan review by the planning board. 
Outdoor Lighting Fixture: An electrically powered illuminating device containing a total light source of greater than 1800 initial lumens per fixture (This is greater than a single 100 watt incandescent bulb or two 75 watt reflectorized incandescent bulbs) that is permanently installed outdoors. 
S -5 
Privately Maintained Dedicated Public Way is a street built to Town standards that has been approved by the Planning Board, and the plan has been recorded at the Registry of Deeds. 
Sag Glass Lens: Any lens on the lower face of a Shoe Box Style Outdoor Lighting Fixture that is other than flat. 
Shoe Box Style Fixture: Any round or square Outdoor Lighting Fixture that mounts perpendicular to the pole and is Fully Shielded. 
Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Street: A public way established by or maintained under public authority, or a way dedicated to the use of the public. 
Subcollector is a relatively lower-volume street, providing passage from collector streets to neighborhood access streets. Subcollectors provide frontage and access to residential lots, but also carry some through traffic. 
Subdivision: the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance, or building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among several owners shall be deemed a subdivision. 
Substantial Completion means that construction is sufficiently complete so that an improvement may be utilized by its owner for the purposes intended. 
Surface Water Body or Surface Waters means those portions of waters of the state, as defined by RSA 482-A:4, which have standing or flowing water at or on the surface of the ground. This includes, but is not limited to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and tidal waters. 
Wall Pack Style Fixture: Any Outdoor Lighting Fixture that mounts on the outer wall of a building. 
S -6 


Section 3 – Overview of Application Process

In order to subdivide land or adjust lot lines (i.e. move or eliminate property 
lines), prior approval by the Planning Board is required. No subdivision of 
land within Seabrook's municipal boundaries shall be hereafter filed in the County 
Registry of Deeds until a plan thereof has been approved by the Board in 
accordance with the provisions of these regulations. The application process is 
comprised of five phases, as follows: 

Phase 1 – Administrative Review 
Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Board office at the Town Hall. 
The Town Planner will review the submittal, and will subsequently offer 
comments on its complete-ness pursuant to Article V of these regulations. Upon 
the submittal of an application, no work may be performed on-site unless prior 
approval is granted by the Planning Board. Should the applicant desire a 
preliminary conceptual consultation pursuant to RSA 676:4II(a), the Planning 
Board’s representative will schedule that session. 

Phase 2 – Planning Board Determines Whether the Application is 
Complete 
The Planning Board will determine whether the requirements of the Subdivision 
Regulations have been met and the application is complete enough to allow the 
board to proceed with consideration and to make an informed decision consistent 
with RSA 676:4I(b). If the board votes to accept the application as complete, the 
applicant will proceed to Phase 3 below. The board may waive the Phase 3 
review if the board determines that the application will have no impact on 
municipal sewer, water, fire, police, public works, services, or natural resources. 

Phase 3 – Technical Review Committee (TRC) 
The Technical Review Committee will review the application. The committee will 
make recommendations to the Planning Board. 

Phase 4 – Final Review by the Planning Board 
After review by the TRC, the Planning Board will review the application for 
consistency with the applicable standards. Revised plans submitted less than 
four days prior to the Phase 4 meeting will not be reviewed by the Planning 
Board. During Phase 4, the Planning Board may vote to approve, disapprove or 
continue to date and time certain the application. 

S -7 
Phase 5 – Applicant’s Follow-up Responsibilities The applicant shall meet all conditions of approval in a timely manner. The applicant will provide the board with a letter certifying when such conditions have been met. If required by the Planning Board, the applicant shall attend a pre­construction meeting. Required plan revisions and financial securities shall be submitted prior to the pre-construction meeting. Upon completion of the project and adherence to all conditions of approval, the applicant shall petition the Planning Board to release the security and formally close the case file. Failure to meet Phase 5 requirements could result in the rescission of application approval. 
S -8 

Section 4 – Application Submittal 
Section 4.100 Submittal Deadlines 
4.110 Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Board Secretary no later than 12:00 PM on __________ . 
4.120 All Correspondence and Documentation pertaining to revised application shall be submitted to the Planning Board office no later than 12:00 PM on Tuesday, one week prior to the Planning Board meeting. 
Section 4.200 Application Fees 
Subdivisions up to five lots, no road $200 + $100 per lot Subdivisions up to five lots, with road $500 + 250/lot Subdivisions in excess of five lots $1,000 + $500 per lot Lot Line Adjustment $300 Perimeter Survey No charge Voluntary Lot Merger $100 + $50/lot Abutter Notices $100 + $10.48/owner & applicant 
+ $7.78/abutter Public Notice $150 Incomplete application processing fee $75 Recording of mylars and documents Actual recording cost plus $100 Application Administration Fee $150 
Section 4.300 Additional Fees 
4.310 Professional Review -All plans will be reviewed by the Town Planner. All subdivisions that include provisions for roadway construction or connection to Town services, and most site plans, will be reviewed by the Planning Board’s engineer. The cost for such reviews shall be borne by the applicant. 
4.320 Technical Review Committee – The applicant shall reimburse the Town for the cost of Technical Review, if such review is required by the Planning Board. The calculation of such costs shall include the hourly rates for each member of the Technical Review Committee, and that of the Secretary. 
S -9 
4.330 Charge for Extensive Review: 
4.340 Re-submittal of an Application – A re-submittal fee will be assessed, said fee to be at least one half the original application fee, but no less than $500. In the event that the Planning Board’s review of the re-submittal extends more than three meetings, the applicant will be assessed the original application fee in addition to fees specified in Section 4.330 above. 
4.350 Administrative Services – The applicant will be assessed an administrative fee of 20% of the cost of professional services rendered to the Planning Board. Said fee is intended to cover accounts payable and record keeping, but in no instance shall the fee exceed $100 per invoice. 
4.360 Construction Oversight – The applicant shall reimburse the Town for all costs of outside inspection services incurred by the Building Department. 
4.370 Additional Fees may be required for administrative expenses, special investigative studies, review of documents, and legal and other professional services that may be required by a particular application. The Planning Board reserves the right to recover all legal fees in connection with an application, including court related fees. 
4.375 Timely Payment of Fees -The applicant shall pay all fees promptly. After 30 days from the date of the invoice, interest will accrue. Should full payment not be received within 90 days, issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy will be delayed, pending receipt of all fees. 
4.376 Fee Waiver -The Planning Board reserves the right to waive application fees, for good reason shown. 
S -10 
Section 4.380 Refunds 
Upon withdrawal of an application, eligibility for refunds of application fees are as follows: 75% refund after the application is accepted by the Planning Board’s secretary; 50% refund after the application is reviewed by the Town Planner; and 25% after the Town sends abutters notices. Should the application be reviewed by the Planning Board at a formal acceptance hearing pursuant to Section 5 below, no fees will be refunded. 
4.381 All out of pocket expenses for public notices, abutter notices, Town Planner, Town Engineer, special studies, professional reviews & inspections and other professional services are the responsibility of the applicant, and will only be returned if the funds have not been expended. 
4.382 The Planning Board has sole discretion on the decision to return fees. 
4.383 The Application Refund Policy shall apply to all applications made to the Planning Board. 
4.384 The minimum application fee shall be $100. No refund shall be approved by the Planning Board that reduces the fee below $100. 
S -11 
Section 4.400 Plan Exhibits Required for Expedited Applications 
4.401 Site Plan -Three 11” by 17” paper copies, and one copy in digital .pdf format. 
4.402 Scale -The plan shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to the inch, and no larger than 20 feet to the inch. 
4.403 Locus -A location map showing the relationship of the proposal to adjacent properties and to public access. 
4.404 Title block containing the name of the subdivision and owner(s) of the property, to be located in the lower right corner of the plan. 
4.405 Date 


4.406 North arrow 
4.407 Notification -Names and mailing addresses of all abutters, and holders of conservation, preservation, and agricultural preservation restrictions. 
4.408 Dimensions to the hundredth of a foot. 
4.409 Use -Proposed uses of the property. 
4.410 Monuments -Location of all permanent monuments, existing and proposed. 
4.411 Flood elevation data. 
4.412 Details of proposed signs, lighting, and landscaping. 
4.413 Water Resources -The extent of all wetlands, intermittent or perennial streams, ponds, or tidal creeks. 
4.414 Signature Line -Plan approval signature line located above the title block. 
4.415 Structures -Intended location of all dwellings or other structures. 
4.416 Impermeable Surfaces -Size and location of all impermeable surfaces. 
S -12 
4.417 Setbacks -All appropriate setback lines, such as, but not limited to primary dwelling, wetland, and stream setbacks. 

4.418 Street Address 
4.419 Variances -Copies of all variances associated with a parcel must be submitted with the application and noted on the plans. 
4.420 Prior Approvals – A copy of any plans (with case #) previously approved by the Planning Board. 
4.421 Signature line for Building Inspector or Town Planner. 
4.422 Aerial “birds eye view” photographs of the subject property and its abutters. 
Section 4.500 Plan Exhibits Required for Non-Expedited Applications 
4.501 Engineered Plan: Three full size (22” by 34”) paper copies, and one copy in digital .pdf format. 
4.502 Locus -A location map showing the relationship of the proposal to adjacent properties and to public access. 

4.503 Use -Proposed uses of the property. 
4.504 Scale -The plan shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than 100 feet to the inch, and no larger than 20 feet to the inch. 

4.505 Date 


4.506 North arrow 
4.507 Acreage 
4.508 Street Address 
4.509 Proposed Street Name 
4.510 Title block containing the name of the subdivision and owner(s) of the property, to be located in the lower right corner of the plan. 
S -13 
4.511 Revision block located to the left of the title block detailing every revision to the plan. 
4.512 Signature Line -Plan approval signature line located above the title block. 
4.513 Stamps of a surveyor, professional engineer, and wetlands scientist, licensed by the State of New Hampshire. 
4.514 Dimensions to the hundredth of a foot. 
4.515 Radius & bearings of all existing and proposed property lines, public ways, and easements. 
4.516 Notification -Names and mailing addresses of all abutters, and holders of conservation, preservation, and agricultural preservation restrictions. 
4.517 Variances -Copies of all variances associated with a parcel must be submitted with the application and noted on the plans. 
4.518 Streets & Utilities -Profiles, cross sections, and construction details of all existing and proposed streets and utilities. 
6.519 Required Infrastructure -Monuments, street signs, paved streets, sidewalks, water supply, sewage disposal, storm water drainage facilities, and streetlights. 
4.520 Public Areas -Proposed public areas, if any. 
4.521 Monuments -Location of all permanent monuments, existing and proposed. 
4.522 Flood elevation data. 


4.523 Signs, lighting & landscaping details. 
4.524 Driveways -Location of all proposed driveways. 
4.525 Topo -Existing and proposed topographical contours, at two-foot intervals. 
4.526 Structures -Location of all structures. 
4.528 Setbacks -All setbacks from structures, wetlands, and streams. 
4.527 Impermeable Surfaces -Size and location of all impermeable surfaces. 
S -14 
4.529 Zoning Box -In order to demonstrate compliance with the minimum lot depth and lot width requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, rectangles shall be depicted within each proposed lot, at proposed building sites, as follows: 
In Zones 1, 2, 3 & 6M: 125' by 125' 
In Zones 2R, 5 & 6R: 100' by 100' 
4.530 Water Resources -The extent of all wetlands, intermittent or perennial streams, ponds, vernal pools, or tidal creeks. If the subject property includes wetlands: 
• 	
The plan shall include a delineation of said wetlands as mapped by a qualified wetlands scientist 

• 	
Proximity to off-site wetlands situated within 25 feet of the property line shall be indicated on the plan, and 

• 	
The boundaries of all on-site wetlands shall be marked on the ground by permanent monuments. The wetland boundary markers shall be subject to approval by the Conservation Commission. 


S -15 
4.531 Erosion & Pollution Control measures that meet the EPA’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Activities. 
4.532 A Storm Water Operations & Maintenance Plan shall be displayed on a mylar plan sheet that is suitable for recording at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
4.533 Water Meters -Specifications for water meter installation in every new home in the subdivision, and a note stating that such meters are mandatory and to be installed at the property owner’s expense. 
4.534 Privately Maintained Dedicated Public Ways: Streets not intended to be conveyed to the Town after recording of the plan at the Registry of Deeds shall have the following stipulations noted on the plan and on any deeds that are conveyed to other parties: 
• 	
Defining when the Town has a duty to maintain the street; 

• 	
Proper notification on deeds conveyed to other parties; 

• 	
Maintenance of the street and utilities shall be provided by private parties until such time that road is accepted by the Town as a public street; 

• 	
Except for public safety services, no Town services, e.g. garbage pickup, snow plowing, etc., will be provided by the Town. 


All streets approved by the Planning Board are privately maintained dedicated public ways until the Town accepts them as Town Roads. 
4.535 Aerial “birds eye view” photographs of the subject property and its abutters. 
S -16 
Section 4.600 Documentation to Accompany Applications 
4.601 Departmental Reviews -No application will be considered complete and ready for Planning Board review until the plan is reviewed by authorized representatives of the following municipal departments: Sewer, Water, Police, Fire, Department of Public Works and Building. 
4.602 Easements -All easements, existing and proposed, must be submitted in writing with the application. Easements involving the Town of Seabrook shall only be recorded by an agent of the Town. 
4.603 Waivers to the provisions of these regulations may be granted if the board finds, by majority vote, that: 
• 	
Strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations; or 

• 	
Specific circumstances or conditions of the land indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of the regulations. 


The applicant shall submit a written request detailing the rationale for each waiver request. The basis for any waiver granted by the planning board will be recorded in the minutes. 
4.604 Lot Number -A written notice from the Assessor specifying map and lot numbers and street address is to be submitted with the application. 
4.605 Board of Adjustment approval, if required, shall be obtained prior to Planning Board review of the application. 
4.606 Permits -Evidence that applications for all applicable State & Federal permits have been filed with the respective agencies. 
4.607 Conservation Commission -If the subject property includes wetlands, the applicant shall seek written comments from the Conservation Commission. 
4.608 An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be submitted which details: 
• 	
soil stabilization practices to preserve existing vegetation and to re-
vegetate non-paved open areas after grading. 


• 	
structural BMP’s to divert flows from exposed areas, to store flows, or to otherwise limit runoff from exposed areas. 

• 	
control practices to reduce tracking of sediment and wind erosion. 


S -17 
4.609 A Stormwater Pollution Plan is required for all activities that disturb one or more acres of land, or is a part of a larger development that disturbs one or more acres. The plan shall include a narrative describing: 
• 
stormwater management methods; 

• 
erosion and sediment controls; 

• 
BMP’s (Best Management Practices) that will be used; 

• 
when and where the BMP’s will be used; 

• 
who will install and maintain the BMP’s; 

• 
measures to be used by the contractor to control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality; and 

• 
Stormwater management maintenance manual detailing routine maintenance tasks for all stormwater infrastructure and responsible party to perform said tasks. 


4.610 Maintenance Plan -All storm water management systems shall have an Operation & Maintenance Plan (O&M) to ensure that systems function as designed. This plan shall be reviewed and approved as part of the review of the proposed permanent (post construction) storm water management system. The Town shall record the plan at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, at the applicant’s expense. Execution of the O&M plan shall be considered a condition of approval of a subdivision or site plan. If the storm water management system is not dedicated to the Town pursuant to a perpetual offer of dedication, the Planning Board may require an applicant to establish a homeowners association or similar entity to maintain the storm water management system. The storm water management system owner is generally considered to be the landowner of the property, unless other legally binding agreements are established. Copies of all inspection reports shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Office and Department of Public Works. The O&M plan shall, at a minimum, identify the following: 
• 
Storm water management system owner(s); 

S -18 

• 	
The party or parties responsible for operation and maintenance and, if applicable, implementation of the SWPPP; 

• 	
A schedule for inspection and maintenance; 

• 	
A checklist to be used during each inspection; 

• 	
The description of routine and non-routine maintenance tasks to be undertaken; 

• 	
A plan showing the location of all storm water management facilities covered by the O&M plan; and, 

• 	
A certification signed by the owner(s) attesting to their commitment to comply with the O&M plan. 


The applicant shall submit a mylar plan suitable for recording at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds that depicts the following: 
• 	
The party or parties responsible for operation and maintenance; 

• 	
A schedule for inspection and maintenance; 

• 	
A description of routine and non-routine maintenance tasks to be 
undertaken; 


• 	
The location of all storm water management facilities, and 


The Planning Board’s Model Inspection & Maintenance Notes, attached hereto as Appendix A. 

4.611 A draft deed shall be submitted for each parcel to be created, including: 
• 	
all metes & bounds; 

• 	
proposed easements of any sort including but not limited to drainage, stormwater treatment, conservation, other entity access to or across parcel; 

• 	
delineated wetlands. 


S -19 
4.612 Rare Species -The applicant shall submit data on rare species as per records maintained by the State of New Hampshire. 
6.213 Street Names -The Fire Chief will approve all proposed street names so as to assure that none are duplicates of existing street names or so similar as to cause confusion. The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with a copy of the Fire Chief’s approval. 
4.614 Additional Studies -The Board may require the applicant to undertake additional studies where deemed necessary or desirable by the Board in order to protect the public convenience, safety, health and welfare. 



Section 5 -Application Acceptance 
A completed application means that sufficient information is included or submitted to allow the board to proceed with consideration and to make an informed decision. A completed application sufficient to invoke jurisdiction of the board shall be submitted to and accepted by the board only at a public meeting of the board (NH RSA 676:4 I b). 
5.100 Prior Approvals: Prior to application acceptance by the Planning Board, all prior applications for the parcel in question must be completed, withdrawn, or otherwise resolved in a manner that is satisfactory to the Planning Board. 
5.200 Waiver Requests: The Planning Board will act on waiver requests only after considering a written submittal from the applicant detailing the rationale for such request. 
5.300 Technical Review – Immediately following application acceptance, the Planning Board, at its discretion, may forward the application to its Technical Review Committee (TRC) for review and recommendations. 
S -20 

Section 6 -Plan Review 
6.100 Standards for Non-Expedited Applications 
The Board will review the plan in the context of the following design standards: 

6.101 Conformance with the Seabrook Master Plan, and with the provisions of 
all pertinent state and local codes and ordinances. 

6.102 Recording Requirements -Plans shall conform to the recording 
requirements of the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 

6.103 Underground utilities shall provide two four-inch ducts for use of the 
municipality and all overhead poles shall provide space for the use of the 
municipality at the applicant’s expense. 

6.104 Public Use -Land designated for public use may not be subdivided for 
any other purpose. 

6.105 Community Facilities -Proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed with 
respect to their effect upon existing and future community services and facilities, 
including schools and recreational areas. 

6.106 Access -Proposed subdivisions shall be designed so that every lot has 
access to a public or dedicated street. 

6.107 Hazards -Land susceptible to flooding or that is otherwise hazardous to 
life, health or property, shall not be approved for building purposes, but may be 
platted for open space. 

6.108 Streams -No seasonal, intermittent, or perennial stream shall be re­routed without the prior approval of the Planning Board, nor shall any such 
stream be routed into a storm drainage system. A fifteen-foot wide no-cut, no-
disturb vegetative buffer shall be maintained along each bank of the stream. 

6.109 Drainage Easements -Where a subdivision is traversed by a 
watercourse or drainage-way, or where the Board feels that the surface water 
drainage to be created by the subdivision should be controlled, the plan shall 
include an easement of such width and location as the Board deems adequate. 

6.110 Natural Features -The Board may require that a proposed subdivision 
design preserve such features as trees, streams, topography and other natural 
assets. 

S -21 
6.111 Street trees and open spaces may be required, at the discretion of the Board. 
6.112 Utilities -The size, type, and location shall be subject to Board approval. Hydrants shall conform with all standards and requirements promulgated by the Town of Seabrook Water Department. An eight-foot structural setback shall be observed around hydrants. 
6.113 A public water supply system shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider. For new connections to the municipal water system, all proposed lawn areas shall be underlain by 6 inches of loam. 
6.114 Sanitary waste facilities in new buildings shall be connected to the municipal sewer system. 
6.115 Flood Hazards -All subdivision proposals and proposals for other development governed by these regulations having land identified as special flood hazard areas in the Flood Insurance Study for Seabrook, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Seabrook dated May 17, 2005, shall meet the following requirements: 1) Subdivision proposals and proposals for other development shall be located and designed to assure that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 2) Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development greater than 10 lots or 2 acres, whichever is less, shall include base flood evaluation data. 
6.116 Lot Lines -Proposed lot lines shall intersect the public right-of-way at a 90 degree angle (plus or minus 10 degrees), and said lot lines shall run in a straight line away from the street for a minimum distance of 75 feet. 
6.117 Detention Pond Vegetation -The following species shall be utilized when constructing a detention ponds or wetlands (an asterisk indicates that the species is highly recommended): 
Trees: Eastern Larch, Eastern Hemlock *, White Spruce, Balsam Fir, Northern White Cedar *, Atlantic White Cedar, Sweet Gum, American Elm, Mulberry, Shagbark Hickory *, Red Oak *, White Oak *, White Birch, Alder, Black Willow *, Pussy Willow, Balsam Poplar, Black Cherry *, Choke Cherry *, Shadbush -Serviceberry *, Hawthorn, Eastern Redbud, Black Locust, Honey Locust, American Holly, Black Tupelo, Flowering Dogwood*, Sugar Maple, Red Maple, Staghorn Sumac *, Common Prickly-ash, and Black Ash. 
S -22 
Shrubs: Spicebush *, Witch Hazel, Sweetfern, Bayberries *, American Hazel *, Labrador tea, Mountain Laurel, Rosebay Rhododendron, Leatherleaf, Highbush Blueberry *, Lowbush Blueberry *, Red-osier Dogwood *, Button Bush *, American Elder *, and Nannyberry *. 
Herbaceous Groundcovers (“s” means pond/swamp habitat): Wild Ginger, White Water Lily (S), Yellow Pond lily (S), Sacred Lotus (S), Yellow Lotus (S), Marsh Marigold (S) *, Goldenseal, American Globeflower, Goldthread, Monkshood, Wild Columbine, Red Baneberry *, Larkspur *, Wood Anemone, Blue Cohosh, Mayapple, Bloodroot, Common Chickweed *, Soapwort, Smartweed, St. Johnswort, Swamp Rose Mallow*, Marsh Mallow *, Northern Pitcher Plant (S) Common Blue Violet, Sweet White Violet, Dame's Rocket, Watercress (S) *, Bearberry *, American Cranberry *, Wintergreen *, Trailing Arbutus aka: Mayflower, Swamp Candles, Tufted Loosestrife, Starflower, Grass of Parnassus, Meadow Sweet, Wild Strawberry *, Steeplebush, American burnet, Vetch, Wild Licorice, Groundnut *, Blue Lupine, Clover (assorted varieties), Bunchberry, Fox Grape *, Cranesbill, Jewelweed, Wood Sorrel, Orange Milkwort, Wild Sarsaparilla, Dwarf Ginseng, American Ginseng, Great Angelica, Fringed Gentian, Rose Pink, Swamp Milkweed, Forget-me-not, Field mint, Skullcap, Heal-all, Woundwort, Monarda *, Common Foxglove, White Turtlehead (S), Culver's Root, Trumpet Creeper, Water Willow, Unicorn Plant, Joe-pye-weed, Ironweed, New England Aster *, Cup Plant, Bur Marigold (S) *, Coltsfoot, Dandelion *, Wapato (S), Spiderwort, Soft Rush *, Bulrush *, Chufa, Cotton grass, Indian Rice (S) *, Jack-in-the­pulpit, Sweetflag, Water Arum (S), Trout Lily, Indian Cucumberroot, Trillium, Solomon's Seal, Blue Flag Iris, Yellow Flag Iris, Lady Slippers, Rose Pogonia, Grass Pink, Royal fern, Cinnamon fern, Maidenhair fern, and Water Horsetail (S). 
Resident Plants, especially Trailing Arbutus, Fringed Gentian, Bur Marigold, Sweetflag, Trillium, Lady Slippers, Rose Pogonia, and Grass Pink, shall be preserved and replanted for many are very rare and hard to establish. 
Mulch: Saltmarsh hay or coarse woodchips shall be utilized. 
6.118 Shoreland Vegetation shall be consistent with recommendations specified in NHDES Native Shoreland/Riparian Buffer Plantings for New Hampshire (http://www.des.state.nh.us/wmb/VRAP/documents/NativeShorelandRiparianBuff erPlantingsNH.pdf) 
S -23 
6.200 Standards for Roadways & Sidewalks 
6.201 Minimum -All roadways intended for public use shall be constructed to the following minimum standards: 
Right-Of-Way 50 feet 
Pavement Width: 
Arterial and Collector Roadways 24 feet 
Subcollector Roadways 22 feet 
Access Streets and Private Roads 20 feet 

Binder Course (bituminous asphalt) 2 inches 
Finish Course (bituminous asphalt) 1 inch 
Gravel Base: 
Bank-Run Gravel 12 inches 
Processed Gravel 6 inches 

6.202 Future Continuation of Streets -The design shall provide for the proper continuation of streets from adjacent built-up areas, and for the proper projection of streets into adjacent properties. 
6.203 Grades of all streets shall not be less than 1% or more than 8%. 
6.204 Intersection Angle -Streets shall intersect at right angles where possible, but under no circumstances at an angle of less than sixty degrees. 
6.205 Relationship of Intersections -T-intersections formed on opposite sides of the same street shall not be closer than 200 feet, centerline to centerline. 
6.206 Intersection Radius: The paved portions of new streets shall intersect existing streets with a curve of at least 25-foot radius. 
6.207 Sight Distances: Street intersections and curves shall be designed so as to permit adequate visibility for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Curves shall have a minimum centerline radius of 100 feet. 
6.208 Turnarounds: Dead-end streets shall be provided with suitable turnarounds. When a turning circle is used, it shall have a minimum outside curb radius of 65 feet. Cul-de-sac circles shall be completely paved. 
S -24 
6.209 Curbs are mandatory in cases where a sidewalk adjoins a street. Curbs shall be vertical granite, and shall meet the current standards and specifications of the NH Department of Transportation. 
6.210 Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the subdivision boundaries and at all street intersections and points of curves. Monuments marking curves in the street right-of-way shall be stone or concrete. All other monuments may be fabricated of metal. 
6.220 Sidewalks shall meet NH DOT standards, except where stricter standards are set forth in this section. Sidewalks shall be of a material that is approved by the Planning Board, and shall be constructed to the following standards: 
Bituminous Sidewalks  
Gravel Base  8 inches  
Crushed Gravel  4 inches  
Binder Course  1 inch  
Finish Course  1 inch  
Portland Cement Sidewalks  
Gravel Base  8 inches  
Crushed Gravel  4 inches  
Wire Mesh  6 X 6 (W2.9 X W2.9)  
Thickness  4 inches  
Expansion Joints  Pre-formed Expansion Joint Filler  
All Sidewalks  
Width  5 feet  
Slope (to the sides)  1/8 inch per foot  

6.221 Sidewalk Construction Mandatory: Sidewalks shall be installed at the expense of the developer in all subdivisions. 
6.222 Vegetative Buffer: Where possible, the sidewalk shall be separated from adjoining roadways by a grassy strip no less than three feet in width. 
S -25 



Section 7 – Stormwater Management 
All stormwater management plans shall incorporate the following requirements and standards. 
7.010 Design Storm: The rate that storm water flows from the applicant's property onto an abutter's property after development shall not exceed the pre­development rate for the 2-year, 10-year, 50-year, and 100-year design storms. 
7.020 Water Quality: Stormwater infrastructure shall be designed to achieve 80% removal of total suspended solids, and 50% removal of both nitrogen and phosphorous, load as specified in the current edition of the NH Stormwater Manual. 
7.030 Grading: Lots shall be graded so that all buildings will have positive drainage away from the primary structure. 
7.040 LID: Low Impact Development (LID) stormwater practices including the use of green infrastructure (vegetation and trees). The design of structures must utilize specifications cited in the current edition of the NH DES Stormwater Manual: Volume 2, or other alternative satisfactory to the Planning Board. 
7.050 Vegetative Buffers: Utilize existing naturally vegetated and forested areas on site (buffers) as a stormwater best management practice including those from property lines and from surface waters and wetlands. Creation of buffers, consisting of native vegetation suitable for site conditions, can also be utilized for this purpose. 
7.060 Precipitation Data: Utilize new precipitation data from the Northeast Region Climate Data Center1 for the sizing and design of all stormwater management infrastructure and plans. 
7.070 Pervious Materials: Utilize to the maximum extent practicable pervious materials for sidewalks, walkways, other pedestrian use areas, and low traffic areas. 
7.080 Infrastructure Design Criteria: Provide water quality treatment, groundwater recharge, peak discharge and volume management to the specifications detailed in Table 7.0802. 
1 See http://precip.eas.cornell.edu 
2 NH DES Stormwater Manual: vol. 2 Post-Construction Best Management Practices Selection & 
Design (Dec. 2008) 

S -26 
Table 7.080 
Stormwater Design Criteria 
Design Criteria  Description  
Water QualityVolume (WQV)  WQV = (P)(Rv)(A)P = 1 inch of rainfall Rv = unitless runoff coefficient, Rv = 0.05 + 0.9(l)I = percent impervious cover draining to the structureconverted to decimal form A = total site area draining to the structure  
Water Quality Flow (WQF)  WQF = (qu)(WQV)WQV = water quality volume calculated in accordancewith Design Criteria above qu = unit peak discharge from TR-55 exhibits 4-II and 4-III Variables needed for exhibits 4-II and 4-III: Ia = the initial abstraction = 0.2S S = potential maximum retention in inches = (1000/CN) ­10 CN = water quality depth curve number= 1000/(10+5P+10Q-10[Q2+1.25(Q)(P)]0.5)P = 1 inch of rainfall Q = the water quality depth in inches = WQV/A A = total area draining to the design structure  
Groundwater Recharge Volume(GRV)  GRV = (Al)(Rd) Al = the total area of impervious surfaces that will exist on the site after development Rd = the groundwater recharge depth based on the USDA/NRCS hydrologic soil group, as follows: Hydrologic Group Rd (inches) A 0.40 B 0.25 C 0.10 D 0  
Channel Protection Volume (CPV)  If the 2-year, 24-hour post-development storm volume does not increase due to development then: control the 2-year, 24­hour post-development peak flow rate to the 2-year, 24-hourpredevelopment level. If the 2-year, 24-hour post-development storm volume does increase due to development then: controlthe 2-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate to ½ of the 2-year, 24-hour pre-development level or to the 1-year, 24­hour pre-development level.  

S -27 
Peak Control  Post-development peak discharge rates shall not exceed pre­development peak discharge rates for the 10-year and 50-year, 24-hour storms.  
Volume Control  Post-development total discharge volume from a site shall not exceed pre-development total discharge volume from a sitefor the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and 50-year, 24-hour storms. See additional volume control criteria for redevelopment in section 7.090.  
EIC and UDC  %EIC = area of effective impervious cover/total drainage areas within a project area x 100%UDC = area of undisturbed cover/total drainage area within a project area x 100  

7.090  Redevelopment: Stormwater management and treatment shall implement measures onsite that result in disconnection or treatment of at least 50% of the existing impervious cover as well as 100% of the additional proposed impervious surfaces and pavement areas through the application of LID. 
For redevelopment sites situated west of I-95, volume control shall be met to the maximum extent practicable based on soil conditions and the overall capacity of the site to infiltrate stormwater runoff. Infiltration practices must maintain the volume of aquifer recharge in the post-redeveloped condition equal to or greater than recharge achieved in the existing developed condition (e.g. the pre-redeveloped state). 
7.100 Redevelopment is defined as: 
•
Any construction, alteration, or improvement that disturbs a total of 5,000 square feet or more of existing impervious area where the existing land use is other than one or two family residential; 

•
External and internal building renovation is exempt from the stormwater standards; 

•
Removal of parking lot and roadway materials down to the erodible soil surface; 

• 
Resurfacing of a parking lot or roadway surface is exempt. 


S -28 



Section 8 – Planning Board Decision
Following acceptance of the application, the board shall begin formal consideration and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove within 65 days. 

Section 9 -Responsibilities After Plan Approval 
9.100  Applicant’s Responsibilities Prior to Construction 
9.101 A Performance Security may be required. The Planning Board shall determine whether a particular application should be accompanied by a construction security to ensure completion of the proposed improvements. The amount of any such security shall be determined by the Planning Board. The security shall be cash or a non-lapsing irrevocable letter of credit issued by a New Hampshire bank. Any such security shall be accompanied by a signed Site Security Agreement. Both documents are subject to Planning Board approval. A construction security and a site security agreement that is acceptable to the Town must be submitted prior to the recording of a mylar or the commencement of any construction activity that involves roadways or utilities. All construction securities shall be for a term of two years, and all project improvements shall be completed within two years of plan approval by the Planning Board. All security shall be self-calling, and shall be payable to the Town 30 days prior to the expiration of the security. 
9.102 Stipulations -All Planning Board stipulations and conditions of approval shall be incorporated as permanent provisions into all applicable deeds and shall be itemized on plans that are designed for recording. 
9.103 Recording -The mylar will not be signed until such time as the Planning Board staff is satisfied that all documents required by these regulations have been submitted in their entirety, and in proper form. The Planning Board’s representative will record all subdivision plans, and may record deeds and site plans, or portions thereof, as directed by the Planning Board. In the event that the Registry of Deeds declines to record a mylar, a $100 surcharge shall be levied for each subsequent attempt by Planning Board staff to record the mylar. 
9.104 A Pre-Construction Meeting shall be held between the contractor and Town officials designated by the Planning Board to discuss the proposed subdivision construction. A copy of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan 
S -29 
(SWPPP) and National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits shall be provided to the Department of Public Works, Code Enforcement Officer, and Planning Board prior to any activity on-site. The contractor shall ensure that a copy of the (SWPPP) required by the NPDES Construction Permit is on-site at all times. The contractor shall present the phasing of the work to implement said plan, and shall submit an anticipated work schedule, telephone numbers, and 24­hour emergency contact information. 
9.105 Revisions -Subsequent to Planning Board approval, changes to the proposed land development may be undertaken only after the applicant/ contractor and appropriate municipal department head(s) approve, sign, and submit a rough sketch and a written explanation to the Planning Board Office for technical review. The applicant shall submit one copy in digital .pdf format. Changes in the field require prior approval by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may determine that additional information and/or hearings are necessary. 
9.106 Expenses Incurred -Until such time as the applicant has reimbursed the Planning Board for all expenses associated with the application, the mylar will not be recorded, nor will a Certificate of Occupancy be issued. 
9.107 All drainage infrastructure shall be constructed prior to the sale of any lot. 

9.200  Applicant’s Responsibilities During Construction 
9.201 Construction Inspections -The construction of roads in subdivisions will be monitored by the Planning Board’s consulting engineer to ensure compliance with the approved plan. The applicant shall reimburse the Town for all engineering fees incurred for such monitoring. Activities to be monitored may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
• 	
removal of stumps and topsoil, the installation of utilities, and cuts & fills prior to the laying of the gravel base; 

• 	
placement of the gravel base and paving; 

• 	
installation of storm water control infrastructure and landscaping. 


It is the responsibility of the developer to coordinate with the Planning Board’s engineer for inspections. Copies of all inspection notes and sheets shall be submitted to the Planning Board and Code Enforcement Office. 
S -30 

9.300  Applicant’s Responsibilities After Construction 
9.301 Maintenance Security -Prior to the release date of the Construction Security, a two-year Maintenance Security shall take effect in order to guarantee repairs necessitated by defective construction or design.  The two-year Maintenance Security shall be in the amount of 10% of the Construction Security, and shall remain in effect for two years. The applicant may request an extension to the term of either security (construction or maintenance), said extension not to exceed one year. The Planning Board may grant said extension, if in the Planning Board's judgment, good cause is shown. 
9.302 Monumentation -A certificate of monumentation, stamped by a licensed land surveyor, shall be provided to the Planning Board prior to project closure except where a stamped plan certifies that the monuments have been set. 
9.303 As-Built Plans -The submission of as-built plans shall be considered a stipulation of approval for every subdivision approval granted by the Seabrook Planning Board. An as-built plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board immediately following completion of the project. As-built plans shall include a notation by the project designer certifying that the project has been substantially completed in a manner that is consistent with the approved plan. Two paper copies, one recordable mylar, and digital copies of the as-built plan shall be submitted. The digital copies shall be in .dwg and .pdf formats. The feature layers that are stored in each .dwg file shall be assigned a name that clearly identifies the feature. Required features are sanitary pipes, manholes, water pipes, hydrants, drainage, catch basins, edge of pavement, building footprints, wetlands, property lines, and easements. Legends shall also be included. All data shall be defined by the horizontal datum of the New Hampshire State Plane Coordinate System (NAD83) in units of feet, and the National American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD) in units of feet. 
9.304 Project Completion -Upon project completion, the project owner shall provide a letter to the Planning Board from a professional engineer certifying that the project is complete and in compliance with the approved plans. The Planning Board will initiate a final review of all project requirements, and if it is satisfactorily completed, will close the case. 
9.305 Street Acceptance -The approval of a final plan by the Board shall not be deemed an acceptance by the Town of any street or public way. Only the Board of Selectmen may formally accept a street on behalf of the Town. 
S -31 

9.400  Applicant’s Failure to Comply 
9.401 Expiration -Conditional approvals, consistent with NH RSA 676:41(I) shall expire 180 days after the date of said conditional approval if all conditions are not met, and the plan shall expire at that time. The applicant may request an extension for up to an additional 180 days by written request stating specific reason(s) for the extension to the Planning Board not less than 30 days prior to the original expiration date. The intent is to prevent premature applications being submitted and approved to facilitate exclusion from any future regulation changes, rather than readiness to carry out a plan. 
9.402 Revocation -The Planning Board reserves the right to revoke approval should the applicant fail to meet the terms of Planning Board approval, consistent with NH RSA 676:4-A. 


Section 10 – Administrative Provisions 
10.101 Higher standards to prevail -In any case where a provision of these regulations is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town of Seabrook existing on the effective date of these regulations, the provision which established the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the public health and safety shall prevail. 
10.102 Violations -Any person who conveys or agrees to convey any land by reference to a subdivision plan prior to acceptance of the requisite bond by the Seabrook Board of Selectmen and the recording of the requisite mylar at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, shall be punished by a fine of $1,000 for each lot conveyed or agreed to be conveyed, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The Town of Seabrook may enjoin such transfer or sale and may recover the said penalty by civil action. 
10.103 Amendments -These regulations may be amended when deemed advisable by the Board, following a duly noticed public hearing. 
10.104 Severability -The invalidity of any one of these regulations shall not be held to invalidate any other section. 
10.105 Appeals -An appeal may be taken from the decision of the Planning Board to the Superior Court, as provided in RSA 677. 
S -32 

Appendix A 

Inspection & Maintenance of Stormwater Infrastructure 
Notes to Guide Property Owners and for inclusion on the Maintenance and Operations Mylar 
The Inspection & Maintenance Plan outlines the regular inspection and cleaning schedule necessary to keep the system aesthetically pleasing, in good repair, and operating efficiently. It is a critical component for the success of the Stormwater Runoff Erosion Control Best Management Practices (BMP) designed for the proposed improvements on the site. 
Such controls reduce the types and concentrations of contaminates in stormwater runoff, that in turn, improve water quality. Source controls cover a wide range of practices, including local regulations, fertilizer management, reduced road salting in winter, erosion & sediment controls at construction sites, and comprehensive snow management. The guiding principle for pollution prevention and control is to minimize the volume of runoff and to minimize contact of stormwater with pollutants. Nonstructural practices can reduce these stormwater pollutant loads. 
The following source controls are included in the Inspection & Maintenance Plan: 
Sweeping – Street sweeping is an effective source control, and will be implemented on a regular basis. Sweeping efforts shall be conducted biannually, including the period following the winter snow melt when road sand and other accumulated sediments are washed off. 
Snow and Snow Melt Maintenance – Proper management of snow and melt, snow removal and storage, use of deicing compounds, and other practices can minimize major runoff and pollutant loading impacts. Use of alternative deicing compounds, such as calcium chloride and calcium magnesium acetate, designation of low site area on local roadways, and reducing the use of deicing compounds through better training, equipment calibration, and careful application, can be effectively utilized for comprehensive snow management. Storage of deicing compounds in sheltered and on impervious pads, and improved snow removal and storage techniques have further impacts on pollution reduction. 
S -33 
Deep Sump/Hood Catch Basins – Deep sump/hood catch basins are incorporated in the proposed development’s stormwater management plan as pre-treatment for the proposed constructed wetland. The sump provides for the settlement of suspended solids, and a hood is provided to remove floatables and trapped hydrocarbons. It is not anticipated that the proposed roadways will become an area of high sediment loading. The sump should be inspected and cleaned at least two times per year, the more frequently the cleaning, the less likely sediment will be re-suspended and subsequently discharged. Catch basin sediments and debris shall be disposed of at an approved NHDES location. The property owner shall be responsible for the catch basin cleaning operations. 
Constructed Wetlands – A constructed wetland is included in the stormwater management plan design for the proposed development. The property owner shall incorporate this sediment control feature into the project during construction activities. Upon completion of development, the property owner shall be responsible for proper maintenance and upkeep of the wetland. To ensure proper performance and system longevity, the following maintenance schedule is recommended: 
a) Sediment & Debris Removal -The wetland should be inspected twice a year by a certified wetland scientist during both growing and non-growing seasons, in the first three years after construction. Observations during inspections should include: 
i) Types & distribution of dominant wetland plants in the wetland; 
ii) The presence & distribution of planted wetland species versus the presence & distribution of natural wetland species, and any signs that natural species are overtaking planted species; 
iii) Accumulation of sediment in the forebay and micro-pool. Any sediment and debris should be removed manually before the vegetation is adversely impacted. 
b) Wetland Protection – Efforts should be made, through snow and snow melt management, local regulations, and public education, to protect the wetland from damages of snow removal and off-street parking. 
Maintenance for the following types of activities shall be included in the Operations & Maintenance Plan: 
a) Lawn & Landscaping Activities -All grass and landscape clippings shall be disposed of off-site and in conformance with state and local regulations. 
S -34 
b) Pesticide & Fertilizers shall be stored in a dry, covered storage area and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion. Use, application rates, and disposal shall be in strict conformance with manufacturer recommendations and federal, state, and local regulations. Any spills shall be promptly cleaned up. 
c) Pet Waste shall be immediately removed from public areas. Disposal shall be in accordance with state and local regulations. 
Best Management Practices – The property owner shall adhere to the Best Management Practices (BMP) cited in the NH Stormwater Manual, on file at NH Department of Environmental Services. 
S -35 
S -36 



Site Plan Review 
Regulations 

1 Authority & Purpose SP-3 2 Scope of Review SP-3 3 Fees SP-4 4 Procedure SP-5 5 Required Exhibits & Data SP-7 6 Financial Guarantees SP-8 7 Site Approval Expiration SP-8 8 Review Standards SP-9 9 Lighting SP-11 10 Off-Site Impacts SP-12 11 Parking SP-15 12 Condominium Conversion SP-16 13 Landscaping SP-17 14 Smithtown Development Standards SP-35 15 Spill Prevention & Countermeasures SP-57 
Site Plan Review Regulations 

Section 1 -Authority & Purpose
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Town of Seabrook Planning Board by Town Meeting, and in accordance with the provisions RSA 674:43-44, the Seabrook Planning Board hereby adopts the following regulations governing the review of site plans. The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to promote balanced growth, and to ensure positive environmental development in accordance with the Seabrook Master Plan. 

Section 2 -Scope of Review
The development, expansion, or change of use of property for nonresidential use, multi-family dwelling units, or condominium conversion, or excavation which results in the ponding of water shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board. A change of use sufficient to invoke Planning Board jurisdiction is: 
• 
The change of one type of use to another, e.g. retail to restaurant; or 

• 
Any use proposed for vacant land or buildings. 


Should a use cease for one year, any subsequent use shall be subject to site plan review. 

Section 3 -Fees 
3.100 Standard Site Plan Review: The application fee for site plan review is $300 + $100 per every 1,000 square feet of net increase in impervious surface. For purposes of determining the appropriate application fee, the plans shall identify and measure the area of net increase in impervious surface, including, but not limited to, buildings, parking, landscaping, woodlands, and wetlands. 
3.200  Low Impact: The fee for Low Impact Proposals (see Section 4 below) applications is $300. No impacted area or public notice fees are due. 
3.300 Condominium Conversion: The application fee is $300 plus $100 per condominium unit. 
3.400 Conditional Use Permits: The application fee is $100. No public notice fee is required. 
3.500 Amended Site Plans: In those instances in which an applicant seeks to amend an approved site plan less than one year after Planning Board’s vote to approve, and in which the proposed amendment impacts less than 10% of the approved site plan impact area, the applicant will pay one hundred percent (100%) of the Town’s expenses to review the plan, as determined by the Planning Board, and will submit an application fee in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the original site plan application fee. 
3.600 Additional Fees specified in Section 4 of the Subdivision Regulations apply to all applications unless otherwise noted herein. 

Section 4 -Site Plan Review Procedure 
shall be the same as that required by the Seabrook Subdivision Regulations for subdivision review, including provisions relative to abutter notification, public notice, administration; the submittal of site security, exhibits, data, standards, project revisions & as-built plans; the depiction of dimensions, parking, signs, lighting, site features & vegetation; and stormwater standards & requirements. The meanings of terms in the Seabrook Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations apply also to these regulations. 
4.100 Low Impact Proposal: Notwithstanding the foregoing, in those cases in which Code Enforcement and/or Town Planner determines that a site plan proposal meets all of the following criteria: 
• 	
No discernible impact on abutters; 

• 	
No adverse impact on the public or the environment; 

• 	
No building expansion; 

• 	
No increase in intensity of use; 

• 	
No increase in traffic impact; 

• 	
No condominium conversion, subdivision, or lot line adjustment; 

• 	
No changes to stormwater flow or utilities; 

• 	
It is the site of a previously approved site plan; 

• 	
No review by the Technical Review Committee is warranted; 

• 	
No change to lighting or signage; 


then the proposal may qualify as a Low Impact Proposal, consistent with RSA 
676:4 III. Abutters shall be notified pursuant to RSA 676:4. Publication of the notice shall not be required, nor shall review by the Technical Review Committee be required. The Planning Board reserves the right to determine that the proposal does not qualify as a Low Impact Proposal. Required exhibits for Low Impact Proposals are as follows: 
• 	
Name of applicant, site address, and business address; 

• 	
Name of property owner and address; 

• 	
Case number(s) of prior site plan approvals; 

• 	
All lot, building, driveway, and parking dimensions; 

• 	
Location of lighting, signage, vegetation and other site features; 

• 	
Wetlands locations; 

• 	
Abutter names and locations shown on drawing; 

• 	
North arrow; 

• 	
Street names clearly shown; 

• 	
Location of Liberty Elm if planted, or new location if not already planted; 

• 	
Aerial photos and hand drawings are acceptable if they include all of the above; 

• 	
Applications should include 14 copies – if color is used, all copies must 


show colors. 
4.200 Conditional Use Permits: Abutters shall be notified pursuant to RSA 
676:4. Publication of a public notice shall not be required, nor shall review by the Technical Review Committee be required. In determining the merits of an application for Conditional Use, the Planning Board will be guided by the criteria specified in Section 8 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
4.300 Home Offices: No abutter notification or Planning Board review is required. Applicants for Home Office use shall file an application with the Building Department. 
4.400 Special Events: No abutter notification or Planning Board review is required. Applicants for a Special Event shall file an application with the Building Department. At the Building Inspector’s discretion, the proposal may be forwarded to the Board of Selectmen for review and approval. 


Section 5 -Additional Exhibits & Data Required For Site Plan Review 
The applicant shall submit the following exhibits and data, in addition to those required for a subdivision application by the Subdivision Regulations, unless such submittal is specifically waived by the Board: 
5.010 Copies of all applicable State & Federal Permits; 
5.020 Elevation views of all buildings; 
5.030 The stamp or seal of a Licensed Landscape Architect pursuant to RSA 310-A:152. 
5.040 A copy of the certification from a qualified inspector, pursuant to NH RSA 155-A and NH RSA 285, that the project meets the accessibility standards in the State Building Code. 
5.050 The location, size and design of proposed signs, outside lighting & other advertising devices; 

5.100 Lighting Specifications: 
5.110 Description of all Outdoor Lighting Fixtures including component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff, support poles, additional shields, etc. Include the manufacturers catalog cut or specification sheet for each type of fixture used. 
5.120 Location and description of every outdoor lighting fixture including hours of operation. 
5.130 The maintained horizontal luminance shown as foot-candles (after depreciation) as follows: 

5.131 Maximum 
5.132 Minimum 
5.133 Average during operating and non-operating hours 
5.134 Average to Minimum Uniformity Ration. 
5.140 Computer generated photometric grid of the site showing the average foot-candle reading in every ten-foot square. This grid shall include contribution from all sources, (i.e., Pole mounted lights, wall mounted lights and signs). 

5.150 Foundation and pole details. 
5.200 The site plan shall meet the recording requirements of the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 


Section 6 – Site Security
The applicant shall submit a site security to ensure that proposed improvements are completed properly and in a timely fashion. The amount of the site security shall be determined by the Planning Board, however, the security amount shall be at least $5,000. 

Section 7 -Site Approval Expiration
In the event that construction is not completed within two years of the date that Site Approval is granted by the Planning Board, the Site Approval shall expire, unless extended by vote of the Planning Board. Site approval shall also expire upon a subsequent site plan approval by the Planning Board for a project on the same site. 

Section 8 -Site Plan Review Standards 
While reviewing a final plan, the Board shall consider the following general requirements and design standards: 
8.010 Detrimental Effects To Be Minimized: Plans shall be reviewed in order to minimize traffic congestion, traffic hazards, unsightliness, annoyance to other land users, erosion and other effects detrimental to the abutters, the neighborhood and the environment. 
8.020 Off-Street Loading: Sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided, including off-street areas for maneuvering the anticipated trucks or other vehicles. 
8.030 Erosion Control: Grading, paving and storm drainage systems shall be installed in such a manner as to prevent erosion or sedimentation of streams or damage to abutting properties. Required hay bales and silt fences shall remain in place and will be maintained for a minimum of 24 months. The utilization of wood chips to control erosion is acceptable, as are bales of salt marsh hay. All other hay bales are prohibited due to their propensity to introduce invasive species. 
8.040 Pollution Control: Oil/water separators shall be installed where the Planning Board deems such installation to be necessary. 
8.050 Local Codes: All fire and safety codes adopted by the Town of Seabrook shall be adhered to. 
8.060 Sewer: Sanitary waste facilities in new buildings shall be connected to the municipal sewer system. 
8.070 Truck Operations to be Restricted in Residential Areas: The applicant shall ensure that truck traffic, the unloading of dumpsters, and the operation of refrigeration trucks will not occur in residential areas between the hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM.   
8.080 Sidewalk Construction Mandatory: Sidewalks shall be installed at the expense of the developer in all locations that, in the judgment of the Planning Board, will enhance the safe and efficient movement of pedestrians. Sidewalks in Zone 2 shall be fabricated of Portland Cement and shall meet the minimum construction standards specified for such sidewalks in the Subdivision Regulations. 
8.090 Curbing Mandatory: Curbs shall be vertical granite, and shall meet the current standards and specifications of the NH Department of Transportation.  Curbs shall be installed at all roadway curb-cuts, at corners, and at other locations deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. 
8.100 Elms: At least one disease-resistant elm tree shall be planted on-site. Additional elm trees shall be planted no closer than 150 feet to another elm tree. The aforementioned liberty elms shall be a minimum of 1.5" in diameter. 
8.110 Noise: All external machinery shall be muffled so that noise will not be discernible at the perimeter of the lot. At locations where a commercial or industrial proposal abuts a residential use situated within a residential district, the applicant for commercial/industrial use shall construct an acoustical barrier wall to specifications determined by the Planning Board. 
8.120 Loam: For new connections to the municipal water system, all proposed lawn areas shall by underlain by 6 inches of loam. 
8.130 All Standards and requirements cited in Section 6 of the Subdivision Regulations shall apply to site plan review. 
8.140 Storage: There shall be no outside storage of flammable or hazardous gases, liquids, or materials over 2,000 gallons aggregate. Utilities for heating a building or motor vehicle fueling station are exempt from this regulation. 
8.150 Green Roofs – Buildings with flat roofs, or roofs sloped less than 10 degrees, in excess of 50,000 square feet shall be constructed as a green roof for the benefit of the environment. 
8.160 LEED -The Planning Board encourages building designs that comply with LEED (Low Energy & Environmental Design) standards. 
8.170 Salt Management: Within the bounds of the Aquifer Protection District, use of road salt shall be minimized and Best Management Practices shall be observed. 

Section 9 -Lighting 
All lighting fixtures shall meet the following standards: 
9.010 Shielding: In order to minimize light trespass and direct glare beyond the site boundary, all outdoor light fixtures shall be fully shielded. This includes Wall Pack Style Fixture. 
9.015 Type: Pole mounted Outdoor Light Fixture shall be Shoe Box Style. Shoe Box Style Fixtures with Sag Glass Lens and pole mounted flood or spot lights are prohibited. 
9.020 Height: Pole mounted lighting fixture are limited to 20 feet in height above ground inclusive of the foundation height. 
9.025 Abutters: Outdoors lighting systems shall be designed such that direct glare is not observable above a height of five feet at the site boundary. Designers are cautioned that this may require shorter poles at perimeter locations depending upon the fixture angle of cut off. 
9.030 Ornamental Lighting and lighting fixtures used to illuminate landscaping or buildings are prohibited except those that will project light equal to or less than incandescent fixture of 100 watts. 
9.035 Signs: Lighting fixture used to illuminate outdoor signs shall be subject to the direct glare restriction of section 9.010 and shall be fully shielded. 
9.040 Specifications: All outdoor lighting systems shall be designed as not to exceed the following Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) recommended luminance levels: 
Horizontal Illuminance (Foot candles) 
Average  Minimum  Uniformity Ratio  
Shopping Centers, Restaurants, Offices, during Operational Hours  2.4  0.9  4/1  
Industrial employee parking and other sites during non-operational hours  0.8  0.2  6/1  
All sites under all operating conditions when measured ten feet from the property line on abutting properties  0.1  N/A  N/A  

Note: These levels do not apply under service station canopies or awnings at building entrances, however all lights shall be fully shielded or fully recessed into the canopy or awning to meet the direct glare design requirement of section D. 
9.045 Hours: All outdoor lighting systems shall be equipped with timers to reduce illumination levels to non-operational levels at a minimum during non­operational hours. 
9.050 Illuminated Signs shall be equipped with timers to extinguish signs during non-operational hours. 
9.055 Nonconforming Outdoor Lighting Fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this section are exempt from the provisions of this section, provided however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of Outdoor Lighting Fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this section. 

Section 10 – Off-Site Impacts of Development 
10.005 Authority & Purpose: Pursuant to NH RSA 674:21 & 674:44, land developers may be required to pay an exaction for the cost of off-site improvements that are determined by the Planning Board to be necessary for the occupancy of any portion of a new development. The exaction is intended to be a proportional share of public infrastructure improvement costs, and one that is reasonably related to the benefits accruing to the development from the improvements financed by the exaction. 
10.010 Infrastructure Improvements shall be limited to the transportation network, stormwater treatment and drainage, culvert upgrades, and sewer and water upgrades, as determined by the Planning Board. 
10.015 Traffic Volume: Land development or redevelopment shall be assessed an exaction fee for the cost of public infrastructure improvements. Traffic volumes produced by prior occupants of the site shall not be factored into the threshold calculations. 
10.017 Trip Defined: Each vehicle that enters the property shall be considered one trip. When that vehicle exits the property, it shall be considered a second trip. 
10.020 The Calculation of Vehicle Trips shall be determined by the table below. In the event that a proposed use is not listed in the table, then trips shall derive from the latest edition of the ITE Trip Generation Manual, or from actual traffic counts at comparable facilities. In the event that more than one methodology is employed, the higher trip count will be utilized. 
Use1  Trips/1,000 square feet  
General Office  1.5  
Medical or Dental Office  3.5  
Retail  5.0  
Supermarkets & Convenience Stores w/o fuel pumps (Includes combination food market and general retail, e.g. Walmart with supermarket)  9.5  
Convenience store & auto repair shop with fuel pumps  50 trips/1,000 sf, or 13.5 trips per fueling station, whichever is greater  
Bank with drive-thru  25.0  
Restaurant w/o drive-thru  10.0  
Restaurant with drive-thru  40.0  
Auto care center without fuel pumps  5.0  
Car Wash  10.0  

10.035 Improvements Identified: The necessary improvements shall be determined solely by the Planning Board. 
10.040 Exaction Formula for New Development: For new development projects that utilize US Route 1 for access or egress, the exaction fee amount will be calculated by determining the peak-hour site generated trips pursuant to Section 10.020 above, then deducting 50 trips from that total, and then multiplying the result by $1,200.2 The term “New Development” refers to the construction of new facilities or an addition to existing facilities. 
10.041 Minimum Exaction: The exaction fee for new development shall be a minimum of $5,000. 
1 Retail malls shall be split into their component uses. 
2 This figure is derived from an exhaustive and comprehensive analysis of the Route 1 corridor 
conducted by Resource Systems Group, Inc. 

10.042 Exaction Formula for Redevelopment & Reoccupation: The exaction fee cited in Section 10.040 above may be adjusted as shown in the schedule below. The term “Redevelopment” refers to alterations to developed land and to the exterior of buildings. The term “Reoccupation” refers to the reuse of existing commercial facilities in which no changes are made to the type of use, building exterior, or size of buildings. 
Vacant for less than one year 0% of new development exaction fee 
Vacant for 1 to 3 years 25% of new development exaction fee 
Vacant for over 3 years 50% of new development exaction fee 

10.042 Credits: The Planning Board, at its sole discretion, may credit the applicant for up to 50% of the fair market value of land donations that would facilitate future improvements along US Route 1 in Seabrook. Improvements required by the NH Department of Transportation shall not be credited toward the exaction required by the Planning Board. 
10.045 Planning Board Costs: The applicant shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred by the Planning Board’s traffic consultants. 
10.050 Payment Due: The exaction fee shall be paid by the developer prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
10.055 Escrow: Any exaction collected by the Planning Board shall be held by the Town of Seabrook in an interest-bearing escrow account. 
10.060 Project Construction: As an alternative to paying an exaction, the developer may elect to construct the necessary improvements, subject to the posting of a financial security that is acceptable to the Planning Board. 
10.065 Refunds: Any exaction collected by the Planning Board shall be refunded if the funds have not been appropriated for their dedicated purpose within six years of the date of collection. 
10.070 Donations: At the discretion of the Planning Board, in lieu of submitting an exaction fee, the applicant may elect to make a donation amounting to 90% of the exaction fee. A donation shall be utilized for the same purposes as an exaction fee or for other transportation related projects along the Route 1 corridor identified by the Planning Board in the Master Plan, however unlike the fee, a donation would not be subject to refund pursuant to Section 10.065 above. 

Section 11 -Parking Requirements 
11.010 Parking Spaces: No structure shall be erected nor shall any non­residential land use be established unless appropriate off-street parking and loading space is provided. The number of off-street parking spaces shall conform to the limits specified in the following table: 
Type of Use  Maximum # of Spaces  Minimum # of Spaces  
Eating & Drinking Establishments  1 space for every 4 seats  0  
Manufacturing Facility  1 space per 500 square feet of floor area  0  
Motels and Hotels  1 space for every sleeping room  0  
Offices  1 space per 250 square feet of floor area  0  
Places of Public Assembly  1 space for every 5 seats  0  
Retail Business  1 space per 250 square feet of floor area  0  

If no standard is specified in these regulations, parking requirements will be at the discretion of the Planning Board. The Planning Board may require variation to these standards if in the board’s judgment, circumstances warrant such variation. 
11.020 Parking Dimensions: Every parking space shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width, and 18 feet in length. Parking lot travel lanes shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width if a herringbone configuration is utilized. Otherwise the travel lanes shall be and a maximum of 24 feet in width. 
11.030 Pavement: Parking and loading areas shall be paved, if required by the Planning Board. Parking lots shall be designed in such a manner so as to minimize the construction of impervious surface area. For that reason, a herringbone parking alignment is preferred 
11.040 Parking Location: All parking shall be located on-site, or alternately, a permanent easement may be recorded for alternative parking off-site, so long as the off-site property’s potential for expansion is not hindered. Parking is encouraged to be in the rear. 

Section 12 -Condominium Conversion 
As used in this section, "Condominium Conversion" shall have the following meaning: The placing or conversion of real property or any interest therein presently under a developed use into the condominium form of ownership pursuant to RSA 356-B. Such conversions must be approved, in advance, by the Seabrook Planning Board. In addition to the requirements specified in these Site Plan Review Regulations for site plan review, applications for condominium conversion must meet the following additional requirements: 
12.010 Documents: A complete set of site plans and floor plans, as well as a complete set of all Condominium documents must be filed with the Planning Board. The applicant’s attorney shall certify that all condominium documents are consistent with the Seabrook Zoning Ordinance and with the requirements of RSA 356-B. 
12.020 Utilities: A plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board showing the location of all utilities on the site, and the plan shall indicate the locations where the shutoff valves will be located for each unit.  The plan shall indicate whether or not additional meters or additional lines from the street will be required as a result of the condominium conversion. Shut-off valves shall be located on Town-owned property or in a Town-owned right-of-way.  Proposed underground utilities shall provide two four-inch ducts for use of the municipality and all overhead poles shall provide space for the use of the municipality at the subdivider’s expense. The responsibility for maintenance, operation, replacement and protection of utilities shall be clearly established by the Condominium agreement. 
12.030 Legal Status: The units which are subject to the requests for condominium conversion must, at the time of the request, exist as legal units pursuant to the ordinances of the Town of Seabrook. The burden shall be on the petitioner to demonstrate that the units to be converted are legal.  
12.040 Wetland Protection: In order for the Condominium Conversion Regulations to be consistent with Section 14 of the Zoning Ordinance, no proposed Limited Common Area shall be allocated a disproportionate share of a lot’s wetlands. 
12.060 Subsequent Revisions: Prior to the construction of buildings or infrastructure in any location other than that which was approved, the property owners must first obtain Planning Board approval. 
12.070 The Access/Egress of other property owners shall not be obstructed. 

12.080 Parking: The application shall include a master plan to allocate all parking on-site. 
12.090 Stormwater Drainage: The long-term responsibility for maintenance must be clearly defined, and binding commitments made by the developer, and a mechanism established to bind successors in title. 


Section 13 – Landscaping 
Purpose of Landscape Design Standards: The existing landscape of Seabrook is diverse, containing natural wooded environments, open fields, as well as marsh, wetlands and streams. New development should be respectful and sensitive to the dominant landscape character of the town as a whole. Landscaping should result in attractive natural areas, outdoor spaces and open space that incorporate high quality design and maintenance, buffering and screening, and support native wildlife. The purpose of landscaping design standards in Seabrook is to: 
13.005 Preserve and enhance the character of Seabrook’s landscape and implement goals and objectives of the Master Plan. 
13.010 Provide attractive settings for new development, which promotes aesthetically pleasing relationship of scale between buildings and their natural surroundings. 
13.015 Preserve and enhance local and regional open space resources. 
13.020 Support and encourage the use of sustainable design principles and operating practices that preserve and enhance wildlife habitats, water quality, and overall health of the natural environment. 
13.025 Encourage the use of indigenous plant material to provide natural habitat and food sources and to maintain ecological diversity. 
13.030 Retain mature vegetation in place or transplant and reuse it on site to the greatest extent feasible and reinforce the visual image of Seabrook through the planting of shade trees along roadways and access ways. 
13.035 Enhance the visual impact of public spaces and promote “pedestrian friendly” environments by defining pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
13.040 Offer adequate buffering between abutting parcels and land uses to protect neighboring properties and zoning districts from potentially adverse impacts of structures, lighting glare, noise, wind velocities, and odors and incompatible uses. 
13.045 Provide visual relief and mitigate the “heat island affect” from broad expanses of pavement. 
13.050 Maintain natural drainage pathways and hydrologic processes and facilitate the reintegration of stormwater run-off on the site. 
Landscaping Design Standards:  These landscaping design standards shall apply to parcels and lots of greater than one (1) acre. Parcels and lots of one (1) acre or less are exempted from these standards but shall comply with the recommendations contained in the guidance document ‘Landscaping Standards for Small Parcels and Lots in the Town of Seabrook’. 

13.100 General Requirements 
Site Landscape Design 
13.105 All applications for Site Plan Review or Subdivision shall be accompanied by a landscape plan that is stamped and signed by a licensed landscape architect. 
13.110 All required landscaping shall be located entirely within the lot or parcel, unless agreements have been made with the Town for landscaping in the road right-of-way. Landscaping and screening must be provided with proper regard to adjacent properties, the public road and right of way, and within the site, including interior landscaping of parking areas. 
13.115 The proposed landscape design must be sensitive to any well-executed and maintained adjoining property landscape design. The landscape design, as submitted to the Planning Board, shall indicate prominent landscape elements on adjoining properties within 25 feet abutting the subject site. 
13.120 Landscaping shall be designed and maintained so that it does not interfere with sight distances for driveways and roadways. 
13.125 Buildings, parking areas, loading docks, access roads, and other structural elements shall be sited to preserve existing healthy mature vegetation and maintain natural topography to the maximum extent feasible. 
13.130 Landscaping shall be laid out in informal natural groupings rather than formal rows and shall be compatible with site topography. Individual clusters of trees or islands of shrub beds are acceptable. Linear solutions shall be avoided wherever possible. Refer to Figure 13.1 for examples. 
13.135 A variety of plant species shall be used to assemble new landscaping masses. Refer to Figure 13.1 for examples. 
13.135.1 	Create visual depth in plant massing by layering plants of various textures, sizes, heights and colors. 
13.135.2 	Include flowering or fruiting species for color, interest and wildlife habitat where appropriate. 
13.135.3 	Maintain landscaping coverage and mass year round by incorporating seasonal plantings. 

Plan View of Informal Grouping 


Elevation View of Informal Grouping 

13.140 Use plantings to enhance the relationship of buildings to their surroundings. 
13.140.1 	Layered plantings soften edges and corners and reduce the scale of buildings in the landscape. 
13.140.2 	Masses of trees and vegetation near buildings reduce the perceived scale of buildings and set them into the landscape. 
13.140.3 	Consider plant massing along with architectural massing during the design process. 
13.140.4 	Balance the mass, proportion and rhythm of landscape and building elements. 
13.145 Rainwater storage and stormwater ruqVHZWff shall be directed to irrigate landscaped areas, lawn and turf. 
Planting and Material Specifications 
13.150 Plants shall be selected for their ability to thrive in the environmental conditions of the site and for their ability to achieve a desired effect. In addition: 
13.150.1 The use of native plant varieties or the cultivars of natives is encouraged. 
13.150.2 Plants shall be installed in contiguous densely planted beds so as to appear more natural. 
13.150.3 Plant varieties shall be selected to ensure long-term survival. 
13.150.4 Plant varieties shall be selected so as to reduce long-term maintenance. 
13.150.5 Landscaping shall consist of native drought resistant plants, shrubs and trees. 
13.155 Under no circumstances shall any plants be used that are recognized by the State of New Hampshire Department of Agriculture as invasive. 
13.160 All plant material shall have a minimum winter hardiness for Zone 5B as determined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
13.165 Minimum sizes for plant material for new or replacement plantings, unless indicated elsewhere in these regulations or the Zoning Ordinance, shall be as follows: 
13.165.1 Deciduous shade trees: three-inch caliper, 
1.165.2 Deciduous ornamental trees: two-inch caliper, 

13.165.3 Evergreen trees: six-foot height, and 
13.165.4  Evergreen and Deciduous Shrubs: 5-gallon container. 
13.170 Sizing and measuring shall be governed as defined in the publication American Standard for Nursery Stock (2004, as amended) by the American Nursery & Landscape Association (available at www.anla.org). 
13.175 Plant material located within 20 feet of any road or other paved area shall consist of only those plants tolerant of roadway deicing salts and snow/ice conditions. 
13.180 Landscaping shall be maintained in healthy condition. If within two years from the date of installation any plant is in a deteriorating state or is dead, it shall be replaced in kind in a timely manner. 
13.185 Lawn area shall be minimized, as most lawn grasses require supplemental irrigation and regular applications of fertilizer to stay green. Where lawn is necessary fescues and other drought tolerant and native species are recommended. 
13.190 Existing mature trees and vegetation shall be integrated with the landscape plan with the goal of preserving the function of existing vegetation, such as groves of trees that separate land uses or provide a natural backdrop for development. 
13.195 Refer to the list of preferred and recommended plant species including a list of drought and salt tolerant species. 


13.200 Preservation of Existing Vegetation 
The purpose of this section is to provide incentives to retain and utilize existing vegetation to satisfy landscaping requirements whenever possible. 
Evaluation of Existing Conditions 
13.205 For parcels and lots of greater than one acre, the applicant shall provide a tree survey performed by a licensed land surveyor, arborist, forester, or landscape architect. The plan shall clearly indicate forest type and the location, species of all existing trees 6 inch DBH (diameter at breast height) or greater on the site. The survey shall identify (1) all existing shade and ornamental trees that may have been part of a prior landscape scheme and (2) the location, average size and species of groves of trees, and of individual trees greater than 16 inch DBH selected for preservation to fulfill landscaping requirements on the site. 
13.210 Healthy trees with a minimum 6-inch caliper and existing wooded areas are recommended for preferential preservation, particularly those trees adjacent to existing or proposed roadways and driveways, and within setback areas where buildings cannot be constructed. Such trees shall be inventoried and shown on an Existing Conditions Plan. 
13.215 The applicant may request that the Planning Board or their designated professional landscape consultant determine whether existing vegetation is suitably located, sufficiently dense, and vigorous enough to be substituted in lieu of new planting required by these regulations. 
On-Site Preservation Requirements 
13.220 Construction activities and site alterations shall not disturb the root zone of the trees designated for preservation (refer to #2 above). No storage of construction equipment, digging, trenching, or other soil disturbance shall be permitted within drip-line of trees to be preserved. Areas of preserved plant material shall not be used as drainage areas or temporary runoff storage areas during construction. 
13.225 Prior to the onset of any construction including site preparation work, the applicant shall install and maintain tree protection fencing, or other protective measures approved by the Planning Board, located 12 inches beyond the drip-line of the trees to be protected. All no-cut and no-disturb zones shall be appropriately monumented and delineated on the site plan. Prior to construction, the town or its designee shall inspect all installed protective barriers. Protective barriers and signage shall remain in place until completion of the project. 
13.230 The developer shall be responsible for making all contractors aware of preservation requirements on the site prior to any construction activities. 
13.235 Trees or groups of trees to be preserved shall be inspected and approved by the town’s designee and shall be clearly identified on the Site Plan, Subdivision Plat, Landscape Plan and Grading Plan. 
13.240 The applicant shall be responsible to replace any trees designated to remain, which have been damaged, killed, or removed as a result of construction activities. The Planning Board may require replacement in-kind, per caliper inch of deciduous trees and by height for evergreens. For example, if a 24-inch caliper deciduous tree is damaged or killed during construction, the applicant shall replace the tree with six 4-inch caliper trees, or any other combination that adds up to 24 caliper inches. A 36-foot tall evergreen, for example shall be replaced with six 6-foot-tall evergreen, or any other combination adding up to 36 feet. 

13.300 Buffers and Screening 
The purpose of this section is to provide detailed specifications for the composition, design and placement of buffers and screening, particularly with respect to mitigating negative impacts of non-residential uses on adjacent residential uses, adequate separation of uses, and creation of landscaped areas for public use and enjoyment. 
13.305 Buffers shall be a year-round visually barrier that may be composed of existing vegetation, constructed landscaping, or a combination thereof. Buffers shall meet the following standards. Refer to Figure 13.2 for examples. 
13.305.1 Buffer areas shall be comprised of existing trees and vegetation, new landscaping or a combination thereof to create a dense buffer incorporating a variety of species of understory and tree canopy layers. 
13.305.2 The use of existing vegetation, topography, and natural features to comply with screening requirements is encouraged. 
13.305.3 Screens shall not be located so as to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
1.305.4 Where appropriate, existing healthy trees and vegetation must be incorporated into the buffer strips and overall landscape design. 
13.310 Where a non-residential use abuts a residential property, activity on the subject property shall be buffered to a reasonable level from the adjacent residential property by appropriate landscaping, including the use of plant materials, and/or existing natural vegetation. Fencing alone is not considered an acceptable method of buffering. 
13.315 A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscaped buffer, or more if required by the Planning Board, must be provided where a proposed non-residential development abuts residential properties. Vegetative buffers shall achieve a minimum of 75 percent vertical opacity to a height of six (6) feet, year-round, within one year of installation. Refer to examples in Figure 13-2. 
10-foot Buffer plan view and elevation view 

13.320 For non-residential and mixed uses, a minimum ten (10) foot wide 

landscaped buffer, including shade trees, shall be provided along the full length of the side and rear property lines, excluding driveways and other access ways. The landscaped buffer shall be designed to accommodate space for public access and use by incorporating elements such as seating, paths and/or walkways. 
13.325 Screening is required to soften the visual impact of high intensity uses such as buildings, parking areas, loading docks, trash disposal areas, exterior storage, and other high intensity use areas associated with or generated by a particular development as viewed from a public right-of-way, residential zoning district, and the principal entrances of buildings on abutting properties. Screening shall meet the following standards. 
13.325.1 Screens may consist of existing natural topographic landforms, rock outcrops, or vegetation that is dense enough to be visually impermeable. 
13.325.2  Vegetative screens shall achieve a minimum of 75 percent vertical opacity to a height of six (6) feet, year-round, within one year of installation. 
13.325.3 Constructed screens may consist of any combination of built screens, such as walls or fences, topographic screens, such as berms or landforms, and vegetative screens consisting of primarily evergreen material. 
13.330 The following site design practices shall be applied to screening of high intensity use areas: 
13.330.1 Locate storage/stockpile areas out of view of public or in a screened area and with a fenced enclosure. 
13.330.2 Locate loading docks and receiving areas out of view or in a screened area. 
13.330.3 An enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the principal structure may be substituted for screening requirements. 
13.400 Street and Internal Access Road Landscape Strips The purpose of the street landscape strip is to provide separation of the roadway from adjacent uses, visual appeal, shading and green space. Street landscape 
strips shall comply with the following standards. Refer to Figure 13.3 for examples. 
13.405 Consisting of a minimum 15 feet width (depth of planting area as measured perpendicularly from the right of way). 
13.410 Minimum one tree per 40’ frontage; trees shall be planted within 15 feet from the front lot line and spaced no more than 30 feet apart. 
13.415 Trees shall not interfere with buildings, overhead utilities, pedestrian travel, or access to on-street parking spaces. 
13.420 Minimum tree height equal to one half the proposed building height (or average building height if more than one building on a site). 
13.425 Consist of groupings of deciduous and/or evergreen trees, shrubs, and groundcover. 

13.500 Parking Areas Parking area landscaping areas shall provide the following: mitigate the visual impact of a broad expanse of pavement through careful placement of trees and other vegetation, shade impervious surfaces, walkways for pedestrian access, 
green space, and opportunity for implementation of stormwater management best management practices. Refer to Figure 13-4 for examples. 
13.505 Landscaping shall be incorporated into the development of surface parking to reduce adverse environmental and aesthetic impacts, to shade pavement to reduce heat island effect and to screen parking areas from public view. 
13.510 There shall be landscaped open space within the interior of parking areas in the minimum amount of 20 percent of the gross interior parking area, exclusive of perimeter landscaping. 
13.515 The perimeter of parking areas shall have a 10-foot-wide landscape buffer, while maintaining clear sight lines, to soften visual and noise impacts and reduce interior temperatures of the parking area. 
13.520 Planting islands should be used to define vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns, to break up large expanses of pavement and to facilitate site drainage. In general, planting islands should be distributed throughout the parking lot. A combination of end cap islands and linear islands running parallel to parking rows are preferred. Islands should be densely planted and shall be designed to absorb ruqVHZWff from the parking areas. 
13.525 Divider islands shall be: provided for every four parking rows at least 10 feet wide; and with trees spaced not more than 50 feet apart in each contiguous island or provide one tree per 200 square feet of island area. 
13.530 Terminal islands shall be: provided at ends of parking rows at least every 25 spaces; and have at least two trees per island and evergreen shrubs 3 feet on center (or grass/ground cover with approval of Planning Board). All landscape areas shall contain shrub and ground cover plantings. Landscape areas may not be totally covered with mulch. 
13.535 Landscape islands shall be a minimum area of 200 square feet, a minimum of 15 feet in width in any direction, and at least one tree per island with trees located a minimum of 4 feet from curbing. 
13.540 Strategically placed island crossings are required to enhance pedestrian access and safety in parking areas. Crossings constructed of modular pervious pavers are encouraged to minimize soil compaction within the island. 

13.545 Landscaped parking area features are encouraged to be designed as stormwater best management practices according to the design principals of Low Impact Development. (Refer to the design guidance manuals Low-Impact Development Design Strategies An Integrated Design Approach (1999, Low Impact Development Center) and The NH Stormwater Manuals Volumes I-III (2008, NH Department of Environmental Services). 
13.550 Snow storage areas may be located in landscaped areas provided that appropriate landscape materials are selected which can withstand such snow storage. Snow storage shall not be located where it would adversely impact the functionality of bioretention or other stormwater management systems. 


13.600 Structural Elements 
13.605 No person shall deface, alter the location of, or remove any stonewall which was made for the purpose of delineating a boundary or border of a lot, road or right of way in the Town of Seabrook or other stone wall or historic structure located within the proposed development area, except upon the issuance of approval/written comments from the Planning Board. 

13.610 Signage in the Landscape Strip: 
13.610.1 Require minimum 4’ wide area around each freestanding sign. 
13.610.2 Existing vegetation, which is preserved, may be substituted for required plantings. 
13.615 Provide minimum 10-foot-deep planting area(s) with trees, shrubs and groundcover around building sides with public access. 
13.620 Fences and walls within public view must be of high architectural quality. Chain link and wire mesh fences shall be out of direct public view and shall be complimented with landscaping. Chain-link fence within public view shall be dark colored vinyl coated 6 – 9 gauge fencing with similarly coated posts and rails. Masonry walls shall be constructed of stone, brick or other durable and attractive materials. Concrete block walls are not permitted except where variety in color, design and detailing of the materials are of high architectural quality. 


13.700 Soil Preparation 
13.705 Landscaped areas where soil compaction has occurred due to construction activities should be deep tilled to a depth of 12 inches to facilitate deep-water penetration and soil oxygenation. Use of soil amendments is encouraged to improve soil chemistry, water drainage, moisture penetration, soil oxygenation, and/or water holding capacity. Soil amendments are organic matter such as compost, bio-solids, and forest by products, but do not include topsoil or any mix with soil as an element. 
13.710 For all newly landscaped areas, organic matter (3-4 cubic yards of organic matter per 1,000 square feet of landscape area) should be incorporated to a depth of 4 to 6 inches. Organic content of landscaped soils shall not be less than 18 percent by volume in the top 6 inches of the finished topsoil. 
13.715 For newly landscaped areas where topsoil is limited or nonexistent, or where soil drainage is impeded due to subsurface hardpan or bedrock, 6 to 24 inches of sandy loam topsoil should be spread in all planting and turf areas, in addition to the incorporation of organic matter into the top horizon of the imported soil. Organic content of landscaped soils shall not be less than 18 percent by volume in the top 6 inches of the finished topsoil. 
13.720 Soil analysis of new or renovated landscaped and turf areas should include a determination of soil texture, including percentage of organic matter; an approximated soil infiltration rate; and a measure of pH value. 

13.800 Mulching 
13.805 Mulch should be applied regularly to, and maintained in all, planting areas to assist soils in retaining moisture, reduce weed growth, and minimize erosion. Mulches include organic materials such as wood chips, compost and shredded bark and inert organic materials such as decomposed lava rock, coble, and gravel. If weed barrier mats are used, the use of organic mulches is recommended. Mulches should be applied to the following depths -3 inches over bare soil, and 2 inches where plant material will cover. 
13.810 Non-porous materials, such as plastic sheeting, are not recommended for use in any areas of the landscaping because of down-slope erosion potential, soil contamination from herbicide washing, and potential for increased ruqVHZWff velocity. 
13.815 Mulch used in stormwater management areas should be heavier and not of a type that can be easily transported by runoff (i.e. float or wash away). 

13.900 Maintenance 
13.905 Upon completion of the project, plant material that has been designated for preservation shall be subject to the maintenance and inspection requirements outlined in this Section. Preserved vegetation and new plantings that show signs of construction damage within a one year period following construction, including but not limited to bark damage or excessive root damage, grade changes other than those originally indicated in the approved grading plan, soil compaction due to heavy equipment traversing closely, or general decline due to mechanical or natural conditions shall be rejected and must be replaced prior to the release of any defect guarantee. Any rejected tree will be subject to replacement (based on total caliper loss). 
13.910 The owner of any lot or parcel for which a development approval has been issued pursuant to these regulations shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaped and natural areas on the property. Landscaping shall be maintained in such condition such that planting shall be vigorous and in good health at all times and that the parcel shall present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. Any dead vegetation that is part of the approved landscaping design shall be replaced within one year. 
13.915 Landscaping shall be maintained so that it does not interfere with sight distances for driveways, roadways and parking areas. 
13.920 Plant material and landscape maintenance procedures that incorporate water conservation techniques are preferred. 
13.925 The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require a landscape maintenance and water management plan. The maintenance plan shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
13.925.1 Integrated Turf Management: mowing schedule, weed control, pest control, soil pH management, fertilizer plan, aeration/dethatching schedule and repair/replacement plan. 
13.925.2 Shrub and Groundcover Management: mulch schedule, weed control, pruning where needed for visibility, preventative pest/disease management, repair/replacement plan. 
13.925.3  Tree Management: mulch schedule, weed control, deadwood removal, pruning schedule, particularly for trees located next to walkways or roadways, fertilizing schedule, preventative pest/disease management, repair/replacement plan. 
13.925.4 Water Systems Management: water source, system description, spring start-up, fall closeout, system testing schedule, and repair/replacement plan. The applicant may install a permanent water supply system consisting of a sprinkler system and/or hose bibs placed at appropriate locations and intervals. Wherever possible, irrigation water shall be derived from sources other than a public water system, including re-used water, detained stormwater or roof drainage. On-site cisterns may be installed to store water for irrigation. 
13.925.5 Seasonal Maintenance: Spring clean-up plan, fall clean-up plan, disposal plans for leaves and plant debris, winter plowing plan, winter deicing plan. 
13.930 The owner of any lot or parcel for which a development approval has been issued pursuant to these regulations shall provide a landscape maintenance bond for one year following completion of construction. 
13.935 A note shall be provided on the final approved site plan stating “All conditions on this plan shall remain in effect for perpetuity.” 

13.950 Preparation of a Landscape Plan 
13.955 A Landscape Plan shall be prepared in sufficient detail to indicate compliance with these regulations. The plan shall also include: 
13.955.1 A plant schedule (keyed to plants shown on the plan) including quantity, plant name (common and scientific), planting size and size of maturity, growth habit, and tolerance to environmental conditions. Sizing and measuring shall be governed by the publication American Standard for Nursery Stock (2004, as amended) by the American Nursery & Landscape Association (available at www.anla.org). 
13.955.2 Written planting notes, requirements and details. 
13.955.3 Existing and proposed vegetation including trees; shrubs and plant beds including all vegetation that shall be retained as required by the Planning Board; dimensions of undisturbed areas and measures that shall be used to protect during construction existing natural features that are to be retained; and location of all utilities above ground and below ground and related easements; and required front, side, and rear yards. 
13.960 The Landscape Plan shall be prepared by a Professional Landscape Architect registered in the State of New Hampshire, or certified by the Council of Landscape Architectural Registration Boards (CLARB). The Landscape Architect shall sign and stamp the Plan which shall be submitted as a requirement for a complete Site Plan application. The Landscape Plan shall be prepared to include the following certification: 
I _____________ _, hereby certify that I prepared or have sufficiently reviewed this plan and am confident that the design meets the requirements of the Town of Seabrook’s Landscape Design Standards. I am a Landscape Architect licensed by the State of NH # ________ and/or CLARB # _____________. 



Section 14 -Development Standards for Smithtown and North Village 
The purpose of the Smithtown and North Village zoning district which include Zones 6R Residential and 6M Mixed Use – are to create a neighborhood focused on a pedestrian oriented, economically viable development center in Seabrook. The intent of village concept is to foster development of a vibrant mixed-use districts with a cohesive street layout and architectural character that includes commercial, residential and civic uses and integration of open spaces, transit, bicycle and pedestrian accommodations. 
The purpose of the Smithtown and North Village Development Standards is to execute the vision for the zoning district. The goal of these standards is to enhance economic vitality, business diversity, accessibility, and visual appeal in a manner that is consistent with the landscape and architecture of the Town’s historic village tradition.  
The overarching goals of the Smithtown Village are to: enhance the economic development potential of properties; encourage mixed uses that support one another; provide services and employment opportunities; create pedestrian and bicycle friendly neighborhoods; respect the historical nature of the villages; and create a gateway between Seabrook and its neighboring towns to the north and south. 
Development shall incorporate the following concepts to preserve and complement elements of the historic tradition of Seabrook, and local and regional village character: 
a. 	
Comprised of compact, pedestrian-oriented development; 

b. 
Mixed use pattern of development where development specializing in a single use should be the exception; 

c. 	
Encourage a range of housing choices and price levels to accommodate diverse populations; 

d. 
Diversity 	of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds distributed within neighborhoods and throughout the district; 

e. 	
Expansion and provision of public transportation facilities that promote use and access; 

f. 	
Provide improved visibility and access to and use of conservation lands, where appropriate; and 

g. 
Opportunities 	for agrarian activities such as farmers markets and community gardens. 


14.010 General Development Criteria 
14.011 	Development in Smithtown Village and the North Village shall incorporate the following: 
a. 	
Wherever possible retention of natural infrastructure and visual character derived from topography, woodlands, riparian corridors and other environmental features. 

b. 	
Infill development and redevelopment of existing sites. 

c. 	
Development contiguous to adjacent zoning districts shall be organized to complement and be compatible with the existing pattern of development and the natural landscape. 

d. 
Develop the street network, connecting with existing local connector roads to disperse traffic to and from the Smithtown Village, and reduce traffic volumes. 

f. 	
Use greenways to define and connect developed areas, provide public spaces and enhance viewsheds to adjacent conservation lands. 

g. 
Integrate a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems that provide accessible alternatives to the automobile. 

i. 	
Apply architectural and landscape designs suited to a traditional New England appearance. 

j. 	
Create public gathering and public use spaces that are connected throughout the District, in a manner and location that will encourage use and promote safety and security. 

k. 	
Reduce impervious surfaces and associated stormwater ruqVHZWff. 

l. 	
Design the scale of development and buildings to foster a traditional village atmosphere. 



14.020 Building Materials and Architectural Elements 
14.021 Building Materials 
a. 	
The exterior of buildings shall be covered with natural or simulated wood materials, natural or simulated stone or brick.  Accent elements may incorporate use of metal, natural or simulated stone or brick. 

b. 
Exterior building materials shall be compatible with or complement other hardscape materials used on the site. 



14.022 Architectural Elements 
a. 	
Roof styles shall be limited to mansard, gable, hip and gambrel.  Flat roofs are permitted only for installation of green roof technology as a Low Impact Development element or to execute a historical architectural style. 

b. 
Sloped roofs are highly preferred. Gabled and hipped roofs should have a slope of greater than 4/12 (18º) but less than 14/12 (49º). 



Figure 1. Illustration of preferred roof styles and forms. 

c. 	Windows should be appropriately scaled to the building mass and style. 
Figure 2. Examples of roof form and styles. 


Articulation is the use of architectural elements and details such as changes in plane, composition or materials, to create a sense of variation and reduction of scale. 
d. Articulation shall be used to define the architectural elements and details of a building (changes in plane, composition and materials of a building wall) to create variation and reduction of scale. A change in the wall plane should be in keeping with the architectural style of the building and should be significant enough to affect the building mass. 

Figure 3. Example of articulation of a multi-section Federal style building. 

e. 	Buildings should be designed to clearly define the two or three distinct parts of the typical multi-story façade (refer to examples in Figures 4 and 5 below): 
i. the bottom or ground level which frames a storefront or entrance; 
ii. the middle or upper floors which comprises the greatest percentage of the façade; and 
iii. the top or roof style/form, defined by a cornice and other trim elements. 


f. 	Buildings shall incorporate New England style character and design into at least one major structural element (i.e. a specific period or style, lines and articulation, exterior materials). 
Figure 5. Examples of New England style architecture and design. 


14.023 Colors for buildings and signs shall reflect those found in a traditional New England village. Applicants shall select from paint chips on file at the Planning Office, or alternately, submit paint samples or chips for Planning Board approval. 


14.030 Site Design Standards 
14.031 Building Configuration and Orientation 
a. 	
Single and multiple buildings on a site are encouraged to break up the massing and scale of larger developments. 

b. 
Buildings shall be oriented to frame the roadway and accommodate pedestrian access and safety. The building entrance is not required to be oriented to the roadway. 


Figure 6. Example of building orientation in relation to the street,parking and overall site design. 


14.032 Mixed Use -Residential and Non-Residential 
a. 	
Mixed Uses in the 6M – Mixed Use zone shall provide commercial uses (i.e. retail stores and shops, food service/bar/entertainment establishments, and professional offices and businesses) on the first floor of buildings, with professional office and businesses, light commercial (such as artisanal manufacturing) and residential uses optionally on the upper floors. 

b. 
Residential developments or neighborhoods should include a mix of housing types, sizes and styles, and provide public gathering and/or recreational spaces or areas for use by residents, businesses, visitors and the community. 

c. 	
Developments should provide a viable mix of residential and non­residential uses to promote living and employment opportunities in the style of a traditional New England Village. 



14.033 Interior Parking Areas 
a. 	
Parking shall not be located between the building any principal road or street, either town or state owned. 

b. 
Parking areas shall be screened from roadways and adjacent residential uses. Refer to the Landscaping Section of the Seabrook Site Plan Review Regulations. 


Figure 7. Illustration of parking area landscaping elements, vehicular and pedestrian connectivity within parking areas, and examples of public spaces. 

c. 	
Individual interior parking areas may be grouped or connected to form larger parking areas. Refer to the dashed areas outlined in the figure below. 

d. 
On-street parking shall provide short-term parking for patrons of shops and businesses. On street parking to service residential areas is recommended. 

e. 	
Parking for mixed-use developments shall provide long term and shared parking by multiple uses and users. 

f. 	
In all instances, the Planning Board shall consider parking lot safety. 

g. 
Delivery areas for mixed use and non-residential uses can be located at the front, rear or sides of buildings, or within designated portions of parking areas. Loading docks and service areas shall not face a public frontage. Delivery and service vehicles are encouraged to utilize rear alleys for building access. 

h. 
Parking structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements and design standards of principal buildings. Below ground and multi-story parking structures are encouraged. 



14.034 Vehicular and Pedestrian Circulation 
a. 	
Development within the district shall incorporate well connected grids of local and neighborhood streets, loop roads, access roads and alley ways. Refer to the examples in Figure 7. 

B. 
New roads and streets shall connect to the existing transportation network within the district and adjacent zoning districts to provide efficient traffic patterns and site access, and provide for public safety. Development shall provide potential future connections to adjacent properties and not prevent or preclude these connections. 

c. 	
All roadways shall provide a pedestrian and bicycle friendly layout and incorporate landscaping and lighting elements. 


Figures 8a-8b. Preferred street cross-section examples (local street above, connector street below). 
8a. 

14.035 Stormwater Management and Low Impact Development (LID) 

a. 	
Stormwater management and erosion control plans shall follow the detailed design and selection specifications in the NH Department of Environmental Services Stormwater Manual:  Volume 2 Post-Construction Best Management Practices Selection and Design and Volume 3 Erosion and Sediment Controls During Construction (latest edition). 

b. 
Low Impact Development (LID) site design strategies shall maintain or recreate the predevelopment hydrology of the landscape. 

c. 	
LID design techniques and best management practices shall demonstrate implementation of ruqVHZWff storage and infiltration, ground water recharge, and maintain volume and frequency of discharges to surface waters and wetlands. 

d. 
LID design techniques shall include the following: multiple, integrated and distributed small-scale stormwater treatment, retention and detention areas; minimization of (new development) and/or reduction of (redevelopment) impervious surfaces; and retention of overland flow paths and drainage systems. 

e. 	
Landscaping shall be integrated with LID practices, general stormwater management practices, and parking lot and roadway designs. 

f. 	
Green roof installations shall demonstrate the following benefits: enhance stormwater management capacity and water quality; reduce energy use; reduce air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions; improve human health and comfort; and improve quality of life. 

g. 
The Site Plan shall include a detailed narrative description of how and to what extent the above standards have been implemented, and if applicable, why such implementation was not feasible. 


Figure 9. Examples of Low Impact Development stormwater management practices. 




A depressed swale with plants tolerant of wet and dry conditions captures and treats runoff from the adajcent parking areas (examples above and below). 
Paver grids in light-duty parking areas are installed 
with a soil medium that supports plant growth and 
infilitrates runoff. 





14.040 Signage Standards -Smithtown Village Signage 

a. 	
For multiple businesses at one address, one sign is permitted. The sign must have a cohesive uniform design for lettering, graphics and other elements. Signage for non-residential and residential uses shall comply with the sign style standards in Figure 10. 

b. 
Free standing signs for multiple businesses shall have a maximum of 24 square feet. Additional dimensional requirements for signs are found in the Zoning Ordinance. 

c. 	
Refer to the preferred examples of suspended and free-standing sign styles in Figure 11. 

d. 
The Site Plan Review or Subdivision application shall include detailed illustrations of dimensions, design, colors, lettering and graphics for all proposed signs. 

e. 	
Digital display signs and internally illuminated signs are prohibited. 


Figure 10. General sign requirements and specifications: examples of free-standing signs for multiple businesses and sign base structures. 


14.050 Street Elements & Design 
Streets are an important part of the livability of our community and well-designed road networks can provide safer, more livable, and welcoming transportation options. Care should be given to design the entire roadway with all users in mind, including bicyclists, public transportation vehicles and riders, and pedestrians of all ages and abilities. 
Figure 12a. Example of a street with accommodations for walking, biking, seating,lighting motorists, and parking. 

Streets in Smithtown and North Village can have various cross-sections and configurations, providing specific basic elements are incorporated in the design, when necessary or desired: clearly defined travel lanes, on-street parking, street trees and other landscaping, sidewalks, pedestrian crossings, and bike lanes when necessary. 
Figure 12b. Example of a typical neighborhood street with narrow width and on-street parking. 

14.060 Pedestrian and Bicycle Connections 

14.061 Sidewalks 
a. 	
Sidewalks shall be constructed. Sidewalks shall be encouraged on private property and on at least one side of a public street with crossings when sidewalks alternate from one side to another. Sidewalks shall be maintained by the property owner when practical. 

b. 
Sidewalks are encouraged on public streets, private roadways and access-ways. 

c. 	
Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide. 



14.062 Walkways 
a. 	
Walkways shall be incorporated to provide safe passage for pedestrians to and from parking areas, businesses, residences, sidewalks, open spaces, and public roadways. 

b. 
Proper lighting shall be installed along walkways when needed to ensure public safety. 






14.063 Seabrook/East Coast Greenway Rail Trail 
a. 	
Pedestrian and bicycle connections shall focus on maintaining or establishing connectivity and circulation within the District and providing connections and access to the Seabrook/East Coast Greenway Rail Trail. 

b. 
Developments may provide a Greenway Trail through the property with connections provided to trails on adjacent properties or open space and public space. Greenway Trails shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width and surfaced to provide universal access. 




14.070 Public Space 
14.071 	Descriptions and requirements for public space are provided below in Table 2 and the photographic examples in Figure 14. 
Table 2. Public Space Standards. 
Public SpaceStandards  Description  
Public Space Requirements  Developments of 1 acre or greater shall include a minimum of 20 percent of the total area dedicated to public space. Public space shall not include lands within required thoroughfare cross-sections and other proposed streets. Public space shall be no less than 100 square feet of contiguous land or the entire 20 percent area requirement whichever is greater. Public space may include septic reserve areas, well protection areas, and Low Impact Development stormwater management  
features (i.e. natural areas such as bio-retention areas, vegetated buffers and rain gardens). Public space may consist of natural areas, or created natural areas such as gardens, landscaped areas and parks, where the public may gather, recreate and enjoy scenic views. Public space shall not include landscaping requirements for parking areas or screening and buffering purposes.  
Permitted Uses  Permitted uses shall include passive, non-motorized recreation and uses; natural resource management and research; and non­commercial agriculture and forestry.  
Access  All development shall provide public access to designated open space and public space.  
Location and Connectivity  The goal of locating public space is to create a contiguous greenway that provides pedestrians and bicyclists opportunity to move throughout the District. Designated public space shall be connected preferably by being contiguous from one lot to another lot or within a development, or secondarily by walking paths or sidewalks.  
Character and Features  Existing natural areas may be designated as public space. Public space may also be created in the form of parks, gardens, ponds and other natural areas and/or features. Public space shall be maintained or established to provide opportunity for the public – both residents and visitors -to gather, recreate outdoors, and enjoy scenic views and landscapes.  

Figure 14. Examples of public spaces and community gardens. 





Small and linear parks can offer gardens, sitting areas, walkways and architectural features of interest. Pocket parks can be used to showcase 
gardens and include historical and cultural 
features such as statues, plaques and 
interpretative signage. 
Figure 14. Examples of public spaces and community gardens (continued). 







Section 15 -Spill Prevention, Control & Countermeasures 
Any existing or otherwise permitted use or activity having regulated substances in amounts greater than five gallons, shall submit an Emergency Response Official a Spill Prevention, Control & Countermeasures (SPCC) plan that is subject to approval by the Seabrook Fire Chief, or his designee. The plan shall include the following elements: 
15.801   Disclosure statements describing the types, quantities, and storage locations of all regulated substances that will be part of the proposed use or activity. 
15.802   Owner and spill response manager’s contact information. 
15.803   Location of all surface waters and drainage patterns. 
15.804   A narrative describing the spill prevention practices to be employed when normally using regulated substances. 

15.805   Containment controls, both structural and non-structural. 
15.806   Spill reporting procedures, including a list of municipal personnel or agencies that will be contacted to assist in containing the spill, and the amount of a spill requiring outside assistance and response. 
15.807   Name of a contractor available to assist in spill response, contaminant, and cleanup. 
15.808   The list of available clean-up equipment with instructions available for use on-site and the names of employees with adequate training to implement containment and clean up response. 

Revisions to the Seabrook Zoning Ordinance Since 1972 
Date 	Description 
3/7/72 	Adopted "An Ordinance Relative to Front & Sidelines, Min. Lot Size, and the # of Dwelling Units on a Lot" 
3/6/73 Adopted a Zoning Ordinance and a "Building Code Ordinance" 3/5/74 Adopted the present Zoning Ordinance 3/8/77 Building Permit required and fees established 3/8/77 Prohibited mobile homes in Zone 1 3/8/77 Prohibited establishment of mobile home parks and expansion of existing ones 3/8/77 Amended regulations re: gravel pits 3/8/77 Amended area & frontage paragraph (Article IV B) 3/8/77 Prohibited new junkyards and restricted existing ones 3/14/78 Amended area & frontage paragraph (Article IV B) 3/14/78 Amended setback requirements (Article IV C) 3/14/78 Enacted growth control 3/13/79 Revised floodplain regulations 3/13/79 Revised definition of "structure" 3/13/79 Adopted language further regulating junkyards 3/11/80 Expressly permitted agriculture in Zone 1 3/11/80 Revised language on side yard setbacks 3/11/80 Defined "schools" 3/9/82 Amended definition of "2-family dwelling" to exclude two attached mobile homes 3/8/83 Exempted "private utility structures" from height restrictions 3/8/83 Re-defined "dwelling building" 3/8/83 Eliminated Special Exception provision from section on non-conforming uses 3/13/84 Seabrook Housing Authority exempted from the Zoning Ordinance 3/13/84 A Certificate of Occupancy required for non-residential buildings 9/15/86 Revised floodplain regulations 3/14/89 Zone 2R created 3/14/89 Zone 1 enlarged in the vicinity of Ledge Road and Allison Drive 3/13/90 Consolidated permitted uses and dimensional requirements into Tables #1 & 2 3/13/90 Adopted the sign ordinance 3/13/90 Zoning changed from 2R to 2 on land bounded by Rts I-95, 107, 1, and New Zealand Rd 3/13/90 Revised floodplain regulations 3/12/91 Defined commercial entertainment, recreation & amusements 3/12/91 Amendments re: roof signs, several signs that require no permit, and prohibited signs 3/12/91 Zone 2 to be land "within 500' of Lafayette, or to the rear lot line of any lots now existing, which 
abuts Lafayette, with the exception of those areas now in Zone 3 and all other areas of Zone 2 shall remain the same" 
3/12/91 Changed Zone 2R east of the Blackwater River to Zone 2 3/12/91 Prohibited building within 50' of a pond or stream 3/9/93 Extended Zone 2 to include all land west of the Blackwater and within 300' of Rt. 286 3/9/93 Amended sign ordinance to allow an additional 32 sf of free-standing sign per business 3/9/93 Amended Table 3 re: signs and added exemption for traffic control & safety signs 3/8/94 Regulated sexually oriented businesses 3/8/94 Revised definitions of dwellings in Article II 3/8/94 Allowed day care, mixed uses, and outside amusements as Special Exceptions 3/8/94 Reduced side & rear setbacks for utility sheds 3/8/94 Clarified limits on residential density 3/8/94 Revised definition of mobile home park 3/8/94 Landings less than 24 sf not to be considered a structure 3/8/94 Clarified definition of recreational vehicle for floodplain regs 3/8/94 Established parking standards for commercial development 
R1 


