Part I, General Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as §§ 1-2 and 1-3 of the 1973 Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of all
other ordinances heretofore adopted, except as the context may otherwise
require, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly elected pursuant
to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township government
assigned to such organizational unit by the Township Committee.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by the procedure required
for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force and effect
pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Andover in the County of Sussex and State
of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The duly elected
Committeemen of the Township.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township
are closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
§ 1-2 ANDOVER CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 6-7 of the 1973 Code]
§ 1-3. Maximum penalty. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
For violation of any provision of this Code, or any other ordinance of the
Township where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section or
sections violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or
more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. (N.J.S.A.
40:49-5)
§ 1-4. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5. Lesser penalty.
The maximum penalty stated in this article is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 1-6. Minimum penalty.
The Township Committee may prescribe that, for the violation of any
particular Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be
imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not
exceeding $100. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[An ordinance to adopt the Code of the Township of Andover is
presently proposed before the Township Committee. Upon final
adoption, it will be included here as Article III of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:7
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies— See Ch. 115.
Police Department— See Ch. 119.
Board of Health administration — See Ch.
194.
§ 1-6 ANDOVER CODE § 1-6
1:8
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the “Administrative Code of the Township of
Andover” and may be referred to herein as “the code.”1
1. Editor's Note: Andover is governed by the township form of government pursuant to
Chapter 63 in Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated. The Administrative Code
has been drafted in conformity with the Townships Law and, in many instances, provisions
of the Townships Law have been restated in the Code. Other enabling laws pertaining to
the Administrative Chapter are N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. (Municipal Court); N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. (Zoning Board of Adjustment); N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq. (Planning
Board); and N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq. (Board of Health). Other authority to regulate the
internal affairs of the Township is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1
1:9

ARTICLE II
Elective Officers
§ 3-2. Enumeration.
The elective officers of the Township shall be the members of the Township
Committee.
§ 3-3. Residence; terms.
All officers shall be residents of the Township and except where otherwise
provided by law shall hold office for one year, beginning January 1 next
succeeding their election. The term of the Assessor shall commence on
July 1 next following his election. No Township officer, whether elected or
appointed, shall hold over in his office after the expiration of the term in
which he was elected or appointed. The Township Clerk shall hold office
for three years, the Assessor and Collector for four years, all subject to any
right of tenure prescribed by the laws of New Jersey.
§ 3-4. Vacancies.
Any person appointed by the Township Committee to fill a vacancy in any
elective office, except the office of Assessor, shall hold office only until
January 1, and any person appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of
Assessor shall hold office only until July 1, after the general election next
succeeding his appointment, and at that election a qualified person shall be
elected to fill the unexpired term. If a vacancy occurs at so short a period of
time before the next general election that the office cannot be filled at the
election, the Township Committee may fill the vacancy in the same manner
as though it had occurred immediately after the election, and the vacancy
shall then be filled at the next subsequent general election for the unexpired
term.
§ 3-4.1. Employment restrictions. [Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-10]
No elected official who was a member of a governing body that authorized,
or otherwise voted in favor of, the award of a contract between the
Township of Andover and a vendor shall, for one year following separation
from elected office, become employed by said vendor.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4.1
1:11

ARTICLE III
Appointive Officers
§ 3-5. Enumeration.
In addition to the officers to be elected, the Township Committee may
appoint and employ a Township Attorney, a Township Construction Official,
a Township Physician and a Township Treasurer. In addition, the Township
Committee may appoint any other person determined by it from time to time
to be necessary or desirable for the efficient administration of Township
affairs.
§ 3-6. Commencement of term.
All appointive officers, except where otherwise provided by law, shall hold
office until January 1 next following their appointment.
§ 3-7. Vacancies.
Where a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, the Township Committee
shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term, except in the case where the
Township Committee grants a leave of absence to join any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States. No officer shall hold over in his office
after the expiration of the term for which he has been appointed.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Township Committee
§ 3-8. Legislative power.
All legislative power of the Township shall be exercised by the Township
Committee pursuant to law.
§ 3-9. Organization. [Amended 1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-1]
The Township Committee shall organize annually on the first day of January,
or during the first seven days of January, at which time it shall elect a Mayor
and a Deputy Mayor from among its members. The Mayor and Deputy
Mayor shall be chosen individually by ballot by the majority vote of all
members of the Township Committee. In the event no Committee member
attains a majority of the vote of all Committee members after five ballots
for either the office of Mayor or Deputy Mayor, the Committee member who
received the most votes on the fifth ballot shall be deemed elected to the
office. In the event of a tie vote for the most votes on the fifth ballot, the
Committee members who received the most votes on the fifth ballot shall
draw lots for the office. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township
Committee and perform such other duties as the Township Committee may
prescribe. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor
shall act in the place and stead of the Mayor during the latter's absence or
disability.
§ 3-10. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays
and events of interest to the Township. He may from time to time appoint
citizens' committees to inquire into matters that are of interest to the
Township, and he shall have such other appointment powers as are
conferred upon him by law. He shall be an ex officio member of all
committees, both standing and special. He shall serve as liaison between
the Township Committee and all boards, committees, agencies or
organizations except as otherwise assigned in this code to a specific
committee. He shall have and exercise the ceremonial power of the
Township, and he shall exercise every other power usually exercised by
township mayors and conferred upon him by law.
§ 3-11. Regular and special meetings. [Amended 6-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-20]
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
A. Regular meetings. The Township Committee shall meet annually on the
first day of January or during the first seven days of January in any year,
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:15
§ 3-12. Rules of procedure for meetings.
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed for the conduct of
business of the Committee shall be provided by resolution. Where not
provided, Roberts Rules of Order, revised, shall govern, and the Chairman
of a particular meeting shall be parliamentarian ex officio.
§ 3-13. (Reserved)2
§ 3-14. Quorum.
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the
Township Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of the
quorum of the Committee. If a quorum is not present one hour after the
appointed time for any meeting, those members present may declare the
meeting adjourned.
§ 3-15. Voting on resolutions and ordinances.
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call, and
the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. All ordinances shall be
introduced, considered, published, reconsidered and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
and such other meetings or adjourned meetings at such time and place
as it may direct by resolution. All regular meetings shall be held within
the Township.
B. Special meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time upon
written request of a majority of the members of the Township
Committee. The request and call for a special meeting shall specify the
purpose of the meeting, and no business shall be transacted at any
special meeting other than that specified. The call for a special meeting
shall be filed with the Clerk and served upon each Committee member,
as hereinafter provided, at least 24 hours prior to the time for which the
meeting is called. The Police Department shall cooperate with the Clerk
in effectuating service of notices. Upon waiver of notice by all members
of the Township Committee, a special meeting may be held without
prior notice notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection. In
addition, notwithstanding the above provisions, the requirements of the
Open Public Meetings Law (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) shall apply and, in
the event of a conflict between those provisions and those of this
subsection, shall prevail.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 3-13, Township Committee conferences, was repealed 6-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-21.
§ 3-11 ANDOVER CODE § 3-15
1:16
ARTICLE V
Township Clerk
§ 3-16. Clerk of Township Committee.
The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Committee. He shall attend
and keep the minutes of all meetings of the Committee. The minutes shall
be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk.
§ 3-17. Recording and compiling ordinances.
§ 3-18. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Township, except those committed by ordinance to any
other office or transferred thereto by the Township Committee. He shall, on
request and the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by resolution of the
Township Committee for the use of the Township, furnish a certified copy of
any such paper in his custody under the Corporate Seal of the Township.
§ 3-19. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Township Committee or when necessary to exemplify any document on
record in his office, or to certify any act or paper which from the records
in his office appears to have been a public act of the Township or a public
document. He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to
any other instrument, writing or paper unless required by law or ordinance.
§ 3-20. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts.
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Township Committee, shall:
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances of a permanent character in books
to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he shall also
record and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law.
Each ordinance so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk,
who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when
so signed the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of
the ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to sign or certify
shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been
duly adopted.
B. At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the
Township Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances or
true copies thereof which then remain in force and effect. He shall also
properly index the record books, compilation or codification of
ordinances.
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20
1:17
§ 3-21. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and publication.
The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all administrative rules
and regulations which shall be available for public inspection in his office
during business hours. No rule or general regulation made by any
department, officer, agency or authority of the Township, except such as
relates to the organization or internal management of the municipal
government or a part thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Clerk.
§ 3-22. Oaths.
The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths in all matters
concerning Township business.
§ 3-23. Notice to officers of election or appointment.
The Township Clerk shall, within five days after the Township Committee
has appointed or elected any officer, whether to fill a vacancy or otherwise,
cause to be delivered to or left at the place of abode of the person so elected
or appointed a written notice of his election or appointment, and within
the same time shall file a certified copy of the record of the election or
appointment with the Clerk of the County of Sussex.
§ 3-24. Other powers and duties.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance, and subject to the supervision and direction of the Township
Committee, the Clerk shall:
A. Be the depository for and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished
by or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which
shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Township or
to protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and
materials to which the Township may be a party.
B. Be the depository for and custodian of all performance bonds running to
the Township as obligee, or any other form of security given by any
contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of work
done or to be done in or for the Township.
C. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
D. Report to the Township Committee annually, at such time as it may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety
bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of outstanding
leases, the rent reserved by each, and their respective expiration dates.
A. Perform all the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes)3 and any other law or
ordinance.
§ 3-20 ANDOVER CODE § 3-24
1:18
§ 3-25. Deputy Township Clerk. [Amended 4-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-04]
The office of Deputy Township Clerk shall be and hereby is established
for the Township of Andover, Sussex County, New Jersey, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
B. Administer the provisions of Township ordinances with references to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Have such other different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him by the
Township Committee.
A. The Deputy Township Clerk shall serve for one year.
B. The Deputy Township Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all
the duties of the Township Clerk during such times and for such specific
periods as the Township Clerk shall be absent, disabled, or when
delegated by the Township Clerk to exercise such powers and perform
such duties. The Deputy Township Clerk shall also perform such
function and duties as may be assigned to him by the Township Clerk or
the Township Committee.
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 19:1-1 et seq.
§ 3-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-25
1:19

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Organization
§ 3-26. Departments, boards and commissions.
There shall be the following departments, offices, boards and commissions
in the Township of Andover:
§ 3-27. Appointment, powers and duties of department heads.
The Mayor shall designate from among the members of the Township
Committee a head of each department; and the head of each department,
subject to the code and the approval or direction of the Township
Committee or the responsible subcommittee thereof, shall:
A. Departments.
(1) Department of Finance.
(2) Department of Buildings, Grounds and Recreation.
(3) Department of Public Works.
(4) Department of Public Safety.
(5) Department of Health and Public Assistance.
(6) Fire Department.
B. Separate offices not under departments.
(1) Township Attorney.
(2) Township Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Zoning Officer.
C. Boards and commissions.
(1) Municipal Court.
(2) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Planning Board.
(4) Board of Assistance.
(5) Board of Health.
(6) Economic Development Commission.
(7) Recreation Commission.
(8) Civil Defense and Disaster Control.
§ 3-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-27
1:21
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
B. Direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
C. Preliminarily approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims
chargeable to departmental appropriations.
D. Maintain records of work performance and unit costs thereof as may be
approved or required by the Township Committee.
E. Provide information and reports on the work of the department as may
from time to time be required by the Township Committee.
F. Exercise other or different powers of administrative supervision and
direction which the Township Committee delegates to him.
§ 3-27 ANDOVER CODE § 3-27
1:22
ARTICLE VII
Department of Finance
§ 3-28. Establishment. [Amended 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
The financial business of the Township shall be committed to the Finance
Committee consisting of the Chief Financial Officer, the Treasurer (who may
also be the Chief Financial Officer), the Township Administrator and two
members of the governing body.
§ 3-29. Chief Financial Officer.
There shall be a Chief Financial Officer of the Township who, in consultation
with the governing body, shall be responsible for overall facets of planning,
execution and reporting associated with the Township's finances. The
official's duties shall include the following:
A. Compile monthly and quarterly operating expenditure reports.
B. Prepare historical operating expenditure report for the purpose of
yearly budget preparation suggested to the Committee based on
historical trends, specific allocation for each line item of operation
budget.
C. Collect and review cash flow information along with current
expenditure needs to develop a cash management program for the
Township. This program shall consist of investments in any one or a
combination of those investments prescribed by New Jersey statutes.
Prepare a yearly report of investments indicating interest earned.
D. Inform department and boards of budget appropriation balances.
E. Perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties provided by
general law and Township ordinances. He shall keep and maintain
books and records of all financial transactions of the Township in
accordance with the standards and requirements of the Division of
Local Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey. He shall have custody of all public moneys of the Township
and shall make monthly reports to the Township Committee of all
receipts, expenditures, commitments and unexpended appropriations.
Within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year he shall, under penalties
prescribed by law, make to the Township Committee and file with the
Township Clerk a detailed statement of the amount of bonds issued and
outstanding and full and detailed account of his receipts and
disbursements for the preceding fiscal year. The statement shall be in
writing and verified by his oath, and may be prepared with the advice,
assistance and consultation of the Township Auditor. All moneys
received from any source by or on behalf of the Township or any
department, board, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise
provided by Township ordinance, shall be paid to the Chief Financial
Officer who shall, within 48 hours after their receipt, deposit them in
§ 3-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-29
1:23
§ 3-30. Division of Treasury and Township Treasurer.
Within the Township Finance Committee there shall be a Division of the
Treasury, the head of which shall be the Township Treasurer appointed by
the governing body. The official shall serve for a term of one year. The
Treasurer may be the Chief Financial Officer. The Township Treasurer's
duties shall include the following:
§ 3-31. Division of Tax Collection.
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax Collection,
the head of which shall be the Tax Collector.
the authorized public depository of the Township to the credit of the
proper account.
F. Make disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall be made by
the Chief Financial Officer upon his preaudit and approval by the
Township Committee. Every warrant shall be in the form of a warrantcheck
payable to the order of the person entitled to receive it and shall
specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or
appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each warrant-check shall be
prepared by the Chief Financial Officer and shall bear the signatures of
the Mayor and the Clerk. All claims and demands shall be in accordance
with § 2-34.
A. Coordinate with the Tax Collector and the Chief Financial Officer in all
duties set by ordinance with emphasis on delinquent tax trends,
foreclosures, and monthly monitoring of tax receipts to aid in a sound
investment program.
B. Coordinate and develop a financial investment program for the
Township.
A. The Tax Collector shall possess all the powers and duties established by
law.
B. He shall enter in suitable books to be kept for that purpose the sums
received by him each day for taxes, with the names of the persons on
whose account the same have been paid; shall keep a record and
account of the finances of the Township, and within 60 days after the
end of the fiscal year or when otherwise required by the Township
Committee shall make and furnish to the Township Committee a report
thereof, with a detailed and true statement of all moneys received by
him and disbursed therefrom and for what purposes, from the
commencement of his official year to the date of his report, or for such
period as the Township Committee may require, and a list of delinquent
taxpayers for the previous year. He shall file the report, with two copies
of the statement and list of delinquents, with the Clerk within the time
specified above or when otherwise required by the Township
Committee.
§ 3-29 ANDOVER CODE § 3-31
1:24
§ 3-32. Division of Tax Assessments.
§ 3-33. Tax Searcher.
The Tax Searcher shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He shall
furnish reports and certificates relating to property taxes and assessments
in the Township.
§ 3-34. Payment of claims and demands.
C. He shall as necessary and as directed arrange for sales of real estate for
delinquent taxes.
A. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of
Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax Assessor.
B. The Tax Assessor shall perform such duties as required by law.
C. The Division shall:
(1) Value all real property in the Township for the purpose of
assessments and taxation, and exercise all the powers of a
Municipal Assessor pursuant to law.
(2) Prepare the tax lists and duplicate as required by law and maintain
adequate records of each and every parcel of real property
assessed or exempted.
(3) Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Township Map and
provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or
character of property assessed.
(4) Perform all other functions and duties required of Tax Assessors by
general law.
A. Any person claiming payment from the Township for goods or services
rendered shall present a duly certified, detailed voucher to the Chief
Financial Officer.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to contact the
appropriate department head or Township employee who has
knowledge that the goods or services rendered were in fact delivered to
the Township and to have him certify this knowledge by affixing his
signature to the municipal voucher in the designated place.
C. The Township Chief Financial Officer may question the accuracy,
veracity or legitimacy of any claim against the Township by demanding
further clarification from the claimant and, where appropriate, making
adjustments in claims submitted. The Township Committee shall be the
final arbitrator of any payment of claims dispute.
D. After being satisfied that all claims are in proper order and that monies
are available to pay such claims, the Chief Financial Officer shall deliver
§ 3-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-34
1:25
§ 3-34.1. One-hundred-percent disabled veteran tax refunds. [Added
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-17]
A retroactive refund of property taxes as set forth in N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.32
shall be limited to the date of the submission of a proper claim to the Tax
Assessor as required by N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30.
the bills to the Township Committee for approval at a regular public
meeting of such body. Claims shall be approved for payment not less
than once in each calendar month; the Chief Financial Officer may set
administrative deadlines after which claims may not be submitted for
approval at a given public meeting of the governing body.
E. Upon approval of payment by the Township Committee, the Chief
Financial Officer shall forthwith prepare all necessary checks, which
shall be signed by the Mayor or other designated member of the
Township Committee and cosigned by the Chief Financial Officer. All
such checks shall be recorded in proper books of account and
thereafter mailed or otherwise delivered to claimants.
F. In the case of payrolls, the Chief Financial Officer shall prepare, sign
and issue payroll checks in accordance with proper payroll procedure
and upon certification that each employee has rendered the service for
which he is receiving remuneration. The Township Committee may at
any time demand of the Chief Financial Officer a full and complete
accounting of monies placed in and disbursed from the payroll account.
G. The Chief Financial Officer, in consultation with the Finance Committee
to establish procedures and regulations for the preparation and use of
purchase orders and for the payment of bills; provided, however, that
any and all such procedures and regulations shall not become effective
until approved by a resolution of the Mayor and Township Committee.
§ 3-34 ANDOVER CODE § 3-34.1
1:26
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works
§ 3-35. Duties.
The Department of Public Works shall take charge of and be responsible
for the construction, operation and maintenance of all streets, roads, parks
and storm sewers; shall be responsible for the cutting of brush, mowing of
grass, removal of snow and cleaning of ditches, and control the care, use
and disposition of motor vehicles owned by the Township.
§ 3-36. Supervisor, Roads. [Amended 12-29-2001 by Ord. No.
2000-17]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Streets,
the head of which shall be the Supervisor, Roads. Under the direction and
supervision of the Supervisor, Roads the Division shall:
§ 3-37. Road Supervising Laborer. [Amended 12-29-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-17]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Road Supervising
Laborer, who shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the
Supervisor, Roads during such times and for such specific periods as the
Supervisor, Roads shall be absent, disabled, or when delegated by the
Supervisor, Roads to exercise such powers and perform such duties.
§ 3-38. Assistant Road Supervising Laborer. [Added 12-29-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-17]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be an Assistant Road
Supervising laborer, who shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties of the Road Supervising Laborer during such times and for such
specific periods as the Road Supervising Laborer shall be absent, disabled,
A. Maintain and repair all Township streets, bridges, culverts and drains.
B. Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, bridges, culverts and drains;
treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads according to such
standards and schedules as recommended or approved by the Township
Engineer.
C. Maintain all Township streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
D. Study problems of street traffic congestion and control and
streetlighting, and recommend to the Township Engineer appropriate
plans for street improvement and use to satisfy traffic requirements.
E. Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers and
check for streetlight outages.
§ 3-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-38
1:27
or when delegated by the Road Supervising Laborer to exercise such
powers and perform such duties.
§ 3-38.1. Fleet Manager. [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Fleet Manager, who
shall perform all of the following duties:
A. Service and repair all Town-owned vehicles and equipment.
B. Schedule outsourcing of repairs as needed.
C. Record all repairs.
D. Use his privately owned tools to make required repairs when
applicable.
E. Assist the Public Works Supervisor in preparing and working within the
vehicle maintenance budget.
F. Work with the public works repairs in all the duties that are required,
such as, but not limited to, roads, parks, buildings, maintenance, and
snow removal, as needed.
§ 3-38 ANDOVER CODE § 3-38.1
1:28
ARTICLE IX
Department of Buildings, Grounds and Recreation
§ 3-39. Responsibilities.
There shall be a Department of Buildings, Grounds and Recreation which
shall be responsible for the following:
A. Operating, maintaining and repairing Township-owned buildings and
properties and provide custodial and janitorial services.
B. Trimming, planting, caring for and preserving public parks, greens,
grounds and trees located on lands owned by the Township. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
C. Maintaining and repairing playing fields and playgrounds and
recreational areas and facilities.
§ 3-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-39
1:29

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Safety
§ 3-40. Police Department.
Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a Police Department
established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 119, Police
Department of the Code of the Township of Andover.
§ 3-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-40
1:31

ARTICLE XI
Fire Department.
§ 3-41. Establishment.
There shall be a Fire Department of the Township established in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 51, Fire Prevention, Article II, Fire
Department, of the Code of the Township of Andover.
§ 3-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-41
1:33

ARTICLE XII
Department of Health and Public Assistance
§ 3-42. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Health and Public Assistance which shall act
as liaison between and review of the work of the Board of Health and the
Board of Assistance.4
4. Editor's Note: See Arts. XX and XXI of this chapter.
§ 3-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42
1:35

ARTICLE XIII
Township Attorney
§ 3-43. Appointment; retainer and fees.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He
shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the
Township. The Attorney shall receive a retainer and in addition shall be paid
his reasonable fees and charges.
§ 3-44. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall give all legal counsel and advice required by the
Township Committee or any member thereof and shall in general serve as
the legal advisor to the Township Committee on all matters of Township
business. He shall represent the Township in all judicial and administrative
proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers or agencies not
separately represented may be a party or have an interest. In furtherance
of his general powers and duties, but without limiting them, the Attorney
shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
B. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township.
C. With the approval of the Township Committee compromise or settle
litigation in which the Township is involved.
D. Render written opinions upon questions of law submitted to him by the
Township Committee or any member thereof with respect to their
official power and duties.
E. Supervise and direct the work of any additional attorneys and technical
and professional assistants the Township Committee may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Township.
§ 3-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-44
1:37

ARTICLE XIV
Township Engineer
§ 3-45. Appointment; term.
There shall be a Township Engineer who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee per N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140. The Township Engineer shall receive
such compensation as may be agreed upon and determined by the Township
Committee. He shall be a duly licensed professional engineer of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 3-46. Duties.
The engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by general law and
ordinance. He shall:
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on
force account or by public contract.
B. Under the supervision and direction of the Township Committee,
provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township.
C. Provide technical supervision with respect to operation, maintenance
and repair of the Township storm sewer system.
D. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments as needed.
E. Upon the termination of his service with the Township, surrender all
papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of his engineering duties.
§ 3-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-46
1:39

ARTICLE XV
Building Inspector
§ 3-47. Appointment; term.
The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Township Committee to
serve for a term of one year. Prior to his appointment, he shall be qualified
by training and experience in the duties of a building inspector.
§ 3-48. Powers and duties.
The Building Inspector shall:
A. Enforce the Building Code and any other laws, ordinances, codes, rules
and regulations relative to buildings and structures and have all the
powers, functions and duties prescribed by general law and ordinance
for building inspectors.
B. Keep a record of his proceedings and a permit book and complaint
book, all of which shall be subject to inspection. He shall report
regularly to the Township Committee, at its direction, the number of
permits issued, the estimated cost of such work and the fees received
and paid by him to the Treasurer.
C. Have such duties as are prescribed in Chapter 190, Zoning, § 190-8, of
the Code of the Township of Andover.
D. Have all the powers and duties prescribed by the Township Committee
by ordinance or resolution.
§ 3-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-48
1:41

ARTICLE XVI
Township Administrator
§ 3-49. Position created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A: 9-136, there is hereby created the position of
Township Administrator.
§ 3-50. Appointment; term.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by the majority of the
Township Committee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137. The term of
office of the Township Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the
governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137, and in all of his duties and
responsibilities hereinafter described, he shall serve under the direction of
the Township Committee.
§ 3-51. Qualifications.
The Township Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard as to
education, training and experience in governmental affairs. The Township
Administrator must have permanent residence in Sussex County within one
year of the year of the date of appointment or such additional time as may
be granted by resolution by the governing body and during the term in office
remain a resident of Sussex County for default of which said office may be
deemed vacated.
§ 3-52. Compensation.
The Township Administrator shall receive as salary such sums as may be
fixed and adopted by the Township Committee in the Annual Salary and
Wage Ordinance.5 The Township Administrator shall be reimbursed for all
reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of his office.
§ 3-53. Removal from office.
The Township Administrator may be removed by two-thirds vote of the
governing body. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the governing body. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-138, the governing body may provide that the resolution of removal
shall have immediate effect; provided, however, that the governing body
shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance
of his salary and his salary for the next three calendar months following
adoption of the resolution.
5. Editor's Note: The Annual Salary and Wage Ordinance is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 3-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-54
1:43
§ 3-54. Vacancy, disability, or absence.
During the absence or disability of the Township Administrator, the
Township Committee may, by resolution, and majority vote of the Township
Committee, appoint an officer or other employee of the municipality to
perform the duties of the Township Administrator as Acting Administrator
during such absence or disability. The Township Committee shall determine
when such absence or disability exists. Such absence or disability shall be
limited to three months after which time the position may be deemed a
vacancy. Any vacancy in the position of the Township Administrator shall be
filled by appointment of the Township Committee. In the event of removal
or resignation of the Township Administrator, the Township Committee may,
by resolution, appoint an officer or other employee of the municipality as
Acting Administrator to serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee
until an Administrator is appointed. Removal of an Acting Administrator
shall be by majority vote of the Township Committee.
§ 3-55. Duties.
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for and perform the
following duties:
A. Overall administrative duties. The Township Administrator shall be the
Chief Administrative Officer of the Township of Andover, and he shall be
responsible to the Township Committee for the proper and efficient
administration of both the day-to-day management of the
administrative affairs of the Township and the overall business affairs of
the Township, acting in its stead and as its representative, to promote
its economic and responsive operation. The Township Administrator's
duties shall relate to the management of all Township business and the
coordination of activities of the various departments, boards and
commissions within the Township, and he shall provide assistance and
planning in supervising the execution of the Township Committee work
in those areas where continuous and sustained effort is required. The
Township Administrator shall not be responsible for those nondelegable
duties and responsibilities conferred upon Township officials by statute,
other applicable laws, rules and regulations promulgated on state
agencies or such other duties and responsibilities as the Township
Committee may reserve to itself.
B. Supervision of administrative functions. The Township Administrator
shall have the authority and responsibility to supervise the
administrative functions, in consultation with the respective committee
chairman, department heads and Township Committee, but not the
professional operation of all departments of the government of the
Township.
C. Collection. The Township Administrator shall see that all moneys owed
to the Township, other than taxes, are promptly paid and that proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
Township's claims.
§ 3-54 ANDOVER CODE § 3-55
1:44
D. Communication. The Administrator shall be responsible for continually
improving communications among the various personnel, departments,
agencies, boards and the governing body. The Township Administrator
shall act as a liaison with other municipalities and county, state and
federal agencies.
E. Correspondence. He shall receive copies of all correspondence
addressed to the Township of Andover. He shall receive notice of all
regular and special meetings of the Township Committee and all
advisory committees, boards, commissions and other agencies of the
Township, including meetings with other governmental bodies and
agencies.
F. Employment. The Township Administrator shall not engage in any other
occupation or employment while employed by the Township in a related
government field except as approved by the Township Committee.
G. Insurance. The Township Administrator shall supervise and recommend
all insurance and bonds for the Township property, personnel and
Township operations.
H. Meetings. The Township Administrator shall attend all meetings of the
governing body, work and agenda sessions for these meetings with the
right to speak but not vote on all agenda items, and attend other
meetings as directed by the governing body.
I. Personnel. The Township Administrator shall serve as personnel officer
of the Township and shall be responsible for enforcement of the
personnel policy of the Township, with the advice and consent of the
Township Committee.
(1) He shall recommend to the Township Committee the selection,
hiring, promotion and removal of employees of the Township,
provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions of this
state or other applicable statutes shall be promoted, hired,
suspended or discharged only in accordance with such provisions.
(2) He shall establish performance standards to evaluate personnel
and submit a written report annually to the Township Committee.
He shall establish working, personal leave, vacation and sick leave
schedules, and make recommendations to the Township Committee
on compensatory time off pursuant to § 115-6D.
(3) He shall develop and administer the personnel program and
policies, including up-to-date job classifications and pay plans,
active recruitment of needed personnel, in-service training
programs developed by interviewing department heads and
personnel and a complete system of personnel records of municipal
officers and employees.
J. Reports. He shall keep the Township Committee currently informed of
all matters within his jurisdiction by such reports, verbally or in writing,
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:45
as he deems advisable or as may be requested by the Township
Committee and to submit an annual written report of his work
accomplished at the request of the Township Committee for the benefit
of the public.
K. Laws. He shall see that all laws of the State of New Jersey, Township
ordinances, resolutions and policies, as established, are executed and
implemented subject to the direction of the Township Committee.
L. Finance. The Township Administrator shall:
(1) Study, recommend, implement and enforce the financial
procedures and policy of the Township and its departments, after
consultation with department heads and approval of the governing
body.
(2) Supervise the disbursement of all Township and escrow funds and
review and approve all purchases, vouchers and bills before
submitting same to the Township Committee for final approval.
(3) Be responsible for the cash needs of the Township and for the
conduct of a sound cash management and investment program,
subject to state regulations and governing board policy, and report
such actions and results to the governing body as required by law.
M. Collective bargaining. The Township Administrator shall be responsible
for the negotiation of collective bargaining contracts with agencies
representing Township employees, subject to the approval of the
Township Committee, and for the administration and enforcement of
such contracts and the personnel policies and procedures of the
Township. The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the
research and necessary documentation for negotiation activities, and
shall participate with the Township Committee in the negotiation effort
and recommend the use of outside resources when deemed advisable.
N. Other duties. The Township Administrator shall:
(1) Ensure that there is an up-to-date and coordinated record retention
and disposal program for all Township departments, offices, boards
and agencies.
(2) Represent the Township and assert its proper interests in relation
to federal, state, county and other political subdivisions, and with
respect to Township contracts and franchises.
(3) Monitor and evaluate state and federal legislation as to its impact
on the Township with recommendations for actions by the
Township Committee. The Township Administrator must be
prepared to testify on behalf of the Township on issues affecting the
Township.
(4) Implement all policies formulated by the Township Committee.
§ 3-55 ANDOVER CODE § 3-55
1:46
§ 3-56. Discretionary duties.
The Township Administrator may be responsible for and may perform the
following duties in addition to those listed in § 3-55 hereof if said duties are
delegated to him by the Township Committee:
(5) Advise the Township Committee on all background matters as an
aid to the establishment of policy and recommend to the Committee
for adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or
expedient.
(6) Follow up acts of the Township Committee by correspondence,
review of minutes and personal conferences.
A. Agenda. He may prepare in conjunction with the Township Clerk, the
agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee and supply facts
pertinent thereto and deliver such to the Township Committee. He may
arrange meetings and conferences when so required by the Township
Committee.
B. Aid. He may solicit and inform the Township Committee as to federal
aid projects and state aid projects and any other aid program or grant
for which the Township of Andover may qualify. He may actively pursue
said projects and programs upon instruction by the Township
Committee.
C. Budget. In all budget functions, the Chief Financial Officer will assist
the Administrator in carrying out all listed responsibilities.
(1) The Township Administrator shall prepare the temporary budget
for presentation at the first regular meeting of the governing body
in January.
(2) The Township Administrator shall prepare the annual capital and
operating budget to be proposed to the Township Committee for
adoption. The Administrator, the Chief Financial Officer or an
officer designated by the Administrator shall obtain from the head
of each department, committee, board, commission, agency, officer
or authority estimates of anticipated expenditures and supporting
data as requested. Said anticipated expenditures and supporting
data are to be supplied by October 15 and copies distributed to the
governing body prior to the review of the budget requests.
(3) The Administrator shall prepare and compile budget studies,
analyses and schedules; assist in the conduct of public,
departmental, board, committee, and commission budget hearings
during the months of October and November each year; and, in
conjunction with the Treasurer, shall assist the Township
Committee in such manner as it shall require in the preparation of
the annual Township budget. Budget recommendations shall be
submitted to the governing body by the Administrator by December
1 preceding the budget year.
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56
1:47
(4) The Administrator shall help draft an explanatory budget message,
including a comparison of prior years' appropriations and
expenditures and an analysis of the proposed expenditures, and
shall prepare the final budget for introduction and approval by the
governing body before February 10.
(5) Upon the adoption of the budget, current accounts of the
expenditures shall be kept on a monthly basis based upon the
supplemental detail of the adopted budget. The Administrator shall
be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the governing body; shall maintain a continuing review
and analysis of the budget operation, work progress and costs of
municipal services; and shall assess the attainment of the
Township's budget and service goals, reporting the same regularly
to the Township Committee.
D. Capital improvement plan. Upon request, and as requested, the
Administrator may assist the Planning Board in the development of the
capital improvement plan for Master Plan updates.
E. Complaints. The Administrator may receive and reply to inquiries and
complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township. He or an
officer designated by him shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints. He shall keep a written record of such complaints and when
and what action was taken in response thereto and provide the
Township Committee a copy thereof when requested to do so.
F. Consultants. The Administrator may recommend the employment of
experts and consultants to perform work and render advice in
connection with the operation or work projects in the Township, subject
to the approval of the Township Committee. The Administrator may
supervise the work of consultants retained by the Township Committee,
such as the Township Engineer, planning consultants and others, and
shall keep the Township Committee fully informed as to the work of
such consultants.
G. Contracts. The Township Administrator may attend to the supervision
and of the performance and faithful execution of Township contracts,
except insofar as such duties as are expressly imposed upon some other
Township officer by statute. He shall have no pecuniary or personal
interest directly or indirectly in any contract, job for work or materials
or the profits thereof to be furnished or to be performed for the
Township of Andover. The Administrator may negotiate contracts,
subject to the approval of the Township Committee.
H. Coordinate. He may integrate and coordinate the functions of all
departments, boards, agencies, offices and officials, and may also
maintain liaison with the Board of Education of the Andover Regional
School District.
I. Efficiency. He may conduct a continuous study of all activities and
operations of the Township government and recommend changes for
§ 3-56 ANDOVER CODE § 3-56
1:48
the purpose of increasing efficiency and effectiveness. He may develop,
prescribe and enforce rules and regulations for the efficient
management of the Township government for the avoidance of any
duplication or overlapping of effort among the departments or among
the units within a department, and for the improvement of methods and
procedures of administration.
J. Improvements. The Township Administrator may recommend the
nature, location and extent of public improvements and coordinate the
execution of same when authorized by the Mayor and Township
Committee.
K. Information. The Township Administrator may study, recommend,
implement and enforce the procedures and policies of the Township, its
departments and officials for the coordination, compiling, editing and
prompt dissemination and release of public information, upon the
recommendation and authorization of the Township Committee.
L. Purchasing. The Township Administrator shall:
(1) Be the purchasing officer of the Township and shall purchase, or
supervise the purchase of, or delegate the purchase of, in
accordance with the provisions of the governing statutes and sound
purchasing practices, all materials, supplies and equipment of the
various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the
Township. The Township Administrator shall keep or cause to be
kept an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or
when directed by the governing body, make a full report thereof.
(2) Establish rules, regulations, standards and specifications to control
all purchases by the Township and recommend to the governing
body such standards as to quality, size and variety of articles,
equipment and supplies used by the offices and departments of the
Township, to make possible uniform purchasing practices; act as
purchasing agent in the purchase of such materials, equipment and
supplies; issue or supervise the issuance of the necessary purchase
orders for such materials, equipment and supplies for all
departments without exception; ensure that all purchases are at
the most favorable price to the Township and see to it that the
materials, equipment, services or supplies delivered are correct in
number or amount and comply with the standards and
specifications prescribed by the governing body as agreed to at the
time of purchase.
(3) Cause to be advertised proposals for the furnishing of work,
equipment and materials and receive bids therefor at the direction
of the governing body.
(4) Review, validate and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment
prior to final approval by the governing body, and shall establish
procedures associated with the payment of claims.
§ 3-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56
1:49
§ 3-57. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this article shall derogate from or authorize the Township
Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of the elected and
appointed officials of the Township.
(5) Have no interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract job for work
or materials, or the profits thereof, to be furnished to or performed
for the Township.
(6) Require the various departments, boards, commissions, agencies
and programs to furnish annually a complete inventory of all
equipment, materials and supplies in stock; and recommend the
sale of any obsolete or surplus equipment, materials and supplies;
and transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies and
from or to central stores such supplies, material and equipment as
need appears and arrange for the sale of surplus or obsolete items
thereof. The Administrator shall maintain a fixed asset inventory in
the manner and form required by law.
M. Other duties. The Administrator may perform such other duties as may
be assigned to him from time to time by the Mayor and/or Township
Committee.
§ 3-56 ANDOVER CODE § 3-57
1:50
ARTICLE XVII
Joint Municipal Court
[Amended 2-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2; 11-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-09]
§ 3-58. Creation; name; jurisdiction.
§ 3-59. Municipal Judge; powers, duties and qualifications.
A. Creation of Court. There has been created a Joint Municipal Court
consisting of the following members: the Township of Andover, the
Township of Hampton, the Township of Fredon, the Township of Byram
and Andover Borough. This Court is created by the shared services
agreement executed by the five municipalities in October of 2014, by
and amongst the aforesaid municipalities and is subject to the terms
thereof. The shared services agreement is attached hereto and
incorporated in this chapter and shall be approved by and filed with the
Administrative Director of the Courts.6
B. Name of Court. The name of the Joint Municipal Court shall be the
"Andover Joint Municipal Court (Andover, Hampton, Fredon and Byram
Townships and Andover Borough)" and it shall have a seal bearing the
name of the Court.
C. Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the Joint Municipal Court of Andover
shall be coextensive with the territories of the Townships of Andover,
Hampton, Fredon and Byram and the Borough of Andover in the County
of Sussex. The Court shall be under the jurisdiction of the Assignment
Judge and Municipal Court Administrator for Vicinage 10 - Morris/
Sussex.
A. There shall be a Joint Municipal Judge appointed by the governor as
provided by law with regard to a Joint Municipal Court. The Municipal
Judge shall serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment
and until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess the requisite qualifications
in order to serve as a Municipal Court Judge as provided by the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
C. The Municipal Judge shall faithfully carry out all of the responsibilities
of a Municipal Court Judge and shall abide by all rules and regulations
established for Municipal Court Judges by the Administrative Office of
the Courts, the New Jersey Supreme Court and any other applicable
laws and rules.
6. Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 3-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-60
1:51
§ 3-60. Municipal Prosecutor.
There shall be appointed a Municipal Prosecutor for the Joint Municipal
Court who shall prosecute all cases in the Joint Municipal Court.
§ 3-61. Municipal Court Administrator.
There shall be an Administrator of the Joint Municipal Court of Andover
who shall perform the functions and duties prescribed for the Administrator
by law, by the rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Municipal
Court Judge. The compensation of the Administrator shall be determined
by Andover Township. The duties of Municipal Court Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
A. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed annually by Andover
Township at the same time and in the same manner as other annual
appointments are customarily made, and shall continue to serve until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified.
B. The Municipal Prosecutor shall serve at the will of Andover Township,
which service may be terminated upon 30 days' written notice.
C. Qualifications for the position of Prosecutor are that the appointee shall
be a duly licensed attorney at law of New Jersey, in good standing, and
remain so throughout the term of service.
D. There shall also be appointed by Andover Township an Alternate
Municipal Court Prosecutor, whose duties shall be the same as the
Municipal Prosecutor's, but who shall act as Municipal Prosecutor only
in the event the Municipal Prosecutor is absent or unavailable, or in the
event the Municipal Prosecutor is unable to represent the Township as
a result of a conflict of interest. All provisions and references to
Municipal Prosecutor in this chapter shall apply to the Alternate
Municipal Prosecutor in all respects. In the event that the Municipal
Prosecutor is absent, unavailable or unable to represent the Township
due to a conflict of interest, the Municipal Prosecutor shall promptly
notify the Municipal Court Administrator of such circumstances, and
the matter shall then be reassigned or transferred to the Alternate
Municipal Prosecutor, through the office of the Municipal Court
Administrator.
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to persons wishing to file criminal
complaints or wishing information in that regard; receiving complaints
and dispensing information relative to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
§ 3-60 ANDOVER CODE § 3-61
1:52
§ 3-62. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator.
There shall be a Deputy Administrator of the Joint Municipal Court of
Andover who shall perform the functions and duties prescribed by law,
by the rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Municipal Court
Judge. The Deputy Administrator shall be appointed in accordance with the
applicable court rules. The compensation of the Deputy Administrator shall
be determined by Andover Township.
§ 3-63. Municipal Public Defender.
The Township of Andover shall, by resolution, annually appoint a Public
Defender to serve within the Joint Municipal Court of Andover. The Public
Defender shall be compensated as determined by the Township of Andover.
It shall be the Municipal Public Defender's duties to represent eligible,
indigent defendants, in proceedings over which the Joint Municipal Court of
Andover has jurisdiction.
D. Attending Court sessions; recording pleas, judgments and dispositions;
arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing and
issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds, recognizances and security in lieu
thereof; making inquiry concerning their sufficiency and equity;
receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal Police Court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
requiring court appearances; maintaining and classifying records and
files.
G. Maintaining, forwarding, receiving and reporting such records, reports
and files as are required by the State Director of Motor Vehicles.
H. Making a yearly report to the Township Committee.
I. Performing all other duties required by law.
A. Qualifications. The Municipal Public Defender shall be an attorney at
law of the State of New Jersey in good standing. The Municipal Public
Defender need not be a resident of the Township, and may hold the
same title in one or more municipal courts. The Municipal Public
Defender may represent private clients in this and any other
municipality, subject to the rules of court governing the conduct of
lawyers, judges and court personnel.
B. Term. The Municipal Public Defender shall serve for a term of one year
from the date of his or her appointment, and may continue to serve in
office pending reappointment of a successor. The Municipal Public
Defender shall be removed by the governing body of a municipality for
good cause shown and after a public hearing, upon due notice with an
§ 3-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-63
1:53
opportunity to be heard. Failure to reappoint a Municipal Public
Defender shall not constitute a removal from office.
C. Salary. Remuneration for the position of Municipal Public Defender and
Conflict Public Defender shall be fixed by ordinance.
D. Duties. The Municipal Public Defender shall represent defendants who
meet the eligibility requirements set forth below. The Municipal Public
Defender shall be responsible for handling all phases of the defense,
including but not limited to discovery, pre-trial and post-trial hearings,
motions, removals to Federal District Court and other collateral
functions. Duties of the Public Defender shall not include de novo
appeals in Superior Court.
E. Eligibility requirements. To be eligible for the services of the Municipal
Public Defender, a defendant must:
(1) Be charged with a crime as specified in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18; or
(2) Be charged with an offense of which there is a likelihood, in the
opinion of the Municipal Court, that the defendant, if convicted,
will be subject to imprisonment or other consequence of
magnitude; and
(3) Meet the financial eligibility requirements, in the opinion of the
Municipal Court, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-14 and guidelines
promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court; and
(4) Provide all necessary applications, releases and authorizations, and
documents.
(5) Pay an application fee of $200. This fee may be waived or reduced
by the Municipal Court upon clear and convincing proof that the
fee is an unreasonable burden upon the applicant. Said fee may be
paid over time, not to exceed four months.
(6) In the event that the Municipal Court cannot determine eligibility
before the time when the first services are to be rendered, the
Municipal Court shall refer the defendant to the Municipal Public
Defender provisionally. If it is later determined that the defendant
is ineligible, or if it is determined that the initial determination was
erroneous, the Court shall inform the defendant, and the defendant
shall be obliged to engage his own counsel and to reimburse the
municipality for the cost of the services rendered.
F. Juvenile defendants.
(1) In the event the defendant is under the age of 18 years, the
eligibility for service shall be determined on the basis of the
financial circumstances of the individual and the individual's
parents or legal guardian.
§ 3-63 ANDOVER CODE § 3-63
1:54
(2) The Municipal Court shall be entitled to recover the cost of legal
services from the parents or legal guardian, and shall have the
authority to require parents or legal guardians to execute and
deliver any authorizations required to determine eligibility.
G. Municipal responsibilities and reimbursements.
(1) The municipality shall be responsible for payment of all necessary
services of representation as determined by the Court. The factors
of need and real value to a defendant may be weighed against the
financial constraints of the municipality in determining the
necessary services.
(2) The municipality shall have a lien on any property to which the
defendant shall have or acquire an interest up to the amount of the
reasonable value of the services rendered to a defendant. To
effectuate such lien, the Municipal Attorney shall file a notice
setting forth the services rendered to the defendant and the
reasonable value thereof with the Clerk of the Superior Court.
Within 10 days of said filing, the Municipal Attorney shall send a
copy of the notice with a statement of the date of the filing to the
defendant by certified mail to the defendant's last known address.
The filing of the notice shall constitute a lien for a period of 10
years from the date of filing and shall have the priority of a
judgment.
(3) The Municipal Attorney may do all things necessary to collect any
money due to the municipality for reimbursement for services
rendered by the Municipal Public Defender, including remedies
available for recovery of a civil judgment, counsel fees and costs.
(4) All application fees collected shall be deposited in a dedicated fund
administered by the Treasurer of the municipality and shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a
Municipal Public Defender.
H. There shall also be appointed by Andover Township a Conflict Public
Defender, whose duties shall be the same as the Public Defender's, but
who shall act as Public Defender only in the event the Public Defender
is absent or unavailable, or in the event the Public Defender is unable to
represent an eligible defendant as a result of a conflict of interest. All
provisions and references to Municipal Public Defender in this chapter
shall apply to the Conflict Public Defender in all respects. In the event
that the Municipal Public Defender is absent, unavailable or unable to
represent an eligible defendant due to a conflict of interest, the
Municipal Public Defender shall promptly notify the Municipal Court
Administrator of such circumstances, and the matter shall then be
reassigned or transferred to the Conflict Public Defender, through the
office of the Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 3-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-63.1
1:55
§ 3-63.1. Auditor.
The Auditor appointed by Andover Township shall act as the Auditor for
the Joint Municipal Court of Andover. The Auditor shall perform a yearly
audit of the Joint Municipal Court of Andover, which audit shall be prepared
generally in accordance with the requirements of the Local Fiscal Affairs
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq. A copy of the complete audit shall be supplied
to each participating municipality by September 1 of each year.
§ 3-63.2. Additional Court personnel.
The Township of Andover shall, hereafter, by resolution have the power to
designate such other persons as may be required to serve as clerks, staff
and other officers thereof and to establish compensation to be paid to the
respective persons to manage and run the day-to-day operations of the Joint
Municipal Court. Compensation thereof shall be in accordance with the
Salary Ordinance adopted annually by the Township of Andover.
§ 3-63.3. Withdrawal by member municipality.
The members of the Joint Municipal Court of Andover established by this
article are the Township of Andover, Township of Hampton, Township of
Fredon, Township of Byram and Borough of Andover. Collectively, the
Township of Andover, Township of Hampton, Township of Fredon, Township
of Byram and Borough of Andover shall be referred to as members. Any
member of the Joint Municipal Court of Andover may withdraw by
complying with the provisions of the shared services agreement amongst
the members identified in § 3-58A above or such subsequent agreements or
amendments then existing and in effect.
§ 3-63.4. Contributions and compensation.
§ 3-63.5. Special Court Officer. [Added 11-9-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-14]
A. The Township of Hampton, the Township of Fredon, the Township of
Byram and the Borough of Andover shall pay the Township of Andover a
fee in accordance with the shared services agreement then existing
between the parties.
B. The Township of Andover shall remit fines and levies collected for
infractions occurring in the Township of Hampton, the Township of
Fredon, the Township of Byram and Andover Borough to the applicable
municipality on at least a monthly basis or as set forth in the agreement
amongst the municipalities.
A. A "Special Court Officer" means any person appointed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. to, on a part-time basis, perform duties
similar to those performed regularly by members of the Police
Department of the Township of Andover in connection with providing
§ 3-63.1 ANDOVER CODE § 3-63.5
1:56
security during all municipal court sessions. The Special Court Officer
reports to the Chief of Police of the Township of Andover.
B. Duties. The Special Court Officer will provide security, including metal
detection and bag searches upon all individuals entering the courtroom,
will maintain order in the courtroom and will follow the direction of the
judge. The duties performed at the direction of the judge may include
swearing in of witnesses, collecting court documents, presenting court
documents, reviewing reports and filing complaints.
C. The ability to carry a firearm by a Special Court Officer may be
authorized only after the officer has demonstrated that he/she has been
fully certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
Chief of Police or that he/she is authorized to carry a firearm pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6 and 2C:58-1 et seq. as a retired law enforcement
officer.
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10, no person shall be appointed as a
Special Court Officer unless the person:
(1) Is a resident of the State of New Jersey during the term of
appointment;
(2) Is able to read, write, and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
(3) Is sound in body and of good health;
(4) Is of good moral character;
(5) Has not been convicted of any crime or criminal offense involving
dishonesty or which would make him or her unfit to perform the
duties of the office;
(6) Has successfully completed a training course approved by the New
Jersey Police Training Commission.
E. The Special Court Officer will be appointed for a term of one year.
Nothing herein shall be construed to require reappointment upon the
expiration of the term.
F. The salary for this position is $20 per hour.
§ 3-63.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-63.5
1:57

ARTICLE XVIII
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 3-64. Establishment.
There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to Chapter 74 of the
Code of the Township of Andover.
§ 3-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-64
1:59

ARTICLE XIX
Planning Board
§ 3-65. Establishment.
There shall be a Planning Board pursuant to Chapter 74 of the Code of the
Township of Andover.
§ 3-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-65
1:61

ARTICLE XX
Board of Assistance
§ 3-66. Consolidation with county program.
The Township Committee of the Township of Andover does hereby approve
the transfer of responsibilities for the Andover Township welfare and
general assistance system to be consolidated into and become a part of
the Sussex County Work First New Jersey Program and that appropriate
Township officials are directed to take action to complete the consolidation
to be effective January 1, 1998.
§ 3-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-66
1:63

ARTICLE XXI
Board of Health
§ 3-67. Establishment.
There shall be a Board of Health of the Township consisting of five
members.
§ 3-68. Appointment; terms; vacancies.
§ 3-69. Powers and duties.
A. The members constituting the Board of Health shall be citizens of the
Township appointed by resolution of the Township Committee for a
term of three years from January 1 of the year of their appointment and
until a successor has qualified. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit
one or more members of the Township Committee from being appointed
to the Board.
B. If any vacancies occur among the members of the Board of Health, they
shall be filled by resolution of the Township Committee but only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
A. The Board of Health shall adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary from
among its members and create and fill such other offices as it shall
determine. It shall have the power and authority to employ experts and
a staff for enforcement and carrying out its purposes, including a
Sanitarian and other persons provided by law and to pay for their
services and such other expenses as may be necessary and proper, not
exceeding in all the amount appropriated by the Township for the use of
the Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and by municipal ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
Board of Health to enforce all ordinances of the Township which relate
to public health and public health nuisances.
C. The Board of Health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for
the protection of the health of the inhabitants of the Township and to
guard against the spread of contagious diseases, and to prevent by
necessary rules the introduction of diseases, contagious or otherwise,
within the boundaries of the Township.7
7. Editor's Note: See Part II, Board of Health Legislation, of this Code.
§ 3-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-69
1:65

ARTICLE XXII
Economic Development Advisory Committee
[Amended 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
§ 3-70. Establishment.
There is hereby established the Economic Development Advisory
Committee of the Township of Andover.
§ 3-71. Members.
Said Committee shall consist of one member of the Township Committee,
who shall serve during their terms on the Township Committee, together
with not fewer than three, nor more than nine, additional members who
shall reside and/or own a business located in the Township, who shall be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 3-72. Organization.
The members of the Economic Development Advisory Committee shall
choose annually from among its members a Chairperson or President and
such other officers as it may deem necessary.
§ 3-73. Powers and duties.
The Economic Development Advisory Committee shall have the following
powers and duties:
§ 3-73.1. Meetings.
The Economic Development Advisory Committee shall meet at least
quarterly and at the call of the Chairperson. Meetings shall be open to the
public.
A. To inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages and utility
of vacant land in the Township which is zoned for commercial or
industrial purposes.
B. Recommend to the Township Committee the methods of advertising the
advantages and opportunities and availability of real estate in the
Township for commercial and industrial development.
C. To investigate the availability of state or federal grants which may be
available for general community development and particularly for
development of commercial and industrial enterprises within the
Township.
D. Make such additional studies as may be desirable and necessary to
attract commercial or industrial ratables to the Township and to
perform such other functions as may be directed from time to time by
the Township Committee.
§ 3-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-73.1
1:67

ARTICLE XXIII
Recreation Committee
§ 3-74. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Township of Andover, a Recreation
Committee, which shall have the duties and powers hereinafter more
particularly set forth, the members of which shall be appointed by the
Township Committee in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 3-75. Membership.
Said Recreation Committee shall be comprised of five members, who shall
be citizens and residents of the Township of Andover. The members first
appointed shall hold office for one, two and three years, respectively, in
such a manner that the term of at least one member and not more than two
members shall expire in each year. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for
a term of three years, and all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term
only. Alternates, not exceeding four, may be appointed for one-year terms.
One member of the Township Committee, appointed by the Mayor, shall
serve as an ex officio member of the Recreation Committee, but shall have
no vote unless he is also formally appointed as a member of said Recreation
Committee.
§ 3-76. Relation to Township.
A. The Township Committee shall cooperate with the Recreation
Committee to coordinate recreational activities in the Township of
Andover in order to plan a balanced recreation program for the citizens
of the Township and in order to provide maximum use of recreational
facilities in the Township.
B. The Recreation Committee herein established shall not be or shall not
be deemed to be a recreation commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1
et seq. and shall not have the power or authority to purchase land or
hold title to any real property.
C. The Township Committee shall annually appropriate its budget funds
that may be used by the Recreation Committee to provide for a
balanced recreation program. The Recreation Committee may accept
additional financial support from time to time from fees, gifts, donations
or other sources.
D. Neither the Recreation Committee, nor any member or members
thereof, shall have any power or right, expressed or implied, to bind or
obligate the Township Committee of the Township of Andover directly
or indirectly.
§ 3-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-77
1:69
§ 3-77. Purpose.
The primary purpose of the Recreation Committee shall be to initiate and to
coordinate recreation programs in the Township of Andover.
§ 3-78. Organization.
The Recreation Committee may organize as it sees fit, choosing a Chairman
from among its members, and such other officers as it may deem advisable,
adopt rules and bylaws for the proper administration of its functions, and
formulate committees for the administration and handling of its programs.
§ 3-77 ANDOVER CODE § 3-78
1:70
ARTICLE XXIV
Civil Defense
§ 3-79. Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council.
There shall be a Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council pursuant to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41, and a Director thereof. The Police Department and all
departments of the Township government shall cooperate with and assist
the Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council as required.
§ 3-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-79
1:71

ARTICLE XXV
Public Records8
§ 3-80. Inspection of Public Records.
§ 3-81. Fees for copies. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-8]
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2,9 all records which
are required by law to be made, maintained or kept on file by any board,
body, agency, department, commission, authority or official of the
Township shall be deemed to be public records. Every citizen of the
state shall have the right to inspect such records during regular
business hours maintained by the custodian of the records. During such
regular business hours and under the supervision of a representative of
the custodian, every citizen of the state shall also have the right to copy
such records by hand and to purchase copies of the records. Copies of
records shall be made available upon the payment of the price as
established by law.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, where it appears that
the records which are sought to be examined pertain to an investigation
in progress by any body, agency, commission, board, authority or
official, the right of examination may be denied if the inspection,
copying or publication of the records would be inimical to the public
interest; provided that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit
any body, agency, commission, board, authority, or official from opening
such records for public examination if not otherwise prohibited by law.
A. Certified copies of all vital statistic records: $10. [Amended
6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
B. For official searches for municipal liens (tax searches) or for
improvements authorized but not assessed or for a certificate as to
approval of subdivisions as follows:
(1) When the property described in the application is shown on the
Assessment Map subdivided into Township lots: $10.
(2) When the property described in the application is or has been
subdivided and assessed as more than one item, an additional fee of
$10 shall be allowed for each subdivision separately assessed.
(3) Ten dollars shall be the maximum charge for a certificate covering
lands wholly within one block, as shown on the Assessment Map of
the Township, unless there is a subdivision of proprietorship
indicated by the assessment.
C. For a continuation of an official search for municipal liens or for
improvements authorized but not assessed or for a certificate as to
8. Editor's Note: See also, Chapter 125, Records, Public.
9. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 2001, c. 404. See now N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 et seq.
§ 3-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-81
1:73
§ 3-82. Copying by person requesting documents.
If the custodian of any such records shall find that there is no risk of damage
or mutilation of such records and that it would not be incompatible with the
economic and efficient operation of the office and the transaction of public
business therein, he may permit any citizen who is seeking to copy more
than 100 pages of records to use his own photographic process, approved
by the custodian, upon the payment of a reasonable fee, considering the
equipment and the time involved, to be fixed by the custodian of not less
than $10 or more than $50 per day.
§ 3-83. Return check policy. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-8]
If not addressed by the New Jersey state statutes for a specific municipal
department or specific subject, checks returned for insufficient or
uncollected funds shall be subject to a surcharge of $20, payable by cash,
money order or certified check to the Township of Andover.
approval of a subdivision within three years from the date of the
original search: $2 per year.
D. For duplicate tax bill: $5 for the first duplicate copy and $25 for each
subsequent duplicate copy of the same tax bill in the same tax year.
E. For a discharge of a lien affidavit: $10.
F. For filing a cancelled tax sale certificate with Sussex County Clerk: $10.
G. For written certification of paid taxes: $10.
H. To generate a duplicate tax sale certificate for a lost certificate held by
an outside holder: $100.
I. Mailing of notice of tax sale: $25.
J. Written confirmation that no certificate of continued occupancy is
required for resale of property: $15.
K. Municipal Court disposition: $10.
L. Third and subsequent lien redemption calculation requested within a
calendar year: $50. [Added 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08]
M. Lien redemption calculations requested by lienholder or his or her
representative: $50. To be paid by the lienholder upon request for the
calculation. [Added 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08; amended
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
§ 3-81 ANDOVER CODE § 3-83
1:74
ARTICLE XXVI
Environmental Commission
[Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
§ 3-84. Establishment; function.
§ 3-85. Powers and duties.
A. The Township Committee hereby creates and establishes an
Environmental Commission pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 et seq., which Commission shall be concerned with the
protection, development and use of the natural resources located in the
territorial limits of the Township.
B. Said Commission shall also be responsible for effectuating and
maintaining the Trust Fund described in § 3-90 below and for making
appropriate recommendations for the acquisition and/or preservation of
land within the Township.
A. The Commission shall have the following powers:
(1) The promotion of the conservation and development of the natural
resources of the Township.
(2) The planning, implementing and informing of the general public
with respect to local conservation programs.
(3) The responsibility to compile and maintain an index of all open
areas, publicly or privately owned, including marshlands, swamps
and other wetlands.
(4) The conduct of all appropriate research into the possible use or
uses of open spaces in the Township.
(5) The submission of recommendations to the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment of appropriate plans and programs for
inclusion in the Township Master Plan and for the general
development and use of such areas.
(6) Preparation of advertisements, books, maps, charts and other
appropriate material necessary to the discharge of its duties and
the distribution of the same.
(7) To act as a coordinating agency in the community with respect to
conservation matters and as a liaison between local conservation
needs and the regional, state and federal agencies responsible for
administering to those needs.
(8) Study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape
protection, environmental appearance, marine resources and
§ 3-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-85
1:75
protection of flora and fauna, marshlands, swamps and wetlands
recycling, and floodplain management.
(9) To identify all scenic, historic, park and recreation sites and make
recommendations for their protection and improvement.
(10) To make recommendations as to legislation for control of
excavation and soil erosion and other activities affecting the
landscape.
(11) To review all proposed road locations and subdivisions for their
environmental impact.
(12) To promote good architectural and landscape design for all
developments with adequate provisions for park and green areas
therein.
B. Ancillary duties of the Commission shall include, from time to time,
submittal of written recommendations to the Township Committee as
to:
(1) Which parcels of land should be acquired for recreation and
conservation purposes and whether such parcels should be
acquired in fee or only by acquisition of development rights;
(2) Which of the lands acquired for those purposes should be
developed and/or maintained;
(3) Which farmland should be acquired for farmland preservation
purposes and whether such farmland should be acquired in fee or
only by acquisition of development rights; and
(4) Which historic properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas, or
objects should be acquired for historic preservation purposes.
(5) The Commission shall submit to the Township Committee a
prioritized list of properties:
(a) Which it recommends that the municipality acquire; and/or
(b) From which it recommends that development rights should be
acquired; and/or
(c) Which the municipality has acquired and which the Committee
recommends be developed and/or maintained for recreation
and conservation purposes; and/or
(d) That are historic properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas
or objects that the Committee recommends be preserved or
acquired for historic preservation purposes.
C. After selection of the properties to be acquired, developed, maintained
or preserved referred to in Subsection B above, the municipality may
proceed to acquire by gift, purchase or by eminent domain proceedings,
§ 3-85 ANDOVER CODE § 3-85
1:76
§ 3-86. Membership; term.
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq., or to develop, maintain or preserve,
the identified parcels within the financial constraints established by the
Township Committee.
D. The Commission shall act and discharge its duties within the limits of
funds appropriated to it for such purpose by the Township Committee.
A. The Environmental Commission shall be composed of seven persons
appointed by the Mayor, which persons shall be citizens and residents
of the Township; one of whom shall also be a member of the Township
Planning Board and one of whom shall be a member of the Township
Recreation Committee. The Commissioners first appointed shall hold
office for terms as follows: two members for one year; two members for
two years; and three members for three years, respectively, from the
date in the year in which the appointments are made until their
successors are duly appointed and have qualified. Thereafter, all
subsequent appointments shall be for the term of three years. Members
shall receive no compensation for their services but may receive
reimbursement for proper and authorized out-of-pocket expenses in
accordance with existing Township regulations.
B. The Mayor, in addition to the regular members of the Commission
appointed pursuant to Subsection A, shall appoint not more than two
alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated at the terms
of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
(1) The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except
that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be
two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so
that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired
term only.
(2) An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he
requests one, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(3) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
C. The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens' advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the Environmental Commission
in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or
§ 3-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-86
1:77
§ 3-87. Vacancies; removal.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only and in the same manner
as the original appointment was made. The municipal governing body may
remove any member of the Commission for cause on written charges served
upon the member and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 3-88. Organization of Commission; records; meetings.
§ 3-89. Acquisitions by Commission.
The Commission, with the approval of the Township Committee, may from
time to time acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of
the Township by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any
of its purposes including but not limited to use as living museums, sites
for scientific study, areas for teaching of natural history and conservation,
places of historic or prehistoric interest and scenic beauty and habitat for
rare and endangered plants and animals and shall administer the same
for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an
acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development
right, easement including conservation easement, covenant or other
contractual right including conveyance on conditions or with limitations
or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect,
limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open
spaces and other land water areas in the Township.
§ 3-90. Funding.
take other action required of the Commission. Such person or persons
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
A. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Commission. The Commission is authorized
to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation.
B. The Commission shall meet once every two months in accordance with
provisions of the Open Public Meeting Law10 and shall also meet at such
times as may be requested by the Township Committee and shall keep a
record of its meetings and activities.
C. The Committee shall provide written reports to the Township
Committee and other boards as deemed necessary.
A. There is hereby established a reserve in the general capital fund, which
shall be known and designated as the "Trust Fund." A separate bank
account shall be opened and maintained for this purpose. Funds from
the Trust Fund may, as directed by the Township Committee, be utilized
to acquire vacant land, as well as land which has improvements upon it
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6.
§ 3-86 ANDOVER CODE § 3-90
1:78
§ 3-91. Sale of property.
No property acquired with funds from the Trust Fund shall be leased
or sold until the sale or lease of the same has been authorized by an
ordinance adopted by the Township Committee, and provided that the
Township Committee shall replace any land conveyed under this section
with land of at least equal fair market value and of reasonably equivalent
usefulness, size, quality and location to the land conveyed. Any monies
derived from the conveyance shall be deposited into the Trust Fund and
used for the purposes authorized by this article. Any such conveyance shall
be made in the manner prescribed by law.
at the time of acquisition where the purpose of the acquisition is
for recreation and conservation purposes, for farmland preservation
or for historic preservation purposes. In the event that the Township
Committee shall find it appropriate to apportion the cost of acquisition
between land and improvements, it may do so and charge the Trust
Fund for the approximate value that it deems appropriate relative
to land and the municipality's capital account for the value that it
determines shall be attributed to improvements. Trust funds may also,
as directed by the Township Committee, be used for the development
and/or maintenance of lands acquired for recreation or conservation
purposes, for the historic preservation or acquisition of historic
properties, structures, facilities, sites, areas or objects and/or for the
payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the
municipality for any of the above purposes.
B. The Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication to the fund of an
amount not to exceed $0.01 per $100 of assessed valuation for the year
2007 tax levy and not to exceed $0.02 of assessed valuation for
subsequent years. The Trust Fund shall also be permitted to accept
donations and testamentary bequests. The funds accumulated within
the Trust Fund may be utilized for the acquisition of land or
development rights in land or as a down payment for the issuance of
bonds for the same purpose or for any other purpose established herein
at the discretion of the Township Committee. Any and all interest
accruing shall remain in the Trust Fund and may be utilized for the
above-described purposes.
§ 3-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-91
1:79

ARTICLE XXVII
(Reserved)11
§ 3-92. through § 3-97. (Reserved)
11.Editor’s Note: Former Article XXVII, Open Space, Recreation and Farmland and Historic
Preservation Committee, added 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-29, was repealed 3-12-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-04.
§ 3-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-92
1:81

ARTICLE XXVIII
Civil Judgments and Settlements
[Added 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-02]
§ 3-98. Public reporting.
Whenever a civil lawsuit that names the Township, any of its departments
or divisions or any of its employees or officials as parties is resolved, either
by judgment or order of the court or by voluntary settlement, the Mayor
or his or her designee shall make every effort to publicly announce the
amount and terms of the judgment, order or settlement at the next regular
Committee meeting and shall forthwith file a copy of the judgment, order
or settlement agreement with the Clerk where it shall remain on file as a
public record. Judgments shall not include decisions from the County Board
of Taxation.
§ 3-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-98
1:83

ARTICLE XXIX
Awarding of Public Professional Service and Vendor Contracts
[Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05]
§ 3-99. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGREEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — An agreement for the
rendering of professional services to or on behalf of the Township, as
defined herein, and without regard to whether the said agreement or
contract is awarded pursuant to and in accordance with the "Fair and Open"
procedures as established in the "Pay-to-Play" Law, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et
seq.
AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE GOODS OR SERVICES — An agreement for
the purchasing of goods to or on behalf of the Township and any vendor
contracts for the procurement of goods or services not considered
"professional" as defined in the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq., above the public bid threshold that may be established
from time to time by the State of New Jersey, and without regard to whether
the said agreement or contract is awarded pursuant to and in accordance
with the "Fair and Open" procedures as established in the "Pay-to-Play" Law,
N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et seq.
ANDOVER CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Any contribution, whether in
the form of money, free service or pledge, including without limitation
any in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets, advertisements or the
like, directly or indirectly, to any campaign committee or election fund
of any candidate for, or holder of the office of, Mayor or Council of the
Township, or to any municipal or party committee or political club or
organization within the Township; the term "directly or indirectly" as used
herein shall further mean and include any campaign contributions made
through intermediaries or third parties for the purpose of concealing the
source of the contribution(s).
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Andover campaign contribution, county
campaign contribution and/or pass-through campaign contribution as
defined herein.
COUNTY CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Any contribution, whether in the
form of money, free service or pledge, including without limitation any
in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets, advertisements or the like,
directly or indirectly, to any county-level political organization or countylevel
campaign committee or fund within the County of Sussex; the term
"directly or indirectly" as used herein shall further mean and include any
campaign contributions made through intermediaries or third parties for
the purpose of concealing the source of the contribution(s).
ENTITY — Any corporation, professional corporation, joint venture, general
or limited partnership, trust or limited-liability company, or subsidiary or
parent of any of the foregoing.
§ 3-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-99
1:85
INELIGIBLE VENDOR — Any vendor who has during the preceding threeyear
period made campaign contributions in excess of the limits set forth in
§ 3-101 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Andover.
INELIGIBLE VENDOR LIST — A list of ineligible vendors maintained by the
Township Administrator or his designee of the Township in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
PASS-THROUGH CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Any contribution, whether
in the form of money, free service or pledge, including without limitation
any in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets, advertisements or the
like, directly or indirectly, to any campaign committee or election fund
of any candidate for or holder of the office of Township Committee of
the Township, or to any municipal or party committee or political club
or organization within the Township, that is received from the election
fund or other campaign account of any elected official or candidate for
any office other than Township Committee of the Township, or from any
county political organization, county campaign committee or political action
committee or fund within or without the County of Sussex.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Andover as a municipal entity, and any
elected official, officer, employee, agent, department, board or commission
of the Township of Andover.
VENDOR — Any individual person or entity who either negotiates, bids or
otherwise seeks to enter into an agreement to purchase goods or services
as defined herein. In the case of any vendor who is an individual person, the
term shall also include the individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at
home, as well as any entity by whom any of them are employed or in which
any of them have an ownership interest in excess of 10%. In the case of any
vendor who is an entity, the term shall also include each and every principal
of the said entity who has an ownership interest in excess of 10% in the
entity, or any parent or subsidiary of the entity, and their spouses, if any,
and any child living at home.
VENDOR'S CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY — A certification in lieu of
affidavit pursuant to which each vendor shall list each and every Andover
campaign contribution and each county campaign contribution the vendor
has made during the preceding year.
§ 3-100. Prohibition on awarding contracts for goods or services to
certain campaign contributors.
A. The Township shall not enter into any agreement for any professional
service or for the purchase of goods or other services with any vendor
that has made any campaign contribution in excess of the limits
specified in § 3-101 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township
of Andover, during the one-year period immediately preceding the date
of the agreement, or during the term of any such agreement.
B. This section shall apply to all professional services contracts, with the
exception of Subsection B(4) and (5) below, and to all contracts for the
§ 3-99 ANDOVER CODE § 3-100
1:86
§ 3-101. Andover and county contribution limits affecting vendor
eligibility; conflicts of interest.
Campaign contribution limits affecting the eligibility of vendors, pursuant
to §§ 3-100 and 3-102, to enter into or be paid pursuant to agreements for
the purchase of goods or services are as follows:
§ 3-102. Limits on political campaign contributions by vendors.
No vendor shall knowingly solicit on behalf of, or make any campaign
contribution in excess of, the limits specified in § 3-101 herein during the
pendency of any such negotiations for, or during the term of, any agreement
to purchase goods or services.
purchase of goods and other services with the exception of the
following items:
(1) Contracts that are awarded as a result of open public bidding as set
forth under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq.;
(2) Contracts that are offered to the lowest, responsible, qualified
bidder after public advertising for bids and quotes, pursuant to the
provisions of the competitive contracting requirement of the Local
Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.;
(3) Contracts with an anticipated aggregate value less than $17,500;
(4) Contracts that are awarded due to certain public exigencies
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.12;
(5) Contracts with any New Jersey government and/or federal
government agencies;
(6) Contracts with banking institutions, insurance and public utility
companies that are regulated by state restrictions on political
contributions; and
(7) Contracts the Township enters into for the purchase and
acquisition of open space.
A. The maximum combined amount of Andover campaign contributions
that may be made by a vendor during any election cycle shall not
exceed $300.
B. The maximum amount of county-level campaign contributions that may
be made by a vendor shall not exceed $300 during any election cycle to
either party.
§ 3-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-103
1:87
§ 3-103. Vendors to certify compliance with restrictions on
campaign contributions; obligation is continuing.
Prior to issuing any purchase order or awarding to any vendor an
agreement for the sale of goods and services, or making any payment
pursuant to the same, or granting any change order in connection
therewith, the Township's Administrator, or his/her designee, shall require
that the vendor submit the required forms adopted by the State of New
Jersey in conjunction with the state's existing "Pay-to-Play" law, in which
the vendor shall verify that it has not knowingly made any campaign
contribution in excess of the limits set forth in § 3-101 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Andover. The Township
Administrator or his/her designee shall keep the original of each such
certification of vendor eligibility on file. Notwithstanding anything
contained herein to the contrary, the vendor shall have a continuing duty to
report immediately to the Township Administrator or his/her designee any
campaign contributions made in violation of this section that occur during
any time that an agreement for the sale of goods or services is in effect, or
that occur during the pendency of any negotiations or bidding by the vendor
to enter into such an agreement.
§ 3-104. Ineligible vendors.
In addition to such other penalties as may be provided by law, any vendor
who, after 10 days' notice of the consequences thereof, refuses or otherwise
fails to provide the certification required herein, or who knowingly files a
false vendor's certification of eligibility, shall be designated by the Township
Administrator or his/her designee as an ineligible vendor, and shall be
promptly included on the ineligible vendor list maintained pursuant to
§ 3-105 hereof and shall thereafter be prohibited from entering or
continuing any agreement for the sale of goods or services with the
Township, and from receiving any payment pursuant to such an agreement
for a period of three years from the date the vendor is designated as
ineligible.
§ 3-105. Township Administrator to maintain list of ineligible
vendors.
The Township Administrator or his/her designee shall prepare and at all
times maintain a list of vendors who are, by virtue of the provisions of
this section, ineligible to enter into an agreement for the sale of goods
or services with the Township. The Administrator or his/her designee shall
prepare this list based upon information obtained from the submission of
the required forms from the vendors pursuant to § 3-103. The Township
Administrator or his/her designee shall update the list of ineligible vendors
within 10 business days of the receipt of any certifications or information as
required in this section.
§ 3-103 ANDOVER CODE § 3-106
1:88
§ 3-106. Contributions made prior to effective date.
Notwithstanding any term contained herein to the contrary, this article shall
not consider campaign contributions made prior to September 1, 2011,
and no such campaign contributions shall be considered by the Township
Administrator or his/her designee in determining a vendor's eligibility
pursuant to this section.
§ 3-107. Curing violations; return of excess contributions.
Any vendor may cure a campaign contribution made in excess of the limits
set forth in § 3-101 of this act, if, the said vendor notifies the Administrator
or his/her designee of the Township in writing that it has received a
reimbursement of a contribution in excess of that allowed in § 3-101 and by
attaching a true and correct copy of the check received in reimbursement
within 60 days of making such contribution.
§ 3-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-107
1:89

ARTICLE XXX
Sustainable Andover
[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
§ 3-108. Establishment of Committee.
There is hereby established the Township of Andover green committee,
"Sustainable Andover."
§ 3-109. Mission; purpose.
§ 3-110. Members.
A. The mission of Sustainable Andover shall be as follows: "Bringing
people, businesses and the community together to develop policies and
practices to create a sustainable Andover Township for all to enjoy."
B. The purpose and goals of Sustainable Andover are as follows:
(1) Collaborate with Township employees, service providers and other
governmental agencies to share resource information and ideas
consistent with the mission of the Committee;
(2) Encourage participation of all employees and residents to solicit
ideas on green initiatives;
(3) Research and analyze green initiatives which make practical
environmental and financial sense; and
(4) Develop and implement strategies for sustainable green initiatives
in municipal operations and within the Township, address, and
advise the Township Council accordingly.
A. Sustainable Andover shall consist of nine members, who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee, upon recommendation by
Sustainable Andover.
B. Membership shall consist of:
(1) One representative from the Township Committee;
(2) Three representatives from the Environmental Commission;
(3) One representative from the Open Space Commission; and
(4) Four citizen representatives.
C. Each of the members shall have one vote, except for the Township
Committee representative, who shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting
liaison of the Committee.
§ 3-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-110
1:91
§ 3-111. Terms of members.
The appointment of the Committee members shall be for one-year terms. A
vacancy in the Committee occurring other than by expiration of the term
shall be filled by the Township Committee for the unexpired term in the
same manner as by original appointment.
§ 3-112. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet at Town Hall or another agreed-upon location
within the Township on a monthly basis or as deemed necessary by the
Committee. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Committee shall forward
to the Township Clerk, as soon as practicable, a copy of the minutes of
the meeting. The Committee shall advise the Township Committee of the
Committee's work. The Committee shall retain attendance records of all
members.
D. The Committee shall designate one of its members as Chair of
Sustainable Andover. The Township Committee representative may not
serve as the Chair.
E. All Committee members shall serve without compensation in
performance of their duties.
§ 3-110 ANDOVER CODE § 3-112
1:92
Chapter 7
ALARMS
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, security and fire emergency alarm devices within
the Township of Andover.
§ 7-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains, has control over, or owns any alarm device designed to summon
police or fire or other emergency personnel to any location in response to
an alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm
companies from providing service by private source to other offices or
premises within the Township of Andover, except, however, that any person
having a premises protected by an alarm device shall still be responsible for
the registration thereof in accordance with §§ 7-4 and 7-5.
§ 7-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system providing warning of intrusion,
fire, flood, or like peril or emergency.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of alarm
devices installed for one or more buildings at any location.
DIAL ALARM DEVICE — That type of device using telephone or other lines
which transmits an alarm signal or signals directly through or to the Police
Department switchboard.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm activated by inadvertent, negligent,
unintentional or intentional act or omission of a person, other than an
intruder or by fire, and shall also include alarms caused by malfunctioning
of the alarm device or other related equipment.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which when activated produces an
audible or visual signal (such as, but not limited to, store burglar alarms
activating bell devices). It shall not include motor vehicle anti-theft alarms.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning or leasing or having control over an
alarm device or a local alarm within the scope of this chapter, including
but not limited to the owner or tenant of a premises or building or other
structure.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, association or
other entity.
§ 3-112 ALARMS § 7-3
7:93
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Andover Township Police Department, or any
other law enforcement agency exercising lawful jurisdiction.
§ 7-4. Alarm user responsibility.
§ 7-5. Registration form.
Any person who owns, installs, maintains, or operates or has control over
an alarm device or a local alarm shall make application for an alarm user
permit in writing to the Chief of Police which application shall contain:
§ 7-6. Connection of devices to police headquarters; abuses;
disconnection of unauthorized devices.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to have control over, or to operate, or
to install or maintain an alarm device within the Township of Andover
without first registering said use with the Police Department in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Every user of an alarm device, shall by January 1, 1990, submit to the
Police Department an application for a permit. Information must be
kept current, and the permittee must notify the Police Department in
writing of any changes of the information listed on the registration form
within no more than 30 days following the applicable change.
A. The full name and address of the applicant, including a complete
physical address and property description which will permit the
appropriate municipal department to respond to the alarm.
B. The exact location of each alarm device.
C. Name and address of person installing, maintaining and/or owning the
system.
D. The type of device, including what provisions have been made relating
to false alarms and testing provisions.
E. A list of persons and their telephone numbers who may be contacted in
the event of an alarm, and at least one other person who is authorized
to receive notification of an alarm call and who is authorized to enter
upon the premises in which the alarm system is located.
F. Any additional relevant information as may be reasonably required by
the Chief of Police.
A. Dial alarm devices shall only be connected to police headquarters on
telephone or other lines as are designated by the Chief of Police. Said
dial alarms shall be registered as specified in §§ 7-4 and 7-5 of this
chapter.
B. Where an investigation of the Police Department discloses or concludes
that there has occurred continued abuse of a dial alarm and a disregard
by the permittee for taking remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the
§ 7-3 ANDOVER CODE § 7-6
7:94
§ 7-7. Nonapplicability; audible signal time limits; false alarms.
Chief of Police shall have the right to require that dial alarms not dial
the switchboard at police headquarters for a limited or permanent time.
However, no such permit or registration shall be revoked or suspended
without giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause before the
Chief of Police why such an action should not be taken.
C. Any unauthorized equipment shall be disconnected by order to the
Chief of Police for noncompliance with this chapter. Any person
installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be prosecuted
for violation of this chapter, and each and every day said equipment is in
operation shall be considered a separate violation. Any permittee shall
by acceptance of the permit be deemed to have consented to inspection
of the premises on which said alarm devices are installed at reasonable
hours by the Chief of Police or his designee.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any alarm system
installed on the property occupied by the Township, county, state or
federal government agency or office, or to any self-contained smoke
detection device, carbon monoxide, flood, or other security device
having only an indoor audible or visual alarm system which is not
audible except inside the premises wherein the alarm device is located
or installed.
B. All local alarms with outdoor audible signals shall be registered, as
provided in this chapter.
C. Local alarm devices having an audible alarm installed out of doors shall
be designed to limit the operation of a bell or sound-producing
instrument to a maximum of 20 minutes after activation. If the duration
of an activated audible device of a local alarm exceeds 20 minutes, the
warnings and penalties provided by Subsection D of this section shall
apply as though a false alarm had been activated.
D. In case of a false alarm any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify police headquarters. In addition, in the case of false
alarms the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made and
keep a record of said false alarms on file. In the event of a false alarm,
the following penalties shall be imposed upon the person or persons
having control over the alarm device, or who caused or allowed the
false alarm to occur, or both:
(1) For the first, second and third false alarms in any given calendar
year, a warning shall be issued. However, for a first, second and
third false fire alarm in any given year there shall be imposed a civil
penalty of at least $25 and no more than $250.
(2) For the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a civil penalty
of $25 shall be paid to the Township of Andover, except that a civil
penalty for a fourth false fire alarm shall be $250.
§ 7-6 ALARMS § 7-7
7:95
§ 7-8. Limitations of Township obligations.
§ 7-9. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of said system.
§ 7-10. Connection fee schedule and renewal of permits.
(3) For the fifth and subsequent false alarms in the same calendar year,
a civil penalty no less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each
occurrence shall be paid to the Township of Andover accompanied
with an advisory letter from a licensed alarm company, dated within
30 days of the date of the false alarm, stating that the system is
operating properly. If the person fails to provide written proof that
the alarm system is operating properly, as provided above, a civil
penalty may be imposed up to a maximum of $1,000 in the court's
discretion. However, the civil penalty for a fifth false fire alarm in
the same calendar year shall be $1,000 notwithstanding any
language herein to the contrary.
A. The Township of Andover shall be under no duty or obligation to any
permittee. Any individual permit issued hereunder may be revoked at
any time by the Township Committee upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police, provided that 30 days' notice is given in writing to said
permittee to the permittee's last known address.
B. A condition precedent to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this
chapter shall be the obligation of each permittee and the alarm
contractor of such permittee to agree in writing to indemnify and save
harmless the Township of Andover, its agents, servants, and employees,
including but not limited to members of the Police Department, any and
all responding fire departments, any and all responding emergency or
rescue squads, from and on account of any and all damages arising
from or as a result of any and all phases of the operation of any such
permittee or alarm contractor. Additionally, it shall be a further
condition precedent to the issuance of a permit that each permittee
agree in writing to indemnify and save harmless the Township of
Andover, its agents, servants and employees, including the members of
the Police Department, any and all responding fire departments, any
and all responding emergency or rescue squads, from and on account of
any and all damages arising from or sustained as a result of any forced
entry by police personnel onto the premises during alarm response.
A. All permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewal permits
will be issued effective and only upon submission of a new application
and payment of the annual maintenance fee.
B. The following maintenance charges shall be in effect from the effective
date of this chapter and shall apply for one calendar year or any part
§ 7-7 ANDOVER CODE § 7-10
7:96
§ 7-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates the terms of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of up to $2,000, or not more than 90 days in jail, or both,
or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorized bicycles — See Ch. 93.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 175.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 183.
§ 10-1. Definitions; time standard.
§ 10-2. Authorization for closing of street.
thereof. On December 31 of each year the annual maintenance fees
shall become due immediately, or the alarm device shall be
disconnected. All fees shall be payable to the Township of Andover:
(1) Telephone dialer devices (residential): $25 per year.
(2) Telephone dialer devices (other than residential): $25 per year.
(3) All other alarm devices: $15 per year (residential); $25 per year
(nonresidential).
A. Words and phrases defined. Whenever any words or phrases are used in
this chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply
to such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the Township.
A. The Public Safety Director or, in his absence, disability or inability to
act, the Mayor and, in the event of his absence, disability or inability to
act, then the Chief of Police of the municipality, is hereby authorized to
provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to
motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
day or days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
§ 7-10 ALARMS § 10-2
7:97
§ 10-3. Removal of vehicles in violation of chapter; costs.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 10-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 10-5. Effect of chapter.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 10-6. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Andover are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 10-7. Parking regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, or any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 10-8. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period of greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 10-2 ANDOVER CODE § 10-8
7:98
§ 10-9. Stopping or standing prohibited on certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time on any day upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Location
Current Road South From the intersection Route 616
(Newton-Sparta Road) to the intersection
of Route 669 (Limecrest Road)
Goodale Road
[Amended
2-28-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001-412]
South From the intersection of Luchetti Way in
the southerly direction for 1,500 feet
Limecrest Road West To a point 250 feet north of the traffic
light located at the intersection of
Limecrest Road and Newton-Sparta Road.
Newton-Sparta
Road (County
Route 616)
[Amended
2-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-4]
Both The entire length from the Sparta
Township line to the Newton Town line
§ 10-10. Parking time limited on certain streets.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations, etc., dictate or require
the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the
free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs
are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of
any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being erected
as required by law.
A. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between
the hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described.
12.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, references throughout this chapter to Pinecrest
Road have been changed to Luchetti Way.
§ 10-8 ALARMS § 10-10
7:99
§ 10-11. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
Name
of Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Springdale-
Gardens Road
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
From the
intersection of
Route 206 to the
Fredon Township
line
West Sunset
Boulevard
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Entire length
B. (Reserved)13
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name
of Street Side Hours Location
Elm Avenue Both 10:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
except
Sundays and
holidays
From the westerly curbline of
Route 517 (Andover-Sparta
Road) for a distance of 400
feet westerly
Hillside
Park Barn
[Added
7-28-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-07]
At all times
(except for
loading and
unloading)
The area contained within
Hillside Park Barn, Hillside
Pavilion and Hillside House
Lake Iliff
Road
Both At all times From the northerly curbline of
Limecrest Road (Route 669)
for a distance of 1,000 feet
northerly
Potter
Avenue
Both 10:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
except
Sundays and
holidays
From the westerly curbline of
Route 517 (Andover-Sparta
Road) for a distance of 1,000
feet northerly
Stickles
Pond Road
Both 10:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From intersection of Route
616 (Newton-Sparta Road) to
intersection of Route 206
13.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Night parking restricted, was repealed 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-13.
§ 10-10 ANDOVER CODE § 10-12
7:100
§ 10-12. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight
(tons)
Location
Current Drive
[Added
12-8-2004- by
Ord. No.
2004-19]
4 From County Route 616 to County Route
517
Dorset Lane 4 From County Road 623 to its easterly
terminus
Goodale Road 4 Entire length, both directions
Lake Iliff Road 4 Entire length, both directions
Mulford Road 4 Entire length, both directions
O'Brien Lane 4 From Limecrest Road to Mulford Road
Oxford Road 4 From Pierce Road to Dorset Lane
Payne Road
[Added
12-8-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-19]
4 From County Route 517 to Current Drive
Pierce Road 4 From County Route 623 to the Andover
Township-Lafayette Township corporate
line
Pinkneyville Road 4 Entire length, both directions
§ 10-13. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 10-12 ALARMS § 10-13
7:101
Name of Street Direction Limits
Cedar Drive Eastbound Between Pinecliff Road and
Prospect Place
Current Drive
[Added 9-24-2012
by Ord. No.
2012-09;
amended
5-9-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-05]
Northwest Between the westernmost driveway
of 20 Current Drive (Block 73, Lot
7) and Newton Sparta Road
Pinecliff Road Southwest Entire length
Ridge Road East and north Between Cedar Drive and its
easterly terminus at Pinecliff Road
§ 10-14. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Old Creamery Road Between Limecrest Road and the
Andover Township/Andover Borough
corporate line
Skytop Road Between Limecrest Road and Andover
Sparta Road
Stickles Pond Road/ Yates Avenue Between U.S. Route 206 and Newton-
Sparta Road
Valleyfield Road/ Hemlock Avenue Between Andover-Sparta Road and
Old Creamery Road
§ 10-15. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
Bernard Drive and Irving Place Irving Place
Bernard Drive and Vivian Plaza Vivian Plaza
Club Road and Bruce Drive Bruce Drive
Club Road and Manor Drive Manor Drive
Country Club Lane and Park View
Lane
Park View Lane
§ 10-13 ANDOVER CODE § 10-15
7:102
Intersection Stop Signs On
Goodale Road and Luchetti Way Luchetti Way
Hillcrest Road and Cedar Drive Cedar Drive (southerly approach
facing northbound)
Hillcrest Avenue and Sussex Avenue Sussex Avenue
Howard Drive and Vivian Plaza Vivian Plaza
Kilroy Road and Ballantine Road Ballantine Road
Knox Road and Sunset Terrace Sunset Terrace
Lake Iliff Road and Goodale Road Goodale Road
Linda Lane and Florence Lane Florence Lane
Longview Road and Terrace Drive Terrace Drive
Luchetti Way and Linda Lane Linda Lane
Manor Drive and Great Oak Road Great Oak Road
Manor Drive and Knox Road Knox Road (both approaches)
Manor Drive and Sunset Terrace Sunset Terrace
Mt. Nebo Drive and Westview
Terrace
Westview Terrace
Mulford Road and McPeek Road McPeek Road
Mulford Road and O'Brien Lane O'Brien Lane
Park Lane and Longview Drive Longview Drive
Sussex Avenue and Delaware View Delaware View
Terrace Drive and Deer Pond Road Deer Pond Road
West Lakeview Road and Westview
Terrace
Westview Terrace
§ 10-16. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersections Yield Signs On
Bernard Drive at Arthur Avenue Arthur Avenue
Bruce Drive at Knox Road Knox Road
Hillcrest Road and Cedar Drive Cedar Drive (easterly approach facing
westbound traffic)
Payne Road at Current Drive Current Drive (southerly approach
facing northbound traffic)
§ 10-15 ALARMS § 10-17
7:103
§ 10-17. No turn on red.
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
From To
Northbound on Limecrest Road Eastbound on Newton-Sparta Road
Southbound on Limecrest Road Westbound on Newton-Sparta Road
Eastbound on Newton-Sparta Road Southbound on Limecrest Road
Westbound on Newton-Sparta Road Northbound on Limecrest Road
§ 10-18. Handicapped parking.
§ 10-19. Speed limits.
Speed limits for both directions of travel shall be established as follows.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the below designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Andover-Mohawk Road
(County Route 613):
Zone 1 35 From the Andover Borough
line to Roseville Road
Zone 2 45 To the westerly leg of Kilroy
Road
Zone 3 40 To the Byram Township line
Andover-Sparta Road
(County Route 517):
Zone 1 35 From the Andover Borough
line to Overlook Road
Zone 2 45 To Skytop Road
Ayers Circle 25 Entire length
A. The following area in Hillside Park may be used for handicapped
parking only: starting from the westerly curbline of Lake Iliff Road at
the upper entrance on Hillside Park for a distance of 83 feet in the
westerly direction.
B. The following areas at the Andover Township Municipal Building may
be used for handicapped parking only: starting from the easterly
curbline of Newton-Sparta Road at the lower parking lot for a distance
of 50 feet in the southerly direction.
§ 10-17 ANDOVER CODE § 10-19
7:104
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Ballantine Road 20 Between Andover-Mohawk
Road (County Route 613) and
Kilroy Road
Brighton Avenue
(County Route 606)
40 Between the Green Township
line and the Andover Borough
line
Brighton Road
(County Route 603)
45 From State Highway Route
206 to the Green Township
line
Bruce Drive [Amended
8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
25 Entire length
Cambridge Road
[Added 4-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-10]
35 Entire length
Cedar Drive 25 Between Hillcrest Avenue and
Ridge Road
Club Road [Amended
8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
25 Entire length
Country Club Lane
[Amended 8-13-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-14]
25 Entire length
Current Drive 25 Entire length
Delaware View 25 Between County Route 517
and Sussex Avenue
Dorset Lane [Added
4-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-10]
35 Entire length
Elm Avenue 25 Between County Route 517
and terminus
Great Oak Road
[Amended 8-13-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-14]
25 Entire length
Greendale Road 40 Between State Highway Route
206 and the Andover
Township-Fredon Township
line
Goodale Road 30 Between State Highway Route
206 to Lake Iliff Road
§ 10-19 ALARMS § 10-19
7:105
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Hemlock Avenue 25 Between Old Creamery Road
and Valleyfield Road
Huntsville Road 35 From County Route 611 to the
Green Township line
Knox Road [Amended
8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
25 Entire length
Lake Iliff Road 35 Entire length
Lenape Avenue 25 Between County Route 517
and Old Creamery Road
Limecrest Road
(County Route 669):
Zone 1 40 From the southerly Township
line to 1,550 feet north of Old
Creamery Road
Zone 2 45 To 2,000 feet south of Lake
Iliff Road
Zone 3 40 To the northerly Township line
(Sussex Mills Road) except 25
mph in the Long Pond School
Zone (1,465 feet north of
Broadview Drive to 1,475 feet
south of Current Drive) during
recess when the presence of
children is clearly visible from
the roadway or while children
are going to or leaving school
during opening or closing
hours
Manor Drive [Amended
8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
25 Entire length
Maple Drive 25 Entire length
Michael Court [Added
6-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-11]
25 Entire length
Mulford Road 40 Entire length
Newton-Sparta Road
(County Route 616):
§ 10-19 ANDOVER CODE § 10-19
7:106
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Zone 2 35 Between Newton Town line
and Stickle Pond Road
Zone 3 40 Between Stickle Pond Road
and Florence Lane
Zone 4 50 Between Florence Lane and
the Sparta Township line
except 35 mph in the Florence
M. Burd School Zone (300 feet
west of Current Drive to 500
feet east of Current Drive)
during recess when the
presence of children is clearly
visible from the roadway or
while children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
Old Creamery Road 25 Between County Route 517
and County Route 669
Overlook Road 25 Between County Route 517
and terminus
Park View Road 25 Entire length
Penn Avenue 25 Entire length
Perona Road 35 Entire length
Pierce Road 30 From Lawrence Road to the
Lafayette Township line
Pinecliff Road 25 Between Cedar Drive and
Ridge Road
Potter Avenue 25 Between County Route 517
and terminus
Ridge Road 25 Between Prospect Place and
Cedar Drive
Roseville Road [Added
10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-11]
25 Entire length
Skytop Road 35 Entire length
Southdown Road
[Added 4-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-10]
35 Entire length
Sunset Terrace [Added
8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
25 Entire length
§ 10-19 ALARMS § 10-19
7:107
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Sussex Avenue 25 Between Old Creamery Road
and Hillcrest Avenue
Sussex County Route
616 [Added 9-22-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-15]
Zone 1 35 Between the municipal
boundary of the Town of
Newton and the Township of
Andover to Florence Lane
Zone 2 45 Between Florence Lane and a
point 1,550 feet west of
Limecrest Road (County Route
669)
Zone 3 35 Between a point 1,550 feet
west of Limecrest Road
(County Route 669) and a
point 2,800 feet east of
Limecrest Road (County Route
669)
Zone 4 45 Between a point 2,800 feet
east of Limecrest Road
(County Route 669) and the
municipal boundary of
Andover Township and Sparta
Township
School Zone 30 In the Florence Burd School
Zone in Andover Township,
within Zone 3, between a
point 545 feet west of Current
Drive and a point 617 feet east
of Current Drive during recess
or while children are going to
or leaving school during
opening or closing times
Valleyfield Road 25 Between Hemlock Avenue and
County Route 517
Victoria Pines Lane
[Added 6-11-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-11]
30 Entire length
Warbasse Junction Road
(County Route 663):
§ 10-19 ANDOVER CODE § 10-19
7:108
Name of Street Speed Limit
(mph)
Location
Zone 2 50 From the Newton Town line to
1,150 feet north of Mile Post
1, thence
Zone 3 45 To the Lafayette Township line
Wisteria Road [Added
6-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-11]
30 Entire length
§ 10-20. Restricted turning. [Added 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
The following described streets, parts of streets and locations are hereby
designated as restricted turning areas in the direction indicated.
§ 10-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07]
The following penalties shall be imposed for violations listed herein:
Section Violation Fine
§ 10-8 Parking prohibited:
State of emergency $44
§ 10-10B Night parking restricted:
10:00 p.m. - 6:00 a.m. (Nov. 15 - Apr. 15) $44
§ 10-11 Parking prohibited:
Elm Avenue (10:00 p.m. - 8:00 a.m.) $44
Hillside Park Barn (at all times) $100
Potter Avenue (10:00 p.m. - 8:00 a.m.) $44
Stickles Pond Road (10:00 p.m.-8:00 a.m.) $44
§ 10-18 Handicapped parking [N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.13(b)] $123
§ 10-22F Restricted parking:
Rolling Hills Condominiums
$44
§ 10-22. Rolling Hills Condominium Complex.
Applicability of Title 39 within the Rolling Hills Condominium Complex.
The provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New
A. The egress into Sussex County Route 616 (Newton-Sparta Road)
located approximately 1,284 feet west of Limecrest Road, at Lot 11 in
Block 105, Florence M. Burd School, shall be designated a “No Left
Turn” zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and the hours
of 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 10-19 ALARMS § 10-22
7:109
Jersey shall be applicable within all semi-public and private roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots situated within the Rolling Hills Condominium
Complex and the following regulations pertaining thereto are hereby
adopted:
A. Parking.
(1) All vehicles. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
(2) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking sign
and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
B. Through streets. The following street or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs have been provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Cheyenne Road From McPeek Road to terminus
C. Stop intersections (stop streets). The following described intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Cherokee Road and McPeek Road Cherokee Road
Cheyenne Road and McPeek Road Cheyenne Road
Dakota Drive and Cherokee Road Dakota Drive
Dakota Drive and Seminole Road Dakota Drive
Navajo Drive and Iroquois Court Iroquois Court
Navajo Drive and McPeek Road Navajo Drive
Seminole Road and McPeek Road Seminole Road
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the Rolling Hills
Condominium parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cherokee Road 15 Entire length
Cheyenne Road 15 Entire length
Dakota Drive 15 Entire length
§ 10-22 ANDOVER CODE § 10-22
7:110
§ 10-23. No parking when snow covered. [Added 9-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-11]
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Iroquois Court 15 Entire length
Navajo Road 15 Entire length
Seminole Road 15 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
E. Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's
or operator's expense.
F. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of Street Sides Location
Cherokee Road Both Entire length
Cheyenne Road Both Entire length
Dakota Drive Both Entire length
Iroquois Court Both Entire length
McPeek Road Both Entire length
Mohegan Circle Both Entire length
Navajo Drive Both Entire length
Seminole Road Both Entire length
G. Signing. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the Rolling Hills Condominium Association. Installation
shall be inspected by the Andover Township Police Department to
ensure installations meet state and federal specifications, and all
signing shall conform to the current Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
H. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by the New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 10-22 ALARMS § 10-23
7:111
Chapter 12
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Retail food establishments — See Chs. 59 and
202.
Games of chance — See Ch. 63.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, including town-owned and operated parking
lots, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked on any
street or highway or portion thereof. This parking prohibition shall
remain in effect for an eight-hour period following the cessation of such
snowfall.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs for the
removal and storage before regaining possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being erected
as required by law.
D. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section or
any supplement hereto shall be liable for a penalty of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both.
E. Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this section
including town-owned and operated parking lots will be towed by police
at the owner's expense if the vehicle is deemed a nuisance and/or a
hindrance to snow removal efforts of the Department of Public Works.
§ 10-23 ANDOVER CODE § 10-23
7:112
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as Chapter VIII of the 1973 Code; as amended
through Ord. No. 83-36]
§ 12-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Andover in accordance with the provisions
of an Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled “An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages,” comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 12-3. Licenses.
§ 12-4. License fees; type and number of licenses. [Amended
5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the Act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 12-1, and all other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey or the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Township Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of
this article.
C. License required. Unless an exception under the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law (the “Act”) or the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control (the “rules and regulations”)
exists, no person shall manufacture, sell, possess with intent to sell,
transport, warehouse, rectify, blend, treat, fortify, mix, process, bottle
or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township without having
obtained a license in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations and
this article. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
A. The types of license which shall be issued, annual license fees and
maximum number of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
§ 12-1 ALARMS § 12-4
7:113
§ 12-5. Hours; sale to minors; visibility and access requirements.
Class of License Number of Licenses
Annual License Fee
(for 2003)
Plenary retail
consumption
10 $597
Club 2 $150
B. The provisions of this section with respect to the limit on the number of
licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses presently
issued; nor shall this section prohibit the issuance of a new plenary
retail consumption license to a person operating a hotel or motel
containing at least 100 sleeping rooms. Such a license shall be renewed
or transferred only from or to a hotel or motel likewise containing at
least 100 sleeping rooms.
A. Hours of sale.
(1) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or distributed in
original containers, for off-premises consumption except between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. [Amended 5-14-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-6]
(2) No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or
consumed in any licensed premises on any day between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except New Year's Day each year as
hereinafter provided.
B. New Year's Day. The provisions of Subsection A(2) shall not apply on
January 1. On that day no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered to or consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
C. Vacation of licensed premises. No patron or guest shall be permitted to
remain in any licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m., except as provided in Subsection B. [Amended 5-14-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-6]
D. Sale to certain persons. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell,
serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of
any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person under the
legal age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages or to any person
actually or apparently intoxicated, or permit or suffer the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage by any such person in or upon the licensed
premises. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
E. Fingerprinting and record check. No licensee shall employ, or have
connected with him in any business capacity whatsoever, any person
who has not obtained an identification card from the Township of
§ 12-4 ANDOVER CODE § 12-5
7:114
§ 12-6. Minors.
Andover, and submitted himself for fingerprinting, photography, record
check and any other information required by the Township.
F. Visibility and access to licensed premises. All licensees shall ensure
that the licensee area is adequately visible as required by the licensing
authority. Access shall be granted to all proper authorities for the
enforcement of the rules and regulations and Township ordinances.
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
G. Bring your own bottle "BYOB" exception for establishments not licensed
for on-premises consumption. The following rules, which are
incorporated by reference from N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27, as amended, and are
hereby made part of § 12-5, apply to those establishments allowing
patrons to bring your own bottle ("BYOB"). [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-12]
(1) Recognizing that BYOB is authorized pursuant to New Jersey
Statute, the consumption of wine and/or malt alcoholic beverages
in a restaurant, dining room or other public place where food or
liquid refreshments are sold to the general public pursuant to
BYOB shall be permitted only during the hours of 12:00 noon
prevailing time to 10:00 p.m. prevailing time. All other rules,
incorporated by reference pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-27, as
amended, shall apply, including provisions that alcohol may only be
consumed by persons of the appropriate legal age. Any violations
shall be enforced by the police, or by the Code Enforcement
Official.
(2) Any such establishment open to the public, irrespective of whether
or not food or liquid refreshments are sold or served, that engage in
any business function, specifically including art classes and adult
entertainment establishments, allowing patrons to consume wine
or malt alcoholic beverages pursuant to BYOB, shall register with
the Township Clerk no later than January 1 of each calendar year.
(3) No such establishment shall charge any admission fee or cover,
corkage or service charge or advertise inside or outside of such
premises that patrons may bring and consume their own wine or
malt alcoholic beverages in a portion of the premises which is open
to the public.
(4) No such establishment shall allow the consumption of wine or malt
alcoholic beverages by persons not of legal age at any time.
(5) A person who violates any provision of this act is a disorderly
person, and the court, in addition to the sentence imposed for the
disorderly person violation, may by its judgment bar the owner or
operator from allowing consumption of wine or malt alcoholic
beverages in his premises as authorized by this subsection.
§ 12-5 ALARMS § 12-6
7:115
§ 12-7. Closing premises during public emergency or crime
investigation. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, at retail, or allow, permit or
suffer the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises,
or allow, permit or suffer the retail licensed premises to be open, during
any period for which any duly constituted state, county or municipal law
enforcement authority, because of a public emergency or investigation of
crime, has ordered the licensed premises to be closed, unless excepted by
such authority to permit continuing conduct of business other than the sale
of alcoholic beverages.
§ 12-8. House-to-house solicitation prohibited.
No licensee shall solicit from house to house, personally or by telephone,
the purchase of any alcoholic beverage, or allow, permit or suffer such
solicitation.
§ 12-9. Narcotics and illegal activities; prohibited patrons.
A. Presence. No minor shall be permitted in any premises where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served for consumption on the premises, except
for eating establishments, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
B. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by a minor. No minor shall purchase,
attempt to purchase, or have another purchase for him any alcoholic
beverages on any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for a minor. No person shall purchase
or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to induce or attempt to induce any employee of
a license to sell, serve or deliver alcoholic beverages to a minor.
D. Misstating age. No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of
another person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21
years or to permit a person under 21 years to remain on any premises in
violation of Subsection A.
E. Presumption. Any parent or guardian of a minor who accompanies such
minor into a premises in which alcoholic beverages are served and who
permits the minor to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be
presumed to have misrepresented the age of the minor.
F. Possession. No minor shall possess, serve, sell or consume any alcoholic
beverage in any public place within the Township.
A. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises the habitual presence of any known prostitute, gangster,
racketeer, notorious criminal, or other person of ill repute.
§ 12-6 ANDOVER CODE § 12-9
7:116
§ 12-10. Immoral activities; disturbance; nuisance on premises.
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises any lewdness or immoral activity; any brawl, act of violence,
disturbance, or unnecessary noise; nor shall any licensee allow, permit or
suffer the licensed place of business to be conducted in such a manner as to
become a nuisance.
§ 12-11. Lottery and gambling.
B. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed
premises any unlawful possession of or any unlawful activity pertaining
to narcotic or other controlled dangerous substances as defined by the
New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act (N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et
seq.) or any prescription legend drug, in any form, which is not a
narcotic drug or controlled dangerous substance or analog, as so
defined, or drug paraphernalia as defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1.
[Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
C. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the licensed premises to be
accessible to any premises upon which any illegal activity or enterprise
is carried on or the licensed premises or business to be used in
furtherance or aid of or accessible to any illegal activity or enterprise.
A. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer in or upon the
licensed premises the conduct of any lottery; any ticket or participation
right in any lottery to be sold or offered for sale; any pool-selling,
bookmaking or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind; any slot
machine or device in the nature or a slot machine which may be used
for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing; nor shall
any licensee possess, have custody of, or allow, permit or suffer in or
upon the licensed premises any gambling paraphernalia, including but
not limited to any slip, ticket, book, record, document, memorandum or
other writing pertaining in any way to any lottery, pool-selling,
bookmaking or unlawful game or gambling of any kind. [Amended
5-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-6]
B. This rule shall not apply to bingo, raffles or New Jersey State Lottery, or
tickets or participation rights therein, being conducted pursuant to
appropriate license under the Bingo Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24),
Raffles Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50), State Lottery Law ( N.J.S.A.
5:9-11), or other activity authorized by state law. However, in any
instance of bingo at licensed premises, no licensee, during the period
between the commencement of the first and the conclusion of the last
game, shall sell, serve, or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in or upon
any part of the licensed premises where the bingo or any part thereof is
being conducted.
§ 12-9 ALARMS § 12-12
7:117
§ 12-12. Copies of current certificates; applications; list of
employees.
§ 12-13. Indecent matter.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises or
have in his possession or distribute or cause to be distributed any obscene,
indecent, filthy, lewd, lascivious or disgusting recording, printing. writing,
picture or other matter.
§ 12-14. Prohibited promotions. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-6]
A. No licensee shall conduct the licensed business unless:
(1) The current license certificate is at all times conspicuously
displayed on the licensed premises in such plain view as to be
easily read by all persons visiting such premises;
(2) A photostatic or other true copy of the application for the current
license as well as the last filed long form application (if current
application is the short form), is kept on the licensed premises; and
(3) A list, in form prescribed by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, containing the names and addresses of, and
required information with respect to, all persons currently
employed on retail licensed premises, is kept on the licensed
premises.
B. Such application copy and such list shall be available for inspection by
the Director, his deputies, inspectors and investigators, and by any
officer defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(p).
A. Except for consumer alcoholic beverage tastings or tasting dinners
conducted in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:2-37, and promotions
excepted in this section, no licensee, permittee or brand registrant
shall, directly or indirectly, allow, permit or suffer any practice or
promotion that:
(1) Offers unlimited availability of any alcoholic beverage for
consumption on a licensed premises for a set price, except for:
(a) Private parties, not sponsored by the licensee, such as
weddings and birthday parties, and events held by social affair
permittees; or
(b) New Year's Eve parties sponsored by a licensee where a set
price for attendance includes an open bar.
(2) Offers to a patron or consumer a free drink, gift, prize or anything
of value, conditioned upon the purchase of an alcoholic beverage or
product, except for:
§ 12-12 ANDOVER CODE § 12-14
7:118
§ 12-15. Intoxicated workers.
No licensee shall work in any capacity in or upon the licensed premises
while actually or apparently intoxicated, or allow, permit or suffer any
(a) Branded or unique glassware or souvenirs in connection with a
single purchase;
(b) Consumer mail-in rebates offered in accordance with N.J.A.C.
13:2-24.11;
(c) Manufacturer's sweepstakes and contests, not prohibited by
law, where entry or opportunity to win is open to the public
without a requirement that a purchase be made;
(d) Discounts offered by retailers to consumers on the purchase of
alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption;
(e) Offers of not more than one free drink per patron, as a gesture
of good will, in a twenty-four-hour period, by an on-premises
consumption licensee;
(f) Offers of not more than one free drink coupon, ticket, or token
redeemable by a patron, once in a twenty-four-hour period;
(g) Offers of a set price for a meal that includes a single alcoholic
beverage drink; or
(h) Offers of a single bottle of wine or champagne to guests staying
at a licensed hotel or motel, as part of a specialty package,
provided that the primary guests are of legal drinking age.
(3) Requires or allows a consumer to prepurchase more than one drink
or product at a time via tickets, tokens, admission fees or the like,
as a condition for entry into a licensed premises or as a
requirement for service or entertainment thereon; or
(4) Offers a prize, gift or award which consists of alcoholic beverages
or coupons or gift certificates which may be redeemed for alcoholic
beverages, such as two-for-one, and the like, except for a prize
consisting of alcoholic beverages in sealed containers offered in a
raffle licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-50. A coupon or gift
certificate, other than a certificate purchased by a consumer for an
amount equal to the dollar value of the certificate, shall expressly
state that the certificate shall not be applied toward the purchase
or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
B. No prize or promotion shall be given to, nor shall any contest for
consumers be open to any person under the legal age to purchase or
consume alcoholic beverages; any supplier, wholesaler, distributor or
retailer; or affiliates, employees or members of the immediate family or
household of any such persons or entities.
§ 12-14 ALARMS § 12-15
7:119
actually or apparently intoxicated person to work in any capacity in or upon
the licensed premises.
§ 12-16. Activity during license suspension.
No licensee, during the suspension of a license, shall:
§ 12-17. Hindering of investigations.
No licensee shall, directly or indirectly, fail, on demand, to produce, exhibit
or surrender to the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control,
his deputies, inspectors, or investigators and any officer as defined by
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(p), any and all matters and things which the Director or
other issuing authority is authorized or empowered to investigate, inspect
or examine; nor shall any licensee, directly or indirectly, fail to facilitate, or
hinder, delay or cause the hindrance or delay, or attempt to hinder, delay
or cause the hindrance or delay, of any investigation or inspection of the
licensed business or of the licensed premises or of any search thereof by
the Director, his deputies, inspectors or investigators or by any officer as
defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 (p).
§ 12-18. Books of account. [Amended 5-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-6]
A. Allow, permit or suffer the sale, service, delivery or consumption of any
alcoholic beverage, or any other alcoholic beverage activity in or upon
the licensed premises, except the storage of alcoholic beverages on
hand or (with permission of the Director) the return of alcoholic
beverage to a wholesaler or manufacturer; or
B. Deliver any alcoholic beverage to any consumer; or
C. Receive delivery of any alcoholic beverage at the licensed premises; or
D. Advertise that the licensed premises is closed or the licensed business
stopped because of repairs or alterations or for any reason other than
the suspension.
A. All licensees shall have and keep, for an unlimited period of time, a
permanent book or books of account in the English language which
shall truly and accurately contain a record of all moneys invested in the
licensed business, including loans, the source of all such investments,
and the disposition of such investments for an unlimited period of time.
B. All licensees shall maintain for a period of five years a record of all
money or any other thing of value received in the ordinary course of
business or received outside the ordinary course of business; a record
of all money expended from such receipts; the name of the person
receiving such money; and the purpose for which such expenditures
were made.
§ 12-15 ANDOVER CODE § 12-18
7:120
§ 12-19. Revocation of licenses.
C. All books and records pertaining to investments, receipts or
expenditures shall be made available for inspection, upon demand, by
the Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control or the Director's deputies,
inspectors and agents and other officers as defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(p)
and the Township.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the license and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 12-18 ALARMS § 12-19
7:121

ARTICLE II
Consumption and Possession on Private Property by Minors
[Adopted 7-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-11]
§ 12-20. Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 12-21. Consumption or possession prohibited on private property.
The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages of any type on private
property by a person who is under the legal age and without legal authority
is prohibited.
§ 12-22. Nonapplicability.
§ 12-23. Violations and penalties.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to an underage person who
consumes or possesses an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, or rite, or consumes or possesses an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparations of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or postsecondary
educational institution.
C. This article shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under section N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person who shall violate any section of this article shall be subject
to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for any subsequent
offense.
B. The court may, in addition to the fine, suspend or postpone for six
months the driving privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of
any person and the suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division of Motor
§ 12-20 ALARMS § 12-23
7:123
Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section.
(1) If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17
years of age, the period of license postponement, including
suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is
imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the person
reaches the age of 17 years.
(2) If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Division along with the
report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of
birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last
day of the license suspension period imposed by the court.
(3) The court shall also inform the person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the
period of license suspension or postponement, that person shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall
be required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice shall not be a defense to a
subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
(4) If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspense or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
section. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the
suspension or postponement.
§ 12-23 ANDOVER CODE § 12-23
7:124
Chapter 16
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Games of chance — See Ch. 63.
§ 16-1. License required.
No person shall display, place, maintain or keep for operation any
amusement machine, as defined in § 190-4, on or within any public place
where permitted under the provisions of Chapter 190, Zoning, without
having first obtained a license for the premises from the Township
Committee and without having first paid the required fee for such machines.
§ 16-2. Application.
§ 16-3. Investigation of applicant. [Amended by Ord. No. 83-42]
A. An application, sworn to by the applicants, to license a premises for use
and operation of amusement machines, either as a primary or accessory
use, shall be filed annually with the Township Clerk on forms supplied
by the Clerk.
B. The forms shall require the following information and such additional
information as deemed necessary:
(1) Name of applicant and address.
(2) Address of the premises where the machines are to be maintained,
operated or used and the operating area by square footage as set
forth in Subsection 15-7.12, Paragraphs b.1 and 2.14
(3) Number of machines to be installed on premises.
(4) Whether the applicant, or any partner, officer, director, or
stockholder owning more than 10% of the outstanding shares
thereof, has been convicted of:
(a) A crime.
(b) A violation of any ordinance involving gambling.
(c) A violation of this article.
(5) Consent of owner or lessee of said premises if other than applicant.
14.Editor's Note: This reference is to the former Zoning Ordinance codified in Chapter XV of
the 1973 Code. It was superseded 7-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-10 which is included in Ch.
190, Zoning, of this Code and which does not contain a corresponding section.
§ 12-23 AMUSEMENTS § 16-3
16:125
§ 16-4. Issuance, denial and display of license.
§ 16-5. Fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 83-6; Ord. No. 83-42]
A. When the aforesaid original application or renewal is properly filled out
and signed by the applicant, the duplicate thereof will be referred to the
Chief of Police, if the applicant shall have answered any of the items
required to be answered in § 16-2B(4)(a) through (c) in the affirmative
who shall then make or cause to be made an investigation of the
applicant's business responsibility and moral character to determine
his fitness to hold the license.
B. The Chief of Police shall issue a report of such investigation to the
Township Committee, which report shall address but not be limited to
the following areas:
(1) Conviction of any crime.
(2) Conviction of any misdemeanor.
(3) False statements contained in the application.
(4) Evidence of bad character or moral turpitude.
(5) Prior performance under this chapter.
(6) Condition and location of property.
A. The Township Committee shall review the annual application and
investigation report of each applicant. The Committee shall approve or
deny the application, taking into consideration the factors set forth in
§ 16-3B and testimony adduced at the hearing.
B. Any applicant who is denied a license may, in writing, request a hearing
on the same before the Township Committee.
C. The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises
prior to the opening of the premises for business.
A. The annual license fee for each and every premises on which
amusement machines are located shall be $25.
B. In addition to Subsection A above, there shall be an annual fee of $10
per machine.
C. If an investigation is necessary as provided for under § 16-3, the
applicant shall deposit with the Township Clerk, upon request, the sum
of $250 for the purpose of paying all out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
the Township in making the investigation. Any balance of deposit money
after completion of the investigation shall be returned to the applicant.
D. The annual license fee and the per-machine fee required in this section
shall be due and payable on or before January 1 of each year. Said
license shall be issued for the calendar year commencing January 1 and
§ 16-3 ANDOVER CODE § 16-5
16:126
§ 16-6. Hours of operation.
§ 16-7. Supervision.
In all premises wherein the operation of amusement machines is the
primary use, the licensee shall employ one or more adult supervisors, one
of whom shall be present at all times when the premises are in operation,
and whose sole responsibility shall be the control and supervision of the
games and the patrons of the premises. A current list of said supervisors
shall be filed with the Township Police Department. In all premises wherein
the operation of amusement games is an accessory use, the licensee or a
designated employee may serve as supervisor in addition to other duties.
§ 16-8. Notice of adoption.
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to give notice at least 10 days prior
to the hearing on the adoption of this chapter to the County Planning Board
and to all others entitled thereto pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-16. Upon the adoption of this chapter after public hearing thereon
the Township Clerk is further directed to publish notice of the passage
thereof and to file a copy of this chapter as finally adopted with the Sussex
County Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16.
expiring December 31. Said license shall be renewed annually on or
before December 31 by the filing or a written application accompanied
by the annual license fee and per-machine fee for each renewal. The
license fee and per-machine fee for any license issued in any calendar
year after July 1 shall be 1/2 of the annual and per machine fees.
A. All amusement machines licensed in primary establishments under this
chapter shall be operated only during the following hours:
(1) Monday through Thursday: 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Friday: 11:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(3) Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(4) Sunday: 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m.
B. No premises wherein the operation of amusement machines is the
primary or accessory use shall permit children under 18 years of age to
operate any amusement machines prior to 3:00 p.m. on Monday
through Friday when the schools of Andover Township are in session.
§ 16-5 AMUSEMENTS § 16-8
16:127
Chapter 20
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 103.
Swine — See Ch. 227.
§ 16-8 ANDOVER CODE § 16-8
16:128
ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted by Ord. No. 91-4 (Ch. IX of the 1973 Code); as amended
through Ord. No. 91-24]
§ 20-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A certified municipal Animal Control
Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the chief law enforcement
officer of the municipality or his designee.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch or dog hybrid.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog, or livestock other than poultry.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding, selling or
breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept on display.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dogs hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by the panel pursuant to § 20-22 of this chapter.
POUND — Any establishment for the confinement of dogs seized under the
provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by the panel
pursuant to § 20-22 of this chapter.
§ 20-2. License required; replacement tags.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor within the Township more than five
dogs on any residential property, regardless of property size, unless
said property is a qualified farm. Six or more dogs shall constitute a
kennel or shelter, which are defined herein at § 20-1 and are regulated
by § 20-12. No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog, within the
Township, without obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the
Township Clerk or Animal Control Officer, upon application by the
owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or
harbor any dog except in compliance with the provisions of this article.
[Amended 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-12 ]
§ 20-1 AMUSEMENTS § 20-2
16:129
§ 20-3. Annual license and registration tag required; tag on collar.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall in
the month of January of each year, and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Township Clerk or Animal Control Officer a license and
official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored,
and shall place upon each dog a collar or harness with the registration tag
securely fastened thereto.
§ 20-4. Fees; expiration of license.
§ 20-5. Exemption from fees.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye dogs," dogs used to assist handicapped persons commonly known as
"service dogs" or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear dogs" shall be licensed and registered as other dogs as
herein provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not
be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 20-6. Delinquent fees.
B. The owner of any dog may, if the license tag is mislaid, stolen or lost,
procure a replacement tag for $2. The owner must provide adequate
proof that the dog is currently licensed for the year in which the
replacement tag is desired. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04; 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
A. The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee
as established herein for the licensing of each dog. The licenses,
registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of
January of each year.
B. The fee for any dog, other than a potentially dangerous dog as defined
herein, shall be $8.80 for each dog plus a registration fee of $1 and
$0.20 for the pilot clinic fee for each dog. In addition, there will be an
additional surcharge of $5 on all licenses issued for nonspayed and
nonneutered dogs. The same fees shall be charged for the annual
renewal of each license and registration tag. [Amended 11-13-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-28; 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 10-24-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-14]
C. (Reserved)15
D. The annual fee for licensing a potentially dangerous dog and each
renewal thereof shall be $500 per year.
A. Any dog owner or person harboring a dog, found to have any unlicensed
dog by the Animal Control Officer, dog canvasser or any other municipal
15.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the replacement tag fee, as amended, was
repealed 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04. See now § 20-2B.
§ 20-2 ANDOVER CODE § 20-6
16:130
§ 20-7. License reciprocity within state.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Township as
evidence of compliance with this chapter.
§ 20-8. Newly acquired dog and dog attaining licensing age; fee.
§ 20-9. Contents of application; information to State Department of
Health.
official after January 31 of any year, shall be required to pay an
additional delinquent fee as provided for herein plus the required
license and registration tag fees as provided in this chapter, in addition
to any fine imposed for failure to obtain a dog license before February
1.
B. The Township Clerk or Animal Control Officer shall levy a per-calendarmonth
additional late fee of $10 for any license issued after January 31,
effective January 1, 2016. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04; 3-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03; 10-24-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-14]
A. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for license and
registration tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or
age attainment.
B. The fee shall be the same as required in § 20-4. Failure to obtain a
license as provided herein shall result in a delinquent fee being
imposed as set forth in § 20-6. The owner shall be required to present
sufficient proof to establish that the dog was acquired after February 1
and that application has been submitted within the ten-day
requirement.
A. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which license and registration are sought; whether it is of a
long- or shorthaired variety; and the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
B. There shall be provided with the application evidence that the dog to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a
type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Health,
Education and Welfare, or has been certified exempt as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health. No license or metal
registration tag shall be issued without proof of inoculation as required
hereunder.
§ 20-6 AMUSEMENTS § 20-9
16:131
§ 20-10. Dogs brought into Township from another state.
§ 20-11. Removal of tag prohibited; wearing of tag.
§ 20-12. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
C. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Township Clerk. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of
the application.
D. The Township Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health
each month, on forms furnished by the Department, an accurate
account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another state for the current year, and bearing a
registration tag, and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 90 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
A. No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall
remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent
of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for
which it was not issued.
B. No licensed dog shall be allowed off the premises of the person
harboring or keeping the dog, without the metal registration tag
attached to its harness or collar.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Township Clerk for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
B. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located, the purpose or purposes for which
it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval
of the local Board of Health and the Planning/Zoning Board, showing
compliance with the local and state rules and regulations governing
location of and sanitation at such establishments.
C. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall share
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained. Such license
shall expire on the last day of June of each year and shall be subject to
revocation by the Township on recommendation of the State
Department of Health or the local Board of Health for failure to comply
with the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health or the
§ 20-9 ANDOVER CODE § 20-12
16:132
§ 20-13. Disposition of fees.
A license fee and other monies collected or received under this chapter
after payment to the state of its statutory fees shall be forwarded to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Township, and such funds shall be used, expended
or transferred only in accordance with statutes of the State of New Jersey
governing and regulating the use, expenditure or transfer of such funds.
§ 20-14. List of licensed kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds.
The Township Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a
list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed, within 30 days
after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and
address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 20-15. Dog census. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
Any person appointed by the Township Committee, for the purpose set forth
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15, shall biennially cause a canvass to be made
local Board of Health governing the same, after the owner has been
afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health or the
local Board of Health in accordance with the statutes providing for such
hearings.
D. Any such person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by him and kept at such
establishments. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises.
E. One female dog for breeding purposes may be kept by not more than
one person for each family household without obtaining a kennel
license for not more than one litter per year, and further provided that
the pups from such breeding shall be sold or disposed of after seven
months of age, unless kept as licensed dogs, and that the female dog
kept for breeding purposes must be registered as a breed bitch each
year when the license for the dog is obtained.
F. The fees for kennels and pet shops shall be as follows and shall be paid
with the application: [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $25.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $50.
(3) Pet shop: $50.
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
G. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off such premises except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 20-12 AMUSEMENTS § 20-15
16:133
of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township and
shall report, on or before September 1 of the year in which the census is
taken, to the Township Clerk and to the local Board of Health and to the
State Department of Health, the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
unlicensed dogs, the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored
by each of said persons, together with a complete description of each of said
unlicensed dogs.
§ 20-16. Appointment of Animal Control Officer and Municipal
Humane Law Enforcement Officer. [Amended 11-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-13]
The Mayor and the Township Committee shall appoint a certified Animal
Control Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16b and a Municipal Humane
Law Enforcement Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:22-14.1 et seq. to enforce
the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws.
§ 20-17. Impounding of dogs.
A. The Animal Control Officer or other persons designated by the Mayor
and Township Committee shall take into custody and impound or cause
to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or
offered for adoption as hereinafter provided in this section:
(1) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which the official or his agent have reason to
believe it is a stray dog.
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or the
person keeping or harboring said dog.
(4) Any dog upon the public or private streets or in any public place not
accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and not confined
as prescribed by § 20-21C, said dog shall be deemed to be a stray.
(5) Any dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound and off such
establishment and not confined or controlled as prescribed by
§ 20-12G said dog shall be deemed to be a stray.
(6) Any dog or other animal that is suspected to be rabid.
(7) Any dog declared vicious as determined by the provisions of § 20-22
and the dog has not been disposed of in accordance with § 20-22.
(8) Any dog which the owner or persons keeping or harboring said dog
wishes to dispose of and to which he renounces ownership, custody
and control, in writing.
§ 20-15 ANDOVER CODE § 20-17
16:134
(9) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured
or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring the
dog is known, an Animal Control Officer or anyone authorized by the
Mayor and Township Committee shall forthwith serve on the person
whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or the person
keeping or harboring the dog, if known, a notice in writing stating that
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for adoption or
destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the
notice.
C. A notice under Subsection B of this section may be served either by
delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at
the person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his usual or last known place of abode, or to the address
given on the collar.
D. Any dog which shall bite any person and/or be suspected to be rabid
shall be examined by a veterinarian within 24 hours after impoundment
for the purpose of determining if such dog is affected by any disease
and shall thereafter be quarantined for such period of time that the
veterinarian shall determine as appropriate under the circumstances.
The owner shall be required to pay for all testing and quarantine
expenses. In lieu of impounding the dog, the Animal Control Officer may
notify the owner to have the animal examined by a veterinarian within
24 hours after such notification and upon testing may order the owner
to quarantine said dog in accordance with the instructions of the
veterinarian. Failure of the owner to comply with the order of the
Animal Control Officer and/or the quarantine instructions of the
veterinarian, if any, shall result in a minimum fine of $150 plus
additional fines for violation of this chapter, as may hereinafter be set
forth.
E. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth in this section, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and
cannot be given as above set forth in this section, and if the owner or
person keeping or harboring the dog has not claimed the dog and paid
all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, and, if the dog be
unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping
or harboring the dog has not produced a license and registration tag for
the dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause the dog to be destroyed
in a manner causing as little pain as possible or offered for adoption.
§ 20-17 AMUSEMENTS § 20-17
16:135
§ 20-18. Impounding and disposal fees.
There shall be charged to the owner of each dog which is impounded,
pursuant to § 20-17 all fees incurred by the Township in the picking up
and detention including the per-day maintenance fee for each day or part
thereof that the dog has been impounded, which fees shall be paid before
the dog can be released.
§ 20-19. Right of entry for seizure of dogs.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if the said owner is present and forbids
the same.
§ 20-20. Interference with enforcement officials prohibited.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 20-21. Barking and running at large of dogs; leashing required.
F. When any dog shall be delivered under Subsection A(8) of this section,
no notice to the owner shall be required, unless the person delivering
the dog is someone other than the owner, in which event the foregoing
procedure shall be followed; if the person delivering the dog is the
owner, the Animal Control Officer or any person so authorized may
forthwith destroy the dog in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
G. The provisions of § 20-22 et seq. shall apply to dogs impounded
pursuant to that section of the chapter.
A. Barking or crying dogs. No person shall allow any dog in his keeping,
custody, control or ownership to bark, howl or cry, continuously for any
period longer than 1/2 hour between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. or otherwise repeatedly at intervals of more than 1/2 hour at any
time of the day or night, in such volume or manner as to disturb the
comfort, peace and repose of persons in the vicinity.
B. Running at large.
(1) No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or
permit such animal to run at large in, upon, or through any public,
quasi-public or private street, public park or recreation area, public
building, or any other public place or place to which the public is
invited, and no person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall
suffer or permit such animal to run at large in, upon, or through any
private property without the authority of the owner of the private
property.
§ 20-17 ANDOVER CODE § 20-21
16:136
§ 20-22. Vicious or potentially dangerous dogs.
(2) When a dog has been impounded for running at large, the Animal
Control Officer shall file a complaint of this violation in the
Municipal Court.
C. Dog to be accompanied by person over 12 years old; leash. No person
owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to be
upon the public or private streets or in any public place of the Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years
and is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more
than six feet long.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
(1) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
(2) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
(3) Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and 4:22-26.
B. The dog shall be impounded until the final decision as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to and in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. Subject to the approval of
the municipal health officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
C. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the official responsible for
convening a hearing pursuant to Section 516 and the municipal health
officer within three working days that he has seized and impounded a
dog pursuant to Section 3 of this Act,17 or that he has reasonable cause
to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that a
hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall through a
reasonable effort attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded. If its owner cannot be identified within
seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
D. The chief law enforcement officer of the municipality or the municipal
health officer shall select a panel of three qualified individuals
knowledgeable about dog behavior and conduct a hearing, within 30
days of the receipt of the signed statement from the dog's owner as
required by Subsection b of Section 4 of this Act,18 to determine
whether the dog impounded pursuant to Section 3 of this Act19 is
16.Editor's Note: Refers to N.J.S.A. 4:19-21 which was repealed by L. 1994, c. 187.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-19.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-20.
§ 20-21 AMUSEMENTS § 20-22
16:137
vicious or potentially dangerous. In no case may the municipal officer
who is the supervisor of the Animal Control Officer presenting the
case, select the panel. If neither the chief law enforcement officer of
the municipality nor the municipal health officer is the Animal Control
Officer's supervisor, the municipal health officer shall select the panel
and conduct the hearing. To the greatest extent practicable, the
selected panel shall collectively represent a diverse background in
dog behavior, and in no case may all of the members of the panel
be from the same discipline nor may a panel include any individual
connected to the case. Upon request, the Department may recommend
to the municipal health officer or chief law enforcement officer of
the municipality the names of qualified individuals to serve on the
enforcement officer of the municipality the names of qualified
individuals to serve on the panel. For the purposes of this section,
"qualified individuals" means:
(1) Veterinarians specializing in the treatment of dogs and cats;
(2) American Kennel Club certified dog breed or obedience judges;
(3) Professional dog handlers who are members of the Professional
Handlers Association or who are recommended by either a
professional handlers association member or an American Kennel
Club certified dog breed judge;
(4) Professional dog obedience trainers who are members of the
National Association of Dog Obedience Instructors or who are
recommended by a National Association of Dog Obedience
Instructors member or an American Kennel Club dog obedience
judge;
(5) Dog behavior modification trainers who are recommended by a
veterinarian specializing in the treatment of dogs and cats, an
American Kennel Club dog obedience judge, a National Association
of Dog Obedience Instructors member or person in Subsection D(6)
below; or
(6) Animal behaviorists with at least a bachelor's degree in animal
behavior specializing in the treatment of canine behavior disorders.
E. The official conducting the hearing shall notify the owner of the
impounded dog by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the
Department of Health of the date and time of the hearing and the names
of the panel members selected. During the hearing, the owner shall
have the opportunity to present evidence to demonstrate that the dog is
not vicious or potentially dangerous.
F. If the panel pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-20 declares a dog to be vicious and
no appeal is made of the ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-19.
§ 20-22 ANDOVER CODE § 20-22
16:138
shall be destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner. No dog may be
destroyed during the pending of an appeal.
G. If the panel pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-20 declares a dog to be potentially
dangerous, it shall issue an order and schedule for continuance as
required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-24 and may require the owner to comply with
additional conditions permitted to be imposed by said statute.
H. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the Township for the costs and expenses of impounding and
destroying the dog. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding
the dog in a facility other than the municipal pound, regardless of
whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially
dangerous.
I. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of this section in accordance with a
schedule established by the panel, but in no case more than 60 days
subsequent to the date of determination;
(2) Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large,
or has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
(3) Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
(4) Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
(5) Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, police department or force, and Animal Control Officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner.
J. Registration of potentially dangerous dogs:
(1) The Township Clerk shall issue a potentially dangerous dog
registration number and red identification tag along with a
municipal potentially dangerous dog license upon a demonstration
of sufficient evidence by the owner to the Animal Control Officer
that he has complied with the panel's orders. The last three digits
of each potentially dangerous dog registration number issued by a
municipality will be the three-number code assigned to that
municipality in the regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 17
of the Act.20 The Animal Control Officer shall:
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17.
§ 20-22 AMUSEMENTS § 20-22
16:139
§ 20-23. Defecation on public or private lands.
(a) Verify, in writing, compliance to the Municipal Clerk or other
official designated to license dogs in the municipality.
(b) Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of the
Act. This telephone number shall be forwarded to the
Department, and any changes in this number shall be reported
immediately to the Department;
(2) The annual fee for licensing of a potentially dangerous dog and
each renewal thereafter shall be as set forth in § 20-4D.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of all those frequenting this Township, by preventing the
needless health hazards and nuisances caused by dog feces upon public
and private property within the Township.
B. Defecation on private property. No person owning or in charge of any
dog shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate upon or
commit any nuisance upon any private property, without the permission
of the owner of the property. Any person owning or in charge of a dog
which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any such nuisance shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary
manner.
C. Defecation on public property. No person owning or in charge of any
dog shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate upon or
commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or walk, or
upon any public property. Any person owning or in charge of a dog
which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any such nuisance shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary
manner.
D. Defecation on owner's property. No person shall permit the
accumulation of dog feces upon his/her own property, or property
occupied by him or her, to the extent that the odor may be noticeable to
any adjoining property owners.
E. Disposal of defecation. The feces removed from the aforementioned
designated areas shall be disposed of by the person owning or in charge
of any such dog in a sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container.
Disposition in a sanitary manner shall include taking the feces home for
deposit or wrapping the feces and placing same in a trash can. It shall
not include burial, disposal by placement in a storm sewer, or placing
unwrapped feces in a trash can.
F. Defense to violation. It shall be a complete defense to violations of this
section if a person shall have immediately removed such defecation and
disposed of it in a sanitary manner.
§ 20-22 ANDOVER CODE § 20-24
16:140
§ 20-24. Seeing Eye dogs.
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye dogs,” dogs used to assist
handicapped persons commonly known as "service dogs” or dogs used to
assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear dogs.”
§ 20-25. Complaints of violations.
In the event of a violation on private property, a complaint is only to be
filed by the owner of such property. In the event of such violation occurs on
public property, thoroughfare, walkways or parks, a complaint may be filed
by any witness to such an act.
§ 20-26. Damage to property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat shall permit it to do
any injury to or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds
or property or a complaint may be made against the owner or keeper of
such dog/cat.
§ 20-27. Control of cats.
§ 20-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16; 4-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
A. Any cat shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be subject to
§ 20-23B, if it has no owner or custodian; if it has no place of care or
shelter; or if it trespasses upon or damages either private or public
property; or if it bites, scratches or harms persons within the Township.
B. Any cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the cat, and constituting a public nuisance as defined in
§ 20-27, shall be impounded according to § 20-23B, provided that the
owner of the property upon which the trespassing occurs authorizes the
seizure.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the county jail, or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding
90 days; or a fine not exceeding $2,000; or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days; provided, however, that the following
mandatory fines shall apply:
(1) Failure to obtain license (§§ 20-3, 20-8, 20-10 and 20-12A, B, C and
D): $50.
(2) Dogs running at large (§§ 20-12G and 20-21B):
(a) Section 20-12G: $50.
§ 20-24 AMUSEMENTS § 20-28
16:141
§ 20-29. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to enforce the provisions
of this article.
(b) Section 20-21B: $50.
(3) Disturbing the peace (barking or crying) [§ 20-21A]: $50.
(4) Dogs attacking person: minimum fine of $100 not to exceed $500.
(5) Removal of tag; attaching a tag wrongfully (§ 20-11A): $50.
(6) Dogs attacking other animals: minimum fine of $100 not to exceed
$500.
(7) Interference with an officer (§ 20-20): $50.
(8) Defecation (§§ 20-23A, B, C and D): $50.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating this article within one year of
the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this article, the
penalty for which is not governed by N.J.S.A. 14:19-15.19, and who was
fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the article,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of the article.
§ 20-28 ANDOVER CODE § 20-29
16:142
ARTICLE II
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 10-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-24]
§ 20-30. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park
or on any other property owned or operated by Township of Andover, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 20-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 20-32. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by Township of Andover, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
[for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers or feral cats as part
of an approved trap-neuter release (TNR) program].
§ 20-33. Enforcement.
§ 20-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of Township of Andover.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 20-30 AMUSEMENTS § 20-34
16:143
Chapter 24
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 24-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses for body art
establishments issued by the Township.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices
of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
BODY ART PROCEDURES — The practice of physical body adornment in
permitted establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, body
piercing, tattooing and permanent cosmetics.
§ 24-3. Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to physicians who are authorized by the State
Board of Medical Examiners to practice medicine, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:9-6 et seq.
§ 24-4. Licensing.
§ 24-5. Criteria for closure of establishments.
The following warrant immediate closure of a body art establishment until
the violation is abated to the satisfaction of the Andover Township Board of
Health or its authorized agents:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a body art establishment
without first obtaining a license from the Andover Township Board of
Health.
B. All licensees must comply with sterilization, sanitation and safety
standards outlined in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.
C. Body art establishment licenses will be issued annually in January upon
receipt of the requisite license fee. For those establishments that limit
body art procedures to piercing of the trailing edge of the ear as
described in N.J.A.C. 8:27-9.1, the annual licensing fee is $50. For all
other body art establishments, the annual licensing fee is $250.
§ 20-34 ANDOVER CODE § 24-5
24:144
§ 24-6. Medical waste.
Any medical waste generated at the body art establishment shall be stored
and disposed of properly in accordance with state regulation.
§ 24-7. Enforcement.
Chapter 26
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Tree harvesting — See Ch. 171.
§ 26-1. Plant height limitations near roadways; garbage, trash and
debris.
It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
in the Township:
A. Evidence of a failing or malfunctioning sewage system as defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A for body art establishments with an on-site sewage
system; or
B. Evidence of failing water quality tests. To determine water quality, body
art establishments served by an on-site well water system must submit
laboratory reports for bacterial water quality to the Andover Township
Board of Health or its authorized agent during each quarter. Other
water quality tests may be required by the Andover Township Board of
Health or its authorized agent; or
C. Any other reason outlined in N.J.A.C. 8:27-11.3.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for an
enforcement action by the Andover Township Board of Health or its
authorized agent. Such enforcement action may include a nonrenewal
of the body art establishment's license.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, pay a penalty of not less than $100 and not more than
$2,000 for each offense, unless otherwise provided by law. Each day the
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. [Amended
9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
A. To keep all brush, hedges or other plant life growing within 10 feet of
the roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways cut
§ 24-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 26-1
24:145
§ 26-2. Notice to remove prohibited conditions. [Amended
6-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-11]
§ 26-3. Removal by Township; costs to become lien.
to a height of not more than three feet where it shall be necessary and
expedient for the preservation of public safety.
B. To keep the lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the Township, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
A. Upon receipt of a complaint of a resident, officer or employee of the
Township relative to a violation of this chapter, or upon his own motion,
the Zoning Officer shall investigate said complaint.
B. If the reported conditions are found to exist, the Zoning Officer shall
notify the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands complained
of, in writing, either personally or by registered mail, to remove such
brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth,
filth, garbage, trash or other debris within 10 days after receipt of the
notice.
C. The Zoning Officer shall reinspect the lands in question after the tenday
period expires and, if necessary, cause the person noticed to appear
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question fails
to abate the condition complained of, the Zoning Officer shall notify the
Township Committee in writing. The Township Committee shall cause
the condition complained of to be abated and the cost of abatement to
be charged against the lands. [Amended 6-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-11]
B. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be
added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon the lands, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner
as taxes.
C. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for any violation of
this chapter.
§ 26-1 ANDOVER CODE § 26-3
24:146
Chapter 30
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 51.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 30-1. State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
Chapter 34
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
§ 34-1. Permit required.
No person shall move any building or structure through any streets of the
Township without a permit issued as hereinafter provided.
§ 34-2. Application.
Any person desiring to move any building or structure shall make
application with the Construction Official for a permit.
A. Relinquishment of jurisdiction. The Township of Andover, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 51:27D et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.3, hereby relinquishes its
jurisdiction of the administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Construction Code and hereby transfers jurisdiction for the
administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code to
the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. The
transfer of jurisdiction pursuant to this section shall not take effect until
the expiration of 120 calendar days from the date a certified copy of this
section is forwarded to the Department of Community Affairs or until
the Department of Community Affairs shall exercise its jurisdiction to
enforce the Uniform Construction Code, whichever is sooner.
B. Records and files. The Township of Andover shall deliver or make
available to the Department of Community Affairs any and all records
and files of the municipality necessary for the Department to carry out
its function, and the Department is hereby authorized to transfer such
records and files to a location designated by the Department.
§ 26-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 34-3
34:147
§ 34-3. Bond required.
The applicant shall file with the Clerk a bond in the amount of $5,000 as
hereinafter provided with sureties satisfactory to the Construction Official,
conditioned for the payment of any damage or injury to the trees, streets
or other Township property along the designated route, and for the
replacement of any trees or other Township property destroyed by the
moving; and further conditioned for the payment of any additional fee due
the Township for exceeding the time limit fixed for such moving.
§ 34-4. Fees.
The fee for a permit shall be as provided in § 30-10C(6) of the Code of the
Township of Andover.
§ 34-5. Removal of wires and cables.
The person receiving a permit shall arrange for, at his own expense, the
removal of any wires or cables which may interfere with the moving. If
any such wires or cables pertain to the fire alarm system, police telephone
system or any other municipal system of the Township, then the person
receiving such permit shall arrange for, at his own expense, the removal of
wires so as not to interfere in any manner with the continual operation of
such systems of the Township.
§ 34-6. Traffic control.
All moving operations as they relate to the problem of traffic shall be done
under the supervision of and at such times as may be fixed by the Chief of
Police.
§ 34-7. Barricades and detour signs.
It shall be the duty and obligation of the contractor engaged in the moving
operations to furnish and place barricades and detour signs which may be
necessary for the proper diversion of motor vehicle traffic.
Chapter 38
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
§ 34-3 ANDOVER CODE § 38-1
38:148
§ 38-1. Intent; retroactive effect.
The intention of this chapter is to apply retroactively and include existing
lots and buildings as well as those created after the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 38-2. All buildings to be numbered.
All buildings, including residences and lots of land established within the
Township, shall be subject to being numbered for proper identification,
especially for reasons of expedience in fire, police and medical
emergencies.
§ 38-3. Power of Assessor to assign numbers.
§ 38-4. Applications for number; display.
A. The Township Assessor is hereby authorized to file in his office maps of
the lots of land established within the Township and designate thereon
a system of numbering such lots for proper identification. The Assessor
is further authorized to assign numbers to buildings erected upon such
lots for proper identification.
B. As standards for such designation and assignment, the Assessor shall
give due regard to the need for a logical and uniform sequence of
assignment along the streets and roads of the Township to obtain better
identification and convenience for location. Generally, numbering of a
street shall begin at its intersection with a more major street and shall
be numbered from "one" on the left and "two" on the right.
A. The property owner shall apply to the Township Assessor to obtain the
number assigned to the owner's building, and upon making such
application, the Assessor shall issue to the applicant the number
assigned to his building.
B. Upon receipt of the number assigned, the owner shall affix and display
upon the main building the assigned number in numerical or written
(English) fashion.
C. No number shall be placed upon any building for the purpose of this
chapter, unless said number shall be that number which has been
assigned under the authority of this chapter, and correspond with the
numbers placed upon the maps or records on file with the Assessor.
D. In the absence of an application, the Township Assessor is empowered
to notify the property owner of the number assigned to his building, and
it shall be the obligation of the owner to affix and display the number in
accordance herewith and maintain said numbers at all times.
E. This section shall apply to all properties including those properties that
have been previously assigned a number by the United States Postal
Service.
§ 38-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 38-5
38:149
§ 38-5. Number specifications.
§ 38-6. Violations and penalties.
A person who shall refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $50 upon conviction
in Municipal Court.
Chapter 45
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Soil removal — See Ch. 140.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 45-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to assure the proper installation and
alteration of all private driveways in the Township of Andover, to minimize
erosion and flow of soil and debris from driveways, to prevent increased
runoff onto adjoining properties, to ensure adequate gutter flow, and to
promote safe and comfortable roadway conditions. This chapter requires
design criteria and professional supervision during construction to ensure
that new driveways be located and constructed in a manner to minimize the
foregoing problem areas.
A. The size of the number required to be affixed and displayed shall not be
less than three inches in height and shall be numerical or written
(English) style. It shall be placed in a conspicuous location upon the
street-facing portion of the main building at a location thereon to
provide a clear and legible identification of the building.
B. Where possible the number shall be placed so as to be illuminated by
existing outside lighting.
C. Where a building is so situated so as to prevent the unaided eye from
reading the number affixed thereto from the street the number shall be
displayed on an appropriate marker, post or on the mailbox adjacent to
the driveway or walkway leading to said building.
§ 38-5 ANDOVER CODE § 45-2
38:150
§ 45-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL AND HORTICULTURAL USE — That use of lands and
premises as defined under the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964 (N.J.S.A.
54:4-23.1), as provided under N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 and 54:4-23.4, independent
of acreage for compliance.
ALTER DRIVEWAY — A driveway is altered within the meaning of this
chapter when the horizontal or vertical alignment of it's center line is
relocated by more than two feet, or when its dimensions are enlarged
beyond those specified in § 45-10A of this chapter. Normal maintenance,
such as replacing stone, patching asphalt, and repaving, or improvements
to an existing driveway (subject to the limitations set forth in the previous
sentence hereof), such as paving or widening, shall not be considered as
"altering a driveway."
COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY — One providing access to an office, retail or
institutional building or to an apartment building having more than five
dwelling units or any other use classified as commercial or institutional in
the Andover Township Land Use Ordinance,21 but not by way of limitation
thereof. Industrial plant driveways whose principal function is to serve
administrative or employee parking lots are considered "commercial
driveways."
COMMON DRIVEWAY — A jointly owned roadway that provides entry to
more than one dwelling or place of business from a public road or street.
DRIVEWAY — In addition to its regularly accepted common meaning, also
refers to any lane, way, field entrance or privately owned road, except as
hereinafter exempted in § 45-3.
INDUSTRIAL DRIVEWAY — One directly serving substantial numbers of
truck movements to and from loading areas of an industrial facility,
warehouse or truck terminal.
PLOT PLAN OR SKETCH — A construction plot plan prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in the State of New Jersey; or prepared by the owner
containing sufficient detail and determined to be acceptable by the
Township Engineer that complies fully with all provisions of this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY — One providing access to a single- or
multifamily residence or to an apartment building containing five or fewer
multifamily residences or to an apartment building containing five or fewer
dwelling units.
ROADWAY — The portion of a public road right-of-way on which travel is
conducted.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Land Use Procedures.
§ 45-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-2
38:151
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS — The New Jersey State Department of
Transportation Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, and
amendments thereto.
§ 45-3. Exemption.
All lands and premises used for agricultural and horticultural purposes
and served by a driveway solely for access to fields and woods for said
agricultural or horticultural purposes and not for residential or commercial
uses in conjunction therewith are hereby deemed exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the provisions of § 45-11
and § 45-12.
§ 45-4. Permit required; application.
A. No person or persons, corporation or corporations, industry or
commercial establishment shall cut or construct or alter any driveway
from private property to a public road without first having secured a
driveway permit from the Andover Township Engineer.
B. The owner, or the authorized agent of the owner who is constructing or
altering a driveway that enters onto a Township road shall submit an
application for a driveway permit to the Township Construction Official.
Major and minor subdivisions shall not be exempt from permit
requirements regardless of whether the driveway construction is by the
owner, subdivider or his successor.
C. The Township Construction Official shall transmit the application for a
driveway permit to the Township Engineer, within five days of the
Construction Official's receipt of a completed application. The Township
Engineer shall review and advise the Construction Official with regard
to compliance or noncompliance of the proposed driveway with the
provisions of this chapter within 10 days of the Township Engineer's
receipt of said application. If the Township Engineer shall fail to inspect
and review the application for a driveway permit and so advise the
Construction Official within 10 days of the Engineer's receipt of same,
the Construction Official shall have the right to either approve or reject
the application for a driveway permit without having received
comments from the Township Engineer. At such time that the Township
Engineer is satisfied that the design requirements have been met, he
will direct the Construction Official to issue a permit.
D. The application for such permit shall include a plot plan or sketch
(minimum scale at one inch = 50 feet), submitted in triplicate, including
the location of the proposed driveway. The plot plan or sketch shall
include the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner and applicant, Tax Map sheet,
block and lot number.
(2) Property lines.
§ 45-2 ANDOVER CODE § 45-4
38:152
(3) Setback and location of structures.
(4) Curb, if any.
(5) Utility installments affecting the driveway.
(6) Sidewalk, if any.
(7) Trees and other obstructions within proposed sight triangles for a
minimum distance as described in § 45-6E in each direction of the
proposed driveway location.
(8) Advisory, directional, regulatory and advertising signs within sight
triangles.
(9) Location of existing driveways on the lot in question and adjoining
lots.
(10) Driveway width, slope and proposed driveway cross section.
Additional information may be required for driveways in excess of
eight-percent slope.
(11) Driveway angle with the existing roadway.
(12) Curbline opening.
(13) Center-line profile for drives over 8% at any point along the
driveway.
(14) Sight-line profiles in each direction.
(15) For other than single-family residential, the estimated number of
cars and trucks using the driveway each day.
(16) Type of storm drainage to be constructed at the driveway entrance
to the public road (i.e., dish-type gutter, pipe or culvert). Sizes of
pipes, culverts and gutters, grades, elevations, typical cross
sections, construction details and any other information deemed
necessary for the proper analysis of the drainage design. (See
Figure 1.22)
E. The Township Engineer may require that additional information, such
as a driveway plan and profile and a drainage plan, be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey in those
instances where the Township Engineer has determined that conditions
are such that the driveway design and drainage plan will require the
application of engineering expertise.
F. Upon receipt of an application, together with said drawings, the
Township Engineer shall inspect and study the site of the proposed
driveway, lane or other entrance, and in the event that, in his opinion,
there are changes or additions to be made in order to comply with the
22.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 45-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-4
38:153
§ 45-5. Fees.
There shall be submitted with an application for a driveway permit, the
following fees, payable to the Township of Andover:
§ 45-6. Location.
All entrance and exit driveways to a Township road shall be located to
afford maximum safety to traffic on said Township road in accordance with
the following requirements and standard specifications as defined in § 45-2
requirements of this chapter, they shall be so stated and outlined on the
application and drawings and be made known to the applicant by the
Township Engineer.
G. If a driveway existed at the date of the adoption of this chapter and the
owner proposes to alter the same, then the owner shall file an
application with the Township Construction Official on forms provided
for existing driveway improvement. The Township Engineer shall
inspect the premises and review the application as to the proposed
improvement, and, if it is his determination that the proposed
improvement complies with the standards of this chapter, then in that
event the Township Engineer shall issue a permit to said applicant. If
the determination is that the proposed improvement of the driveway
does not comply with the standards of this chapter, then the applicant
will receive written notice to comply with the provisions of the chapter
as to which the application is deficient.
H. The Construction Official shall not issue a building permit until an
approved driveway permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter.
I. For properties with frontage on a county road, the applicant shall apply
for and receive a driveway entrance permit from the county
Engineering Department. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all aspects of the driveway not under County jurisdiction.
A. Nonrefundable permit application fee: $25.
B. Driveways up to eight-percent slope, engineering review and inspection
escrow fee: $500.
C. Where driveway slopes exceed 8%, an additional fee of $300 shall be
deposited with the application to defer the costs associated with review
of the increased complexities of design and construction.
D. Where the review and inspection costs exceed, or are anticipated to
exceed, the initial escrow deposit, the applicant shall pay the additional
amount prior to the issuance of a certificate of approval (CA).
E. Where the anticipated review and inspection costs do not exceed the
initial escrow deposit, the applicant shall be refunded any amount that
is not expended by the Township for such costs.
§ 45-4 ANDOVER CODE § 45-6
38:154
and the New Jersey State Department of Transportation Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, and amendments thereto. (Note:
Certain requirements may be superseded for driveways along county or
state roads.)
A. Driveways shall be not less than 75 feet from any street intersection.
B. No part of any driveway shall be located within 10 feet of a side
property line unless one driveway serves two lots.
C. Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one Township
road, a minimum clear distance of 150 feet measured along the right-ofway
line shall separate the closest of any two such drives.
D. New driveways shall be so designed as to allow motor vehicles to turn
around on the site in order to make it unnecessary to back any motor
vehicle onto the street.
E. Whenever possible, all driveways shall be designed in profile, grade,
and location to permit a minimum sight distance in accordance with the
following table. Roads which are not posted for speed limits shall be
considered to be 50 miles per hour, unless, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, the applicant's engineer can demonstrate in writing
that the horizontal geometric considerations, or location, dictate
otherwise. The sight distance measurement shall be from a sight point
on the center line of the driveway and 10 feet behind the curbline of the
thoroughfare, or if no curbline exists, a minimum of 10 feet from the
edge of the road. The sight line, equal to the required sight distance,
shall be between sight points set at an eye height 3 1/2 feet to an object
of equal height and shall not be less that six inches above any
obstruction other than planted areas. In planted areas, the sight line
shall be no less than one foot above grade. A clear sight triangle shall
be established connecting the sight points described above, and shall
be graded and otherwise kept free of trees, shrubbery, fences,
structures, etc., in order to maintain clear vision between sight points.
All driveways, including exit or entrance driveways, shall be located to
afford maximum safety to the traffic on the Township road.
Allowable Speed on
Township Road
(mph)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 240
30 275
35 315
40 350
45 420
50 475
§ 45-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-6
38:155
§ 45-7. Common driveways.
The Land Use Board must approve common driveways. If the Land Use
Board approves a driveway utilized by more than two residential units, it
shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
§ 45-8. Slope.
All driveways to be constructed, or existing driveways to be altered, which
intersect with the right-of-way line of any public road shall be constructed
or altered in accordance with the following minimum requirements:
NOTE: In no instance shall the sight distance be less than 200 feet.
(1) All applicants shall take the required action to obtain the required
sight distance immediately after receipt of initial driveway permit
approval and during the commencement of the drive's
construction. In no instance will a temporary or a permanent
certificate of approval be granted until the required sight distance
on the approved plan is verified in the field. The Township Engineer
may require a statement by the applicant's engineer, on the
engineer's letterhead, attesting that the required sight distance
has been met.
(2) Any and all actions taken to obtain the required minimum sight
distance shall be done in a lasting and permanent manner.
(3) Any trees shall be removed within the sight triangle.
A. All common driveways within the Township shall have deeded
provisions for maintenance, parking, and snow removal; however, the
Township will have the power but not the duty to enforce this provision.
For new subdivisions, the Land Use Board Engineer and Attorney must
approve the deeded provisions.
B. The driveway shall have a minimum width of 14 feet and a graded width
of not less than 18 feet.
C. Common driveways which exceed 300 feet in length shall have one or
more passing areas, within sight of each other and not more than 500
feet apart. Such passing areas shall be cleared and graded to a width of
20 feet and shall be improved to a width of 16 feet. The minimum length
of this widened area shall be 20 feet, with ten-foot tapers on each end.
A. Within the right-of-way limits, the finished grade of the driveway shall
be no greater than 6%.
B. In instances where the driveway to be constructed or altered intersects
a roadway with a shoulder, the driveway grade shall be the grade of the
shoulder.
§ 45-6 ANDOVER CODE § 45-8
38:156
§ 45-9. Angle of roadway.
C. The driveway shall slope upward or downward from the gutter line on a
straight slope of a maximum of 6% at least 25 feet long for residential
driveways and 40 feet long for commercial and industrial driveways,
unless otherwise specified by the Township Engineer. (See Figure 1.23)
D. At no point shall the finished grade of the driveway be greater than
15%.
E. Changes in center-line grades of 2% or more shall be made with smooth
vertical curves not less than 25 feet in length.
F. All side slopes shall not exceed a six-foot vertical change in elevation
with side slopes exceeding a ratio of three to one without a wooden
guide rail, boulder or other approved method of protection.
A. Two-way operation. All driveways, constructed or altered, shall meet
the abutting roadway at a horizontal angle of between 75° and 105° off
the road center line or, in the case of curved roads, 15° off a line radial
to the road center line. Any curved or angular approach of the driveway
shall be accomplished outside of the public road right-of-way, or a
projected right-of-way of 50 feet in total width, whichever is wider.
B. One-way operation.
(1) Right turn only. Driveways shall not form an angle smaller than 45°
with a street unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are
provided.
(2) Both left- and right-hand turn. Driveways shall intersect the street
at a horizontal angle of between 75° and 105° off the road center
line or, in the case of curved roads, 15° degrees off a line radial to
the road center line.
C. Commercial and industrial driveways. Industrial driveways shall be
designed for their particular situation, using turning templates to test
truck movements to and from both directions of travel. Flat angles and
one-way drives should be utilized whenever feasible to facilitate the
movement of trucks on and off the traveled way without impeding
through traffic. Driveway exits for one-way operation shall be at an
angle not less than 30°.
D. All curves along the course of any driveway of over 100 feet in length, to
be constructed or altered, shall have radii of sufficient length to allow
standard fire-fighting vehicles to negotiate the driveway without
difficulty. For the purpose of this determination, the American
Association of State Highway Officials SU design vehicle shall be used
for design purposes.
23.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 45-8 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-9
38:157
§ 45-10. Dimensions.
§ 45-11. Erosion control.
E. Driveways of 400 feet or more in length shall have facilities suitable for
fire engine turnaround consisting of the following:
(1) K-turn with fifty-foot depth, fourteen-foot width and with sufficient
radii to satisfy § 45-9D within 200 feet, but not less than 75 feet of
the dwelling; or
(2) Looped driveway of fourteen-foot width and fifty-foot-or-more
center-line radius.
A. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate adequately the volume
and normal character of vehicles anticipated to be traveling the
driveway. The required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways are indicated in the following table. Driveways serving large
volumes of daily traffic or industrial driveways as defined herein
(Twenty-five percent of traffic is truck traffic.) shall be required to use
the maximum dimensions as shown on the following table.
Driveway Dimensions
Type of Driveway
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb Return
Radius
(feet)
Residential
(single-family)
One-way
operation
10 to 15 16 to 21 5 to 15
Two-way
operation
10 to 16 16 to 21 5 to 15
Commercial
One-way
operation
10 to 15 16 to 21 15 to 40
Two-way
operation
24 to 30 30 to 36 15t to 40
Industrial
One-way
operation
12 to 24 18 to 30 25 to 50
Two-way
operation
24 to 30 30 to 36 25 to 50
B. All driveways shall be cleared and graded to a width of two feet beyond
each edge of the driveway.
§ 45-9 ANDOVER CODE § 45-11
38:158
§ 45-12. Drainage.
A. All driveways shall be constructed and maintained at all times in such a
manner as to prevent erosion of soil and debris from them and land
adjoining them. Soil and debris shall be prevented from running onto
the public roadways and adjoining properties, and from entering road
gutters, catch basins, inlets or drainage pipes.
B. The owner of any existing driveway that causes public safety problems
in connection with soil erosion or excess runoff within the public rightof-
way or on adjoining property shall, upon written notice from the
Township Engineer, correct the conditions causing said problems within
14 days of said notification. Failure to make such corrections shall be in
violation of this chapter.
C. The owner of any existing driveway that causes the depositing of soil
and debris upon the roadway shall immediately remove the same
therefrom, but, in any event, the same shall be removed within 24 hours
of written notice by the Township Engineer. Failure to make such
corrections shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. All driveways constructed or altered within the public road right-of-way
shall be constructed in such a manner as not to interfere with the
drainage along the existing pavement or traveled way. Under no
circumstance shall the driveway be allowed to extend beyond the edge
of the existing gutter line of a public roadway and create a hump or
uneven driving surface on the pavement or traveled way or shoulder. In
certain situations, as determined by the Township Engineer, the
driveway may be constructed to have a sufficient rise above shoulder
level to prevent excessive runoff from the roadway onto other
properties.
B. The construction of a properly sized dish-type gutter will be permitted,
provided that existing water flow will not be blocked, altered or
changed in any manner. (See Figure 1.)24
C. The installation of a suitable-sized reinforced concrete pipe culvert or
approved equivalent shall be required in the event the existing flow line
or ditch cannot be crossed with a shallow dish-type gutter. The pipe or
culvert required shall be sized to accept flow from a twenty-five-year
storm determined by the rational method of runoff calculation and shall
be installed beneath the driveway by the owner. If the proposed
drainage pipe connects with an existing storm drainage system, a catch
basin shall be constructed. Such pipes shall extend to allow a flat
graded area at least five feet beyond the edges of the driveway. No pipe
or culvert shall be less than 15 inches in diameter. (See Figure 1.)25
24.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
25.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 45-11 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-12
38:159
§ 45-13. Construction materials.
Driveways shall be constructed of the following materials:
D. The installation of suitable-sized cross drains shall be required at points
along the driveway as deemed necessary by the Township Engineer in
order to prevent the accumulation of large quantities of runoff waters
and effects of soil erosion on the public right-of-way or adjoining
property.
E. The Township Engineer may require that measures be taken to limit
runoff rates from the proposed driveway necessary to prevent
increased runoff from affecting downstream properties. In such
instances, runoff rates in the post development condition shall be
modified to equal those existing before development.
A. Residential driveways entering unpaved roads: six inches (compacted
thickness) of one-and-one-half-inch quarry process (blend) stone, threefourths-
inch dirty road stone or soil aggregate Type 5, Class A, or Type
2, Class B, thoroughly rolled and compacted at the specified width.
B. Residential driveways entering paved roads.
(1) Driveways with slopes less than 8% shall be constructed with a
base course six inches (compacted thickness) of one-and-one-halfinch
quarry process (blend) stone, three-fourths-inch dirty road
stone or soil aggregate Type 5, Class A, or Type 2, Class B,
thoroughly rolled and compacted at the specified width. The first
25 feet from the edge of the roadway shall be paved with two
inches of bituminous concrete Type F FABC-1, Mix I-5, thoroughly
compacted.
(2) All driveway slopes in excess of 8% at any point within 250 feet of
the public right-of-way shall be paved with two inches thoroughly
rolled and compacted thickness of bituminous concrete Type
FABC-1, Mix I-5, over a four-inch soil aggregate Type 5, Class A, or
Type 2, Class B, stone or dense graded aggregate thoroughly rolled
and compacted from the right-of-way to the end of the eightpercent
grade.
C. Commercial driveways.
(1) Surface course: two inches (compact thickness) of bituminous
concrete Type FABC-1, Mix I-5; over
(2) Base course: four inches (compacted thickness) of plant-mixed
bituminous concrete, Mix I-2, thoroughly rolled and compacted;
over
(3) Sub-base course: four inches (compacted thickness) of one-andone-
half-inch quarry process (blend) or soil aggregate, Type 5,
§ 45-12 ANDOVER CODE § 45-13
38:160
§ 45-14. Inspection.
Class A, or Type 2, Class B, stone or dense graded aggregate
thoroughly rolled and compacted.
D. Driveways entering curbed roads.
(1) Curbs crossing driveways shall be constructed or reconstructed to
provide a depression with a two-inch curb height relative to the
edge of the roadway pavement. The top of the depressed curb shall
be sloped down toward the roadway to provide a one-and-one-halfinch
curb face.
(2) The total depth of concrete shall be maintained across the
depression.
(3) Transitions from the depressed curb to the full-faced curb shall be
over a maximum length of 18 inches. If an existing expansion joint
is within four feet of a new depressed concrete curb, the existing
curb shall be replaced to that control joint.
A. Upon notice to the Township Engineer of the completion of the
construction of the driveway, the Township Engineer shall inspect the
same and shall determine if the driveway construction is in compliance
or noncompliance with standards specified herein. The construction of
the driveway shall not be deemed in accord with the provisions of this
chapter unless and until the Township Engineer issues a certificate of
approval (CA).
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official
unless all driveways on the lot or site have been completed in
accordance with the approved plan and a certificate of approval (CA)
has been issued. Inspection to assure compliance will be done by the
Township Engineer.
C. If, due to inclement weather conditions, it is not feasible in the
judgment of the Township Engineer to complete the driveway, a cash
bond or certified check in the amount of 120% of the cost of the
remaining improvements as determined by the Township Engineer, but
in no case less than $1,000, may be submitted to the Township thereby
allowing the Township Engineer to release a temporary certificate of
approval (TCA) which would allow the Construction Official to release a
temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO).
D. In the event that the remaining driveway improvements are not
completed within one year after the TCO was issued and, if the
permittee, upon 15 days' notice, does not complete the improvements
required by the approved plans under this chapter, the Township may
complete the outstanding improvements using the funds available from
the bond referenced in § 45-14C.
§ 45-13 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-15
38:161
§ 45-15. Waiver of Conditions by Township Engineer.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the Township Engineer, in
his review of an application for a driveway permit, determines that strict
adherence to any of the requirements in this Chapter 45 would impose a
severe hardship on the owner without any corresponding benefit to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of Andover Township, the
Township Engineer, may (but shall not be obligated to) grant waivers from
the strict application of the provisions of this Chapter 45. The Township
Engineer shall not, however, approve any such waivers if the requirements
for same are included in any of the ordinances of the Township of Andover,
so that a waiver of same would mandate that the applicant seek a waiver
or variance from any board or body having jurisdiction over such provision.
In such event, any such board or body, upon proper application and notice
as provided by law, may grant the requested waivers. It is the intention of
this section to vest in the Township Engineer the discretion to grant waivers
from the strict requirements, provided same does not impact the health,
safety and welfare of persons traversing driveways and roadways in the
Township of Andover.
§ 45-16. Liability for damages.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter which results in deteriorated aprons, broken pipes or debris in
the roadway caused by debris flow from driveways or results in damage
to or obstruction of any public road, gutter, storm drain, ditch, basin inlet
or culvert shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the Township
in repairing said damage or removing said obstruction, in addition to the
penalty herein provided. Further, in the event that property-owner
negligence in driveway construction or maintenance has contributed to
said damage or obstruction, the Township Public Works Supervisor shall
notify, in writing, said property owner of the specific conditions requiring
correction and request driveway repair. If, in the opinion of the Township
Public Works Supervisor, said repairs are not completed in a timely manner,
then the Township shall cause said repairs to be completed at the property
owner's expense.
§ 45-17. Appeals.
If any person shall be aggrieved by an action of the Township Enforcement
Officer/Engineer/Public Works Supervisor under this chapter, appeal
therefrom in writing to the Township Committee may be taken within 10
days after the date of such action. The Township Committee shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, giving due notice thereof to
the appellant. Said appellant shall, at least 10 days to the time appointed,
notify by certified mail all owners of property within 200 feet of the extreme
limits of the property to be affected by such appeal, measured along both
sides of the public road, as they appear on the current municipal tax
records. Said notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the matter being appealed. The appellant shall also cause notice of the
§ 45-15 ANDOVER CODE § 45-17
38:162
hearing to be published in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The
appellant shall, by affidavit, present satisfactory proof to the Township
Committee at the time of the hearing that said notices have been duly
mailed and published as required by this section.
§ 45-18. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 51
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 7.
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any section of this
chapter, which violation results in damage to or obstruction of any
public road, gutter, storm drain, ditch, basin, inlet or culvert, shall be
responsible for all expenses incurred by the Township of Andover for
repairing said damage or removing said obstruction, in addition to the
penalties herein provided.
B. Any person or persons, firm or corporation who violates any section of
this chapter, in addition to the provisions of Subsection A, shall be
subject to the penalties for violations in accordance with Chapter 1,
Article II, General Penalty, of this Code. Each and every day that a
violation continues after notification thereof shall constitute an
additional, separate and specific violation.
§ 45-17 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 45-18
38:163

ARTICLE I
Code Adoption and Administration
[Adopted by Ord. No. 77-10 (§§ 11-1 through 11-14 of the 1973
Code)]
§ 51-1. Adoption by reference.
There is hereby adopted by the Township Committee for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code
recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly
the 1976 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and
from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the Township of Andover.26
§ 51-2. Copies on file.
Not less than three copies of such code have been and now are filed in the
office of the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 51-3. Permit fees. [Amended 2-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4;
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
A. In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the Fire Protection
Code, the following permit fees shall be charged and received by the
Clerk:
Fire Permit Type Application Fee
Type 1 $42
Type 2 $166
Type 3 $331
Type 4 $497
CSDCMAC Inspection Fee
Inspection requested more than 10 business days
prior to change of occupant.
$35
Inspection requested 4 to 10 business days prior to
change of occupant.
$70
Inspection requested fewer than 4 business days
prior to change of occupant.
$125
Reinspection fee $50
26.Editor's Note: See Art. III of this chapter for the administration and enforcement of the
State Uniform Fire Prevention Code under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 51-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-3
38:165
§ 51-4. Definitions.
Whenever the term "Corporation Counsel" shall be used in the Fire
Prevention Code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the Township.
§ 51-5. Enforcement of Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 7-11-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-08]
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Fire Marshal/Official of
the Office of the Fire Marshall of the County of Sussex based upon the terms
of a shared services agreement established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et
seq. which names the County of Sussex as the local enforcing agency.
§ 51-6. Appointment of Chief.
The Chief, or Fire Marshal, in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
be appointed by the Township Committee on the basis of examination to
determine his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good
behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from office
except for cause upon 30 days' written notice, public hearing if requested
and majority vote of the Township Committee.
§ 51-7. Appointment of inspectors.
§ 51-8. Annual report of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
B. The permit fees listed above shall be as provided by state regulations,
presently set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c) and (d), and are subject to
change whenever the fees contained in those regulations are adjusted.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department shall detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as, from time to time shall be necessary.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the Township
Committee the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such
authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to
determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open
to the members of the Fire Department, and appointments made after
examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
A. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Township Committee; it shall contain all proceedings
under the code, with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department,
or Fire Marshal, decides to include therein.
B. The Chief of the Fire Department, or Fire Marshal, shall also
recommend any amendments to the Code which, in his judgment, shall
be desirable.
§ 51-3 ANDOVER CODE § 51-9
38:166
§ 51-9. Assistance in discharge of duties.
The Chief of the Fire Department may request and shall receive so far
as may be necessary, in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the Township.
§ 51-10. Limits of districts in which storage of explosives and
blasting agents is prohibited.
The limits referred to in Section 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents shall be prohibited, are hereby
established as all residential and commercial zones.
§ 51-11. Limits of districts in which manufacture and storage of
fireworks is prohibited.
The limits referred to in Section 13.3a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which manufacture and storage of fireworks shall be prohibited, are hereby
established as all residential and commercial zones.
§ 51-12. Limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in
outside aboveground tanks is prohibited.
§ 51-13. Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases
is restricted.
The limits referred to in Section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall be restricted, are hereby
established as all residential zones.
§ 51-14. Motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives
and blasting agents.
The routes referred to in Section 12.7o of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established
as follows:
A. Storage of flammable liquids in aboveground tanks. The limits referred
to in Section 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks shall be prohibited, are
hereby established as all residential zones.
B. Bulk plants for storage of flammable liquids. The limits referred to in
Section 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants for
flammable or combustible liquids shall be prohibited, are hereby
established as all residential and commercial zones.
A. Limecrest Road.
B. Route 206.
C. Newton-Sparta Road.
§ 51-9 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-15
38:167
§ 51-15. Motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting hazardous
chemicals or other dangerous articles.
The routes referred to in Section 20.14 of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are
hereby established as follows:
§ 51-16. Fire lanes on private property devoted to public use.
The fire lanes referred to in Section 28.16 of the Fire Prevention Code are
hereby established on public or private property, devoted to public use,
where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with
the ingress and egress of Fire Department vehicles for the protection of
persons and property.
§ 51-16.1. Fire zones in front of hydrants, cisterns and other Fire
Department connections. [Added 2-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-2]
In addition to the fire zones already established pursuant to the Fire
Prevention Code, incorporated herein by reference, fire zones are to be
established and maintained in front of any fire hydrant, cistern or other Fire
Department connection located on both public and private property. Such
zones shall extend for a distance of not less than 10 feet either side of the
adjacent curb line.
§ 51-16.2. Parking in or obstructing fire zones. [Added 2-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-2]
No person shall at any time park or leave unattended a motor vehicle in
any area designated as a fire zone, nor shall any person, firm or corporation
place or construct any structure in a designated fire zone nor place any
obstruction thereon which will impair the free passage and access of firefighting
vehicles, apparatus or firemen or impair the free use of an exit or
exit discharge from any building. This shall not apply to emergency vehicles
or firemen while engaged in the actual performance of official duties.
§ 51-17. Modifications.
The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have power to modify any
of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided
that the intent of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
A. Limecrest Road.
B. Route 206.
C. Newton-Sparta Road.
§ 51-15 ANDOVER CODE § 51-17
38:168
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department and a signed
copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 51-18. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that
the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning
of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
shall be permitted to appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention to the Township Committee within 30 days from the date of
the decision appealed.
§ 51-19. New materials, processes or occupancies which require
permits.
The Building Inspector, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any
new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in
addition to those now enumerated in such code. The Chief of the Bureau of
Fire Prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and
distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
§ 51-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation
of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder,
and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Township Committee
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein,
shall, severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not less
than $25 nor more than $500 or by imprisonment for not less than 10
days nor more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time.
C. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
D. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 51-17 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-20
38:169

ARTICLE II
Fire Department
[Adopted by Ord. No. 78-22 (Ch. III of the 1973 Code)]
§ 51-21. Establishment.
There is hereby authorized and established the Andover Township Fire
Department to be composed of one company, to be known as the "Andover
Township Volunteer Fire Department" and such additional companies as the
Township Committee may authorize and approve.
§ 51-22. Membership applications, qualifications and duty
requirements.
§ 51-22.1. Andover Township emergency response recovery of costs.
[Added 1-23-2012 by Ord. No. 2011-13]
A. Applications. Each person seeking to join the Fire Department shall
make application to the company or unit which he/she desires to join,
and upon election to membership by vote of a majority of the unit
present and voting, he/she shall become a member in good standing of
the Fire Department after approval of his/her membership by the Chief
and confirmation by the Township officers, and his/her name shall be
entered on a roll of firemen kept by the Township Clerk.
B. Qualifications. No person shall hereafter become a member of the Fire
Department, or any unit thereof, unless over the age of 18 and not over
the age of 40, a citizen of the United States of good moral character, a
resident of the Township upwards of one year. He/she shall be
physically fit to perform the duties of a fireman evidenced by a
certificate to that effect by a practicing physician of the State of New
Jersey, after physical examination for that purpose.
C. Duty requirements. Every member of the Fire Department shall, in each
and every year, perform at least 60% of duty to be composed of actual
attendance and duty at fires and drills, and a record shall be kept of
such attendance and duty by the Chief of the Fire Department and
reported to the municipal officers annually.
A. Andover Township and its designated public service agencies are
authorized to mitigate the effects of any hazardous material unlawfully
released, discharged, or deposited upon or into the property or facilities
within the Township. The following described persons shall be jointly
and severally liable to reimburse the Township for payment of all costs
incurred by the Township, its designated public service agencies,
mutual aid agencies and local contractors as a result of such mitigation
activity:
(1) The person or persons whose negligent or willful act or omission
proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit;
§ 51-21 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-22.1
38:171
(2) The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release,
discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause;
(3) The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the
container which held such hazardous waste or substance at the
time or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit,
without regard to fault or proximate cause; or
(4) The person or persons who owned or controlled the land on which
the hazardous material was deposited or from which the hazardous
material was released or discharged.
B. Costs associated with minor, major and disaster emergencies.
(1) Andover Township and its designated public service agencies are
authorized to recover all costs associated with minor, major and
disaster emergencies. The following described persons shall be
jointly and severally liable to the Township for payment of all costs
incurred by the Township, its designated public service agencies,
mutual aid agencies and local contractors as a result of such
mitigation activity:
(a) The person or persons whose negligence or willful act or
omission proximately caused such minor, major and/or disaster
emergency.
(b) The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of
the vehicle, machine, plane or other container at the time of or
immediately prior to such minor, major and/or disaster
emergency.
(2) The authority to recover costs under this section shall not be
misconstrued to include fire suppression services which are
customarily provided by the Fire Department to taxpayers unless
such response was necessitated by a willful act of arson or
negligent act as detailed above.
C. For the purpose of this section, costs incurred shall include, but may not
necessarily be limited to, the following per incident: actual labor costs
of Township personnel including benefits and administrative overhead,
replacement of supplies, periodic and scheduled maintenance on
apparatus, fuel purchases, costs of equipment operation, cost of
contract labor and materials, cost of mutual aid labor and materials,
rehabilitation supplies, manpower and training expenses, repair and/or
replacement of protective gear and equipment and administrative fees
associated with billing services.
D. The department head, or his/her designee, of the agency responding to
such outlined emergency shall establish reasonable fees and compile
costs associated with such response representing a recovery of
expenses for services performed for reimbursement to the Township
§ 51-22.1 ANDOVER CODE § 51-22.1
38:172
§ 51-23. Exemption certificates.
Exemption certificates may be issued to members of the Fire Department
who have served seven years in active duty, under municipal control, as
required by law of April 29, 1935, and as amended May 26, 1936.
and shall be authorized to bill the responsible parties either directly,
jointly, or through a contracted billing company. The fee schedule shall
be authorized by the department head and be provided to the Andover
Township Clerk and placed on file in said office.
§ 51-22.1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-23
38:173

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Code
[Adopted by Ord. No. 85-17 (§ 11-15 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 51-24. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c 383)27
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of Andover.
§ 51-25. Agency designation. [Amended 12-27-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-30; 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-08]
The local enforcement agency shall be the Fire Marshall/Official of the
Office of the Fire Marshall of the County of Sussex based upon the terms
of a shared services agreement established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et
seq. which names the County of Sussex as the local enforcing agency.
§ 51-26. Duties. [Amended 12-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted thereunder in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Andover,
other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied buildings used exclusively
for dwelling purposes and buildings, structures and premises owned or
operated by the federal government, interstate agencies or the State of
New Jersey. The local enforcement agency shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 51-27. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 51-25 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 51-28. Non-life-hazard uses. [Added 12-27-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-30; amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07; 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-08]
In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall be registered with the local enforcing
agency as set forth under §§ 51-5 and 51-25 of this chapter. These uses
shall be inspected annually and pay the annual inspection fee outlined
below, except for residential uses which shall be inspected and charged the
inspection fee only upon sale or change of the owner or tenant. This fee
does not apply to life hazard uses as defined in the Uniform Fire Code.
A. Assembly.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 51-24 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-28
38:175
Description Fee
A-1 Eating establishments seating under
50 persons
$30
A-2 Take-out food service (no seating) $30
A-3 Church or synagogue $30
A-4 Recreation centers, multipurpose
rooms, etc.; fewer than 100
$55
A-5 Court rooms, libraries, fraternal
organizations, condominium centers;
fewer than 100
$55
A-6 Senior citizen centers; fewer than
200
$55
B. Business/professional use.
Description Fee
B-1 One- and two-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$30
B-2 One- and two-story; more than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$55
B-3 One- and two-story; more than
10,000 square feet, per floor
$80
B-4 Three- to five-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$105
B-5 Three- to five-story; more than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$155
B-6 Three- to five-story; over 10,000
square feet, per floor
$225
C. Retail/mercantile use.
Description Fee
M-1 One- and two-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$65
M-2 One- and two-story; more than 5,000
square feet, less than 10,000 square
feet, per floor
$95
M-3 One- and two-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$120
M-4 Three- to five-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$155
M-5 Three- to five-story; more than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$180
§ 51-28 ANDOVER CODE § 51-28
38:176
Description Fee
M-6 Three- to five-story; over 10,000
square feet, per floor
$205
With the exception of hardware
stores, 2,000 square feet, retail
stores over 12,000 square feet are
life-hazard uses.
D. Manufacturing (factory use).
Description Fee
F-1 One- and two-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$80
F-2 One- and two-story; more than 5,000
square feet, less than 10,000 square
feet, per floor
$105
F-3 One- and two-story; more than
10,000 square feet, per floor
$155
F-4 Three- to five-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$180
F-5 Three- to five-story; more than 5,000
square feet, less than 10,000 feet,
per floor
$205
F-6 Three- to five-story; over 10,000
square feet, per floor
$255
E. Storage (moderate hazard, S-1; low hazard, S-2).
Description Fee
S-1 One- and two-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$55
S-2 One- and two-story; more than 5,000
square feet, less than 10,000 square
feet, per floor
$105
S-3 One- and two-story; more than
10,000 square feet, per floor
$155
S-4 Three- to five-story; less than 5,000
square feet, per floor
$180
S-5 Three- to five-story; more than 5,000
square feet, floor
$205
S-6 Three- to five-story; over 10,000
square feet, per floor
$255
Exceptions, life-hazard uses.
F. Residential (LEA listed with multifamily BHI). Fee is for each building.
§ 51-28 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-28
38:177
§ 51-29. Unclassified uses; vacant buildings; inspection of
residential uses. [Added 12-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
§ 51-30. Fire Official; Fire Inspector. [Amended 12-27-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-30]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established pursuant to § 51-25 shall be
under the direct supervision and control of a Fire Official who shall report to
the Township Administrator and shall have at least one paid Fire Inspector.
§ 51-31. Appointment of Fire Official and Inspectors; term of office;
removal. [Amended 12-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
Description Fee
R-1 One to 6 units $25
R-2 Seven to 12 units $50
R-3 Thirteen to 20 units $75
R-4 Twenty-one to 50 units $100
R-5 For each additional unit $2
A. Uses not classified under §§ 51-27 and 51-28 that are subject to the
Uniform Fire Code shall be classified as business uses.
B. Uses required to register with the State of New Jersey as life hazard
uses are not required to register with the Andover Township Bureau of
Fire Prevention as outlined in § 51-28.
C. In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant buildings shall be charged
and inspected according to the previous use of the building.
D. All residential uses outlined in § 51-28 shall be inspected in the common
areas only.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be certified by the
State of New Jersey and appointed by the governing body from a list of
three names submitted by the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
B. Term of office of the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall serve for a term
of one year and may be reappointed thereafter. Any vacancy shall be
filled by the governing body.
C. Appointment of inspectors and other employees. Inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the
governing body with the advice of the Fire Official. All life hazard use
inspectors shall be certified by the State of New Jersey.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, Fire Inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be subject to removal
by the governing body for just cause. Prior to removal from office, all
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be afforded an
§ 51-28 ANDOVER CODE § 51-31
38:178
§ 51-32. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,28 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency (or agencies) shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County
of Sussex.29
§ 51-33. Permits and certificates of Fire Code status. [Amended
12-27-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30]
§ 51-34. Enforcement; violation and penalties. [Added by Ord. No.
2002-30]
Enforcement and violations and penalties are to be handled in conformity
with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a hearing officer
designated by same.
E. Legal counsel. The governing body shall specifically appoint legal
counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the code and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. The application fees for permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a) shall be as
provided for by state regulations and are subject to change.
B. The cost for issuance of a certificate of Fire Code status is $35.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
29.Editor's Note: Original Section 11-15.8, Additional Required Inspections and Fees, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-30.
§ 51-31 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 51-34
38:179
Chapter 55
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Soil removal — See Ch. 140.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 55-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of Andover Township,
New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 55-2. Findings of fact.
§ 55-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Andover are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 51-34 ANDOVER CODE § 55-3
38:180
§ 55-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 55-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentor-
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the alternate use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 55-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-5
38:181
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor surface subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 55-5 ANDOVER CODE § 55-5
38:182
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 55-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-5
38:183
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
is 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways,
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
§ 55-5 ANDOVER CODE § 55-5
38:184
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 55-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Andover.
§ 55-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 55-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for 90 days, or both, for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. For the areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Andover,
Community No. 340527, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Sussex
County New Jersey, (All Jurisdictions)," dated September 29, 2011.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Sussex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Nos. 34037C0292E,
34037C0293E, 34037C0294E, 34037C0303E, 34037C0304E,
34037C0311E, 34037C0315E, 34037C0316E, 34037C0318E,
34037C0382E, 34037C0401E, 34037C0402E; the effective date of
which is September 29, 2011.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 134
Newton-Sparta Road, Newton, New Jersey.
§ 55-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-8
38:185
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Andover from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 55-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposed the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 55-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 55-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 55-12. Establishment of development permit.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes.
B. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
C. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Andover, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 55-17B(2).
B. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 55-8 ANDOVER CODE § 55-12
38:186
§ 55-13. Administration and implementation by Construction
Official.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 55-14. Duties and responsibilities of Construction Official.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 55-17B(2); and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 55-18B are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 55-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 55-17, Specific standards.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction Official
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
§ 55-12 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-14
38:187
§ 55-15. Variance procedure.
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 55-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Official shall
make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 55-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by Andover Township
Committee shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
§ 55-14 ANDOVER CODE § 55-15
38:188
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) above, and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) above have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
§ 55-15 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-15
38:189
§ 55-16. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following
standards are required:
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4)
above, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) Anchoring generally. All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
(2) Anchoring of manufactured homes. All manufactured homes shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
§ 55-15 ANDOVER CODE § 55-16
38:190
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings.
(1) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
§ 55-16 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-16
38:191
§ 55-17. Specific standards.
In all cases of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 55-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 55-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation.
(2) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM, that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified); and, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In the area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, either:
(1) Elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; and within any AO
Zone on the municipality's DFIRM, that all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number if specified);
and, require adequate drainage paths around structures or slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
§ 55-16 ANDOVER CODE § 55-17
38:192
§ 55-18. Floodways.
Chapter 59
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Retail food establishments — See Ch. 202.
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in § 55-14C.
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 55-16A.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 55-7 are
areas designated as floodways.
B. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection B(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 55-16, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction, and § 55-17, Specific standards.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/
10 of a foot at any point.
§ 55-17 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 55-18
38:193

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 7-5 of the 1973 Code; as amended
through Ord. No. 96-3]
§ 59-1. License required.
No person shall conduct a retail food establishment as defined in the Retail
Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) established in Chapter
202, without first having procured a license from the Board of Health or
without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation
and maintenance of the same as contained in the code.
§ 59-2. Application for license.
§ 59-3. Fees.
Fees shall be as follows:
A. All applicants desiring a license to conduct a retail food establishment
shall file a written application signed by the applicant with the
Secretary of the Board of Health.
B. Applications shall be accompanied by payment of the amount of the
license fee for the period involved.
C. The Secretary of the Board of Health shall present applications to the
Sanitarian for issuance of the license. If the license applied for is
denied, the fee accompanying the license shall be returned to the
applicant.
D. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where he intends to conduct
the retail establishment, the owner's consent to conduct the business
shall be endorsed in writing on the application or otherwise annexed
thereto.
A. Permanent establishments: $50. Licenses issued between the dates of
May 1 to 12:00 midnight of July 31 of the licensing year will be charged
a fee of $25. A permanent establishment shall be defined as one where
business is conducted on a regular, continuous, or seasonal basis from a
permanent building. Permanent food establishments must meet all the
requirements of Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code of New Jersey.30
B. Reinspection of permanent establishments: If an inspection of the
permanent establishment by a licensed Sanitarian results in an
evaluation other than satisfactory, thereby requiring a reinspection of
the establishment, a fee of $25 will be charged for the first reinspection.
If after the first reinspection the evaluation is still not satisfactory and
an additional inspection is required, the fee for a second reinspection
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
§ 59-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-3
38:195
§ 59-4. Licensing procedure.
§ 59-5. Suspension or revocation of license.
will be $50. The fee for each additional reinspection, after the second
reinspection, will be increased in increments of $25 until a satisfactory
evaluation has been rendered.
C. Temporary food establishments: $250. A temporary food establishment
shall be defined as one operating on a temporary basis and one which
does not comply with the regulations as established in Chapter 12 of the
New Jersey State Sanitary Code for permanent retail food
establishments. Vending carts, wagons, trucks, trailers, and all the
other vehicular type conveyances which are used for retail food sales
shall be classified as temporary retail food establishments.
D. Religious and nonprofit organizations: $1.
A. The Sanitarian, after investigation and consideration of the application,
shall issue or deny the license.
B. The Board of Health may consider an appeal from a denial of a license
at a meeting 15 days subsequent to the filing of a notice of appeal or it
may set a date for a hearing to be held on the appeal at a reasonable
time which shall not be later than one month from the date of the denial
of the license, and at which hearing any objectors to the license, as well
as the applicant and those in support of the license, may be heard and
may present evidence.
C. After considering all the evidence with respect to the appeal, the Board
of Health may deny the license to the applicant for a good cause
revealed by the facts or evidence. If the application for the license is
denied the Board of Health shall state in writing the reasons for denial.
D. When issued the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on
the licensed premises at all times.
E. The license shall be effective from the date of issuance to 12:00
midnight of July 31 in the year in which issued.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health for violation by the
licensee of any provision of this article or the code or whenever it
appears that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of
the person to whom the license was issued is conducted in a disorderly
or improper manner, or in violation of any law of the United States, the
State of New Jersey, or any ordinance of the Township, or that the
person conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character
to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been
issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is being used
for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.
§ 59-3 ANDOVER CODE § 59-5
38:196
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing has been held by the
Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be served on the licensee at least three days prior to the date set
for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement of the
grounds to be relied upon for revoking, cancelling or suspending the
license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery or by
registered mail. At the hearing the person aggrieved shall have an
opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due
consideration and deliberation by the Board of Health, the complaint
may be dismissed, or if the Board concludes that the charges have been
sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the
license.
§ 59-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-5
38:197

ARTICLE II
Certification of Food Service Managers
[Adopted 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-8]
§ 59-6. Requirements.
The staff of every retail food establishment shall include at least one
certified food service manager. A food service manager is any person
responsible for the immediate supervision of food handlers and other
workers involved in the sanitary maintenance of a retail food establishment.
In an establishment having no employees or a single employee, the food
service manager shall be the food establishment operator or the single
employee. An establishment will not be issued a retail food establishment
license unless its staff includes a certified food manager.
§ 59-7. Responsibilities of managers and operators.
Certified food service managers shall be responsible for training and
supervising food handlers with respect to food sanitation. Retail food
establishment operators shall be responsible for assuring that organized
training activities are conducted for all food handlers they employ.
§ 59-8. Exemptions.
The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this article:
§ 59-9. Certification requirements.
An applicant shall be registered as a certified food service manager upon
the successful completion of:
§ 59-10. Application.
An individual seeking certification as a food service manager must apply
to the Secretary of the Board of Health ("Secretary") on application forms
provided by the Secretary prior to assuming duties as a food service
manager. The application form must be accompanied by proof of the
applicant's successful completion of the certification requirements outlined
in § 59-9 and filed with the Secretary. Upon the filing of a satisfactory
A. Agricultural markets, meaning buildings or stands that are located on a
farm for the purpose of selling fresh produce of that farm and open for
business not more than six months per year; or
B. Retail food establishments whose only products are factory-sealed or
prepackaged food products that do not require refrigeration.
A. A course on the principles of food sanitation approved by the Board of
Health or its authorized agent; and
B. A written examination approved by the Board of Health or its
authorized agent.
§ 59-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-10
38:199
application, the applicant shall be certified as a food service manager and
his name placed on the certification register.
§ 59-11. Duration of certification.
Certification as a food service manager shall expire on July 31 of each year
unless terminated earlier or extended.
§ 59-12. Renewal certification.
Renewal certification applications for food service managers shall be mailed
to each retail food establishment by no later than July 30 each year. Renewal
of certification for food service managers and renewal of the food handler's
license for each establishment shall occur at the same time.
§ 59-13. Continuing education.
After a food service manager has renewed his certification twice,
subsequent renewals shall be issued, provided that the applicant shows that
he annually, successfully completes a course dealing with food sanitation
and a written examination approved by the Board of Health or its authorized
agent. This ensures the food service manager's awareness of current
sanitary food maintenance procedures.
§ 59-14. Temporary certification.
If an applicant has not complied with the requirements of § 59-9, the
Secretary may issue a temporary food service manager's certification which
shall expire on July 31 of the year following its issuance. The applicant must
comply with the requirements of § 59-9 prior to the temporary certification's
expiration. No more than one temporary certification will be issued to any
applicant.
§ 59-15. Waiver.
The Board of Health may waive the requirements of § 59-9 and may certify
a food service manager holding a current certification from another agency
with substantially equivalent standards.
§ 59-16. Revocation of certification.
The Board of Health will conduct periodic inspections and/or collect official
samples to determine a retail food establishment's degree of compliance
with Chapter XII of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code. The certification
of a food service manager employed by a retail food establishment shall be
revoked if the establishment receives an inspection rating of unsatisfactory
or receives two or more conditionally satisfactory inspection ratings within
a period of one year.
§ 59-10 ANDOVER CODE § 59-17
38:200
§ 59-17. Fees.
An applicant must pay a fee of $10 for filing either an application or a
renewal application for registration as a certified food service manager.
These fees may be waived for nonprofit or religious establishments upon
receipt of appropriate proof of the organization's status as such.
§ 59-17 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-17
38:201

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Cafes
[Adopted 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
§ 59-18. Purpose.
The sidewalk cafe regulations as established in this article are designed
to permit sidewalk cafes to be established on public property, commercial
zone districts, in locations where they shall be determined to be appropriate
by these regulations and all applicable related ordinances to promote and
protect the public health, safety and general welfare. These general
purposes shall include, among others, the following specific purposes:
§ 59-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESTAURANT — A retail food establishment, or similar establishment such
as a bakery, ice cream store, bagel shop, etc., licensed by the Board of
Health which provides indoor seating for dining and restroom facilities for
use by patrons in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code as codified at N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq. and as
the same may be from time to time amended and supplemented.
SIDEWALK CAFE — A seating area where food and drinks are permitted
to be consumed at the tables and/or benches placed on the public sidewalk
adjacent to and within the confines of the frontage of that portion of the
building in which the restaurant is located. A sidewalk cafe may contain
readily removable tables and four chairs, but shall be otherwise unenclosed
by fixed walls and open to the air except for retractable awnings, umbrellas
or other nonpermanent covers provided such covers do not interfere with
pedestrian circulation and do not extend beyond the front building facade.
§ 59-20. License required.
A. To ensure that adequate space will be provided for pedestrian
circulation through areas where sidewalk cafes are established and to
ensure adequate access to adjoining properties and businesses.
B. To encourage the establishment of sidewalk cafes as one means of
developing a pleasant and distinctive shopping atmosphere.
A. Any person, firm or corporation may operate a sidewalk cafe
(hereinafter called a "cafe") within the Township of Andover in
commercial zone districts, in which such use is permitted on a sidewalk
adjacent to an existing restaurant operated by such person, firm or
corporation upon obtaining a license from the Division of Health. New
applications for such license are to be submitted to the Board of Health
no later than July 31 of any calendar year. Such license shall allow the
operation of a sidewalk cafe from April 1 through and including
§ 59-18 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-20
38:203
§ 59-21. Application procedures, requirements and fee.
December 1 of any calendar year and may be renewed annually during
the month of January. No license shall be issued by the Board of Health
for the operation of a cafe to a person, persons, firm, or corporation
other than the person, persons, firm, or corporation who holds the retail
food establishment license from the Board of Health for the restaurant
where the cafe shall be operated.
B. The license issued pursuant to this article is personal to the applicant,
and any change or transfer of ownership of the applicant shall
terminate the license and shall require a new application and new
license in conformance with all of the requirements of this article.
A. Application and fee. Each applicant for a license shall submit a written
application on the form provided by the Board of Health, together with
a nonrefundable fee to the Board of Health in the amount set forth at
§ 59-3 of the Township Code. All applications for a given calendar year
and the application fees must be submitted to the Board of Health by
February 15 of the applicable calendar year. No application will be
accepted without the fee. In the event that an application, application
fee, or other required document as described in this section is received
later than February 15, a nonrefundable late fee of $100 in addition to
the license fee as set forth at § 59-3 of the Township Code must be paid
in order for the application to be considered.
B. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the
property owner if other than the applicant, the person preparing the
development plans and the written authorization of the owner of the
property to submit the application if the applicant is not the owner.
C. Development plans. The following information shall be shown on all
development plans:
(1) The applicant's entire property and the adjacent sidewalk area to
be used.
(2) The design, number and location of all temporary structures
proposed including tables, chairs, planters, awnings and other
equipment as well as lighting and electrical outlet locations, if any.
Each establishment must provide for the placement of at least one
raised planter which complements the decor of the building's
facade. Each establishment may provide a bench in place of table
and chairs arrangement.
(3) Capacity of existing restaurant and proposed cafe.
(4) Proposal for providing adequate pedestrian circulation as detailed
herein in Subsection F(4) below.
(5) Name, title and seal, if applicable, of person who prepared the
development plan.
§ 59-20 ANDOVER CODE § 59-21
38:204
(6) Statement that a public restroom is available in the existing
restaurant.
D. Review of development plans. Prior to the issuance of a license
pursuant to this section, the development plans and application shall be
reviewed by the Board of Health and the Zoning Officer. The Board of
Health shall review the development plans for compliance with N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq. and as the same may be from time to time amended and
supplemented together with the sanitary requirements detailed in this
article and any applicable local health ordinances. The Zoning Officer
shall review the development plan for compliance with applicable New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code requirements and requirements
detailed in this article relative to the placement of tables, chairs,
planters, awnings, lighting, and electrical outlets as well as dimensions
and distances. The health officer and construction official/Zoning
Officer shall either approve or recommend modifications of the plans
within 20 days of submission of the plans.
E. Conditions for issuance of license. Upon approval by the Board of
Health and Zoning Officer of the application and plans submitted by the
applicant pursuant to this article, the Board of Health shall issue a
license to the applicant provided the applicant has furnished the
following to the Township:
(1) A maintenance agreement signed by the applicant to ensure the
outside dining area is kept free from debris and garbage. The
maintenance agreement must ensure that a garbage container will
be placed outside during hours of operation, but removed prior to
closing.
(2) An agreement signed by the applicant to repair any damage caused
to the sidewalk in the operation of the cafe at the expense of the
applicant. The Township may require a bond to be filed by the
applicant in an amount to be determined by the Township to secure
the repair of any damage to the sidewalk.
(3) An agreement signed by the applicant indemnifying and holding
the Township harmless against loss, including costs and expenses,
resulting from injury to person(s) or property as a direct or indirect
result of the operation of the cafe or for injury to person(s) or
property occurring on the premises occupied by the cafe. The
applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance as evidence of the
required general liability policy to the Township, and naming the
Township as an additional named insured, in the amount of not less
than $1,000,000.
F. Rules, regulations and specifications. A cafe authorized and operated
pursuant to this article shall comply with all of the following rules,
regulations and specifications:
§ 59-21 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-21
38:205
(1) The applicant and/or operator shall fully comply with all plans
submitted and approved by the Board of Health and Zoning Officer
under the terms of this article.
(2) Within 30 minutes after the closing of the cafe, the operator shall
have all furniture, utensils, or any other materials used in the
operation of the cafe or within the area used by the cafe, and all
customers removed from the sidewalk area, provided that furniture
may remain outside if stored in a neat and orderly manner. Said
closing shall be no later than 10:00 p.m.
(3) Music, if any, shall be kept at a reasonable level that is not
unnecessarily loud or objectionable to persons in or around the
area.
(4) The operator shall maintain an area for pedestrian movement free
of any obstruction a distance of three feet from the curb. The
operator shall provide that tables, chairs, and other materials do
not interfere with these required open areas and pedestrian traffic.
Chairs next to the pedestrian walkway shall be placed at a ninetydegree
angle so as not to obstruct the pedestrian walkway. Where
there are obstructions, such as light posts and mailboxes, which
would cause the pedestrian aisle to be less than four feet wide, the
construction official/Zoning Officer shall have the discretion to
approve an alternate arrangement.
(5) The operator shall comply with all the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq., also known as Chapter XXIV of the New Jersey
Sanitary Code, and as the same may be from time to time amended
and supplemented along with the sanitary requirements detailed in
this article.
(6) No pets or animals, except for certified service animals, may be
present in the sidewalk cafe area at any time.
(7) The operator shall comply with all other ordinances of the
Township of Andover.
(8) A license issued under the provisions of this article shall limit the
operation of a sidewalk cafe to that area within the confines of the
frontage of the licensed premises. At no time shall the tables, chairs
and other accessory items used in connection with the operation of
the licensed cafe extend to the frontage or any portion thereof of
any adjacent business, building or property.
(9) Applicant shall not be barred from obtaining a license under this
article due to parking restrictions.
(10) Applicant shall ensure there are adequate and appropriate curb
stops in place, if necessary, to serve as a shield between the
sidewalk cafe and parking area(s) in front of the sidewalk cafe.
§ 59-21 ANDOVER CODE § 59-22
38:206
§ 59-22. Location and size limitations.
§ 59-23. Notice of violation; failure to comply.
Upon a finding by the Zoning Officer that an applicant has violated any
provisions of this article, notice shall be given to the applicant to correct
said violation. Upon failure to immediately correct said violation, the Zoning
Officer may revoke the applicant's license to operate a sidewalk cafe. Upon
the revocation of such license, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing
before the governing body within 30 days, upon notice thereof, provided
that a hearing is requested by the applicant in writing, within five days of
revocation of the license.
§ 59-24. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
The area encompassed within a sidewalk cafe authorized pursuant to this
article shall not be considered duly licensed for sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 59-25. Sanitary requirements.
The licensee shall comply with the following Board of Health requirements:
A. A sidewalk cafe must be located contiguous to and directly in front of a
restaurant as hereinabove defined. The term "directly in front of shall
confine the sidewalk cafe to the area represented by an extension of
each side of the adjacent building or portion of the adjacent building
occupied by the restaurant (whichever is smaller) projected directly to
the curbline immediately in front thereof. No sidewalk cafe may be
located in a rear yard or side yard. An on-site sidewalk cafe must be
located on a preexisting hard, level, man-made surface, such as
concrete, asphalt or pavers. Elevated decks, porches, verandas and the
like shall not qualify for licensing under this article and shall require
site plan approval. Restaurants located on corner lots may locate a
sidewalk cafe in either of the two front yards of the lot (but not both)
and may use the sidewalk space fronting either side of the restaurant
(but not both) for sidewalk cafe operations.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a sidewalk cafe
licensed hereunder may not exceed 250 square feet in total area. The
square footage of a sidewalk cafe shall be measured from the facade of
the building so that there is no gap between the building and the cafe.
A. No fruit, vegetables and other food shall be stored or displayed for sale
in the cafe authorized by this article.
B. No food or drinks shall be prepared other than in the interior areas of
the retail food establishment approved by the Board of Health for such
use.
C. All equipment used in the outdoor seating area, including but not
limited to chairs and tables, shall be nonabsorbent, smooth, easily
§ 59-22 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-25
38:207
§ 59-26. Enforcement.
cleanable, of corrosive-resistant material, and meet the requirements
of the New Jersey Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.), as the same
may be from time to time amended and supplemented.
D. No food service equipment shall be located in, stored in or permanently
mounted to any area of the outdoor dining area.
E. Containers used in the conveyance of soiled tableware shall not be
permanently stored outdoors. Soiled tableware shall be promptly
removed to the establishment's equipment washing area after patron
use.
F. Smoking shall be prohibited in the outdoor dining area. Such areas
shall be marked by a sign approved by the Board of Health indicating
that smoking is prohibited.
G. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor dining
area and the adjacent walks and streets clean, free of litter and food
wastes, free of nuisances and sanitary at all times. Areas must be
cleaned at the beginning of each business day, at closing time and as
often as needed so as to prevent unsanitary conditions.
H. Effective control measures shall be utilized to minimize, prevent and
eliminate the presence and entry of rodents, flies, and all other vermin
into the establishment. Outdoor dining areas and all other parts of the
establishment shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the
breeding, harborage or feeding of all vermin.
I. The licensee shall provide adequate receptacles for the depositing of
waste by patrons as deemed necessary by the Board of Health. Such
receptacles shall have lids and be designed so as to preclude the entry,
harborage, or breeding of vermin. Such receptacles shall be
constructed of easily cleanable nonabsorbent material and shall be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. The licensee shall ensure
that waste receptacles are routinely serviced so as to prevent overflow
of contents upon the ground. Waste receptacles owned and maintained
by the Township shall not be used by the licensee for depositing of
waste generated by the establishment including the outdoor cafe.
A. The Zoning Officer shall investigate violations related to and enforce all
applicable requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. and as the
same may be from time to time amended and supplemented along with
the sanitary requirements detailed in this article and any applicable
local health ordinances.
B. The Zoning Officer shall investigate violations related to and enforce all
applicable requirements set forth in New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code and requirements detailed in this article relative to the placement
of tables, chairs, planters, awnings, lighting, electrical outlets along
with dimensions and distances.
§ 59-25 ANDOVER CODE § 59-26
38:208
C. Violations of § 59-21F(2) and (3) shall be investigated and enforced by
the Andover Township Police Department.
§ 59-26 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 59-26
38:209
Chapter 63
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 63-1. Purpose.
§ 63-2. Hours.
No licensee authorized by law shall hold, operate or conduct any game of
chance at the place where the game of chance is being conducted under any
license except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m.
§ 63-3. Conduct of games on Sunday.
A license for holding, operating or conducting a licensed game of chance
may provide that the game so licensed may be conducted under such
license on Sunday, and the conduct of licensed games of chance within the
Township on Sundays is authorized.
§ 63-4. Organizations eligible for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance as authorized by law shall be issued
to any organization not having a bona fide situs established in good faith
within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in serving one or more
of the authorized purposes as defined by the rules and regulations of the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 63-5. Games of change during elections prohibited.
No game of change shall be conducted under any license at any time during
which a general, municipal, primary, special or board of education election
is being held, while the polls are open for voting at such election.
A. This chapter shall be for the purpose of regulating all games of chance
held, operated or conducted within the Township, pursuant to the acts
of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey known as the Bingo
Licensing Law and the Raffles Licensing Law,31 and in accordance with
the rules and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission in the Department of State of the
State of New Jersey.
B. All applications, licenses and proceedings in connection therewith shall
be subject to the provisions of the Acts and the rules and regulations,
and any laws, rules and regulations hereafter enacted; and shall be
further subject to the provisions of this chapter.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and 5:8-50 et seq., respectively.
§ 59-26 ANDOVER CODE § 63-6
38:210
§ 63-6. Issuing authority. [Added 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01]
The issuing authority for the Township responsible for approving bingo
and raffle licenses shall be the Municipal Clerk. The issuing authority
shall approve or deny all applications for bingo or raffle licenses with due
expedition after the filing of the application. Applications must be filed with
the Municipal Clerk, together with the required fees pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:47-4.9. The applicant must demonstrate in writing compliance with the
provisions of all applicable laws and regulations.
Chapter 66
HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 66-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provision of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt
an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed
pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 66-2. Hotel and motel room occupancy tax.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of Andover which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Andover on or after January 1, 2008, of a room or rooms in a
hotel subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966,
c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 66-3. Additional tax.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 66-4. Exemption.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer
is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the Sales
and Use Tax Act pursuant to subsection (a) of section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30
(N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
§ 63-6 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 66-5
66:211
§ 66-5. Administration of tax.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be administered in
conformance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
§ 66-6. Collection of hotel and motel tax.
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time,
provided that the chief financial officer of the Township shall be joined as a
party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 66-7. Forwarding hotel and motel tax to Division of Taxation;
making and filing return.
Chapter 67
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A hotel or motel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume
or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be up to
$1,500 for each offense.
A. Every person required to collect the hotel and motel tax shall, on or
before the 28th day of each month, forward to the Director of the
Division of Taxation in the New Jersey Department of the Treasury
(Director) the hotel and motel tax collected in the preceding month and
make and file a return for the preceding month with the Director.
B. The return shall be filed on such form and containing such information
as the Director shall prescribe as necessary. The Director may permit or
require returns to be made covering other periods and upon any dates
as the Director may specify. Additionally, the Director may require
payments of tax liability at any intervals and based upon any
classifications as the Director may designate.
§ 66-5 ANDOVER CODE § 66-7
66:212
HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 51.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Nuisances — See Ch. 210.
§ 67-1. Adoption of standards.
In accordance with the provision of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1
et seq.) the New Jersey State Housing Code (1980 Revision), as approved by
the Department of Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's
office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used
as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is attached to and made a part of this chapter without
the text being included herein.
§ 67-2. Copies on file.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file
in the office of the Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 67-3. Enforcing authority.
The administrative and enforcing authority for the provisions of this chapter
shall be the Construction Official and/or the Health Officer as appointed by
the Board of Health.
§ 67-4. Chapter to constitute standards for determining fitness.
This chapter shall constitute the standards to guide the Building Inspector
in determining the fitness of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
premises for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 67-5. Rules and regulations.
The Building Inspector may make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of making the
provisions of this chapter more effective. No regulation shall be inconsistent
with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no regulation
shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater than the
requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed by any provision
of this chapter. Rules and regulations shall be subject to the same penalty
as other violations of this chapter.
§ 66-7 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 67-6
66:213
§ 67-6. Inspection.
The Building Inspector or his agent or employee shall make inspections
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the Township. For the purpose of making
inspections, the Building Inspector or his agent is authorized to enter and
examine any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or premises at such
reasonable hours as the circumstances of the case permit. This subsection
shall not be construed to prohibit the entry of the Building Inspector or his
agent at any time when an actual emergency exists which tends to create
a danger to public health or safety, or at any time when an inspection is
requested by an owner or occupant.
§ 67-7. Access to premises for inspections.
Upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, the Building
Inspector or his agent shall be given free access to the premises for the
purpose of inspection or of making any repairs or alterations which are
necessary to effect compliance with this chapter.
§ 67-8. Search warrant.
The Building Inspector or his agent may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge
of the Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists on the
premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in
the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist. Search warrants may also be obtained in connection
with a general program of inspection.
§ 67-9. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Building Inspector determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall
give notice of the alleged violation to the person responsible therefor as
hereinafter provided. The notice shall:
A. Be put in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case
may require, provided that notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in
§ 67-6 ANDOVER CODE § 67-9
66:214
§ 67-10. Hearing.
a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice;
or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required under the laws of this state. The notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Building Inspector, provided that
such person files in the office of the Building Inspector a written
petition requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice is served.
B. Upon receipt of the petition, the Building Inspector shall set a time and
place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof.
C. At the hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why the notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition is filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Building Inspector may postpone the date of the hearing
for a reasonable time beyond the ten-day period, if in his judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for the
postponement.
D. After the hearing the Building Inspector shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Building Inspector
sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed to be an order.
E. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become
an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Building Inspector within 10 days after the notice is served.
F. The proceedings at the hearings, including the findings and the
decision of the Building Inspector, shall be summarized, reduced to
writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Building Inspector. The record shall also include a copy of every notice
or order issued in connection with the matter.
G. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Inspector may
seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of the state.
H. Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect public health or safety, he may,
§ 67-9 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 67-10
66:215
§ 67-11. Service of complaint regarding unfit dwellings.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Building Inspector by a public authority
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the Township
charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as defined in
the code, or whenever it appears to the Building Inspector on his own
motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in, such dwelling
a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice
that a hearing will be held before the Building Inspector at a place therein
fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right
to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise,
and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints; and that
the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Building Inspector.
§ 67-12. Order for abatement or demolition.
If after notice and hearing, the Building Inspector determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as defined in
the Housing Code, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person
to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately,
but upon petition to the Building Inspector shall be afforded a hearing
as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings
as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the
Building Inspector shall continue such order in effect, modify it or
revoke it.
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the
owner within a reasonable time, which shall be set forth in the order, or
at the option of the owner to vacate or to have the building vacated and
closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in
the order, that the owner shall remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or
at the option of the owner to vacate and close the building, that the
§ 67-10 ANDOVER CODE § 67-12
66:216
§ 67-13. Manner of serving complaints or orders.
Building Inspector may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the Building Inspector may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed
a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, that the Building Inspector may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement and receipt of bids therefor.
E. The amount of:
(1) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
Township.
(2) The cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred.
F. If the building is removed or demolished by the Building Inspector, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of removal or demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits, or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Building
Inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
Court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the
Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court, provided that nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Township to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
§ 67-12 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 67-13
66:217
§ 67-14. Powers of Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
chapter, including the following, in addition to others herein granted:
§ 67-15. Compliance with Housing Code required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or rent to another for
occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing
Code established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether
a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 67-16. Demolition permit required.
The owner of any building located within the limits of the Township who
desire to demolish it shall first obtain a permit for that purpose from the
Construction Official.
Chapter 68
A. Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Building Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Building Inspector makes an affidavit to
that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon such
persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper having circulation in the Township.
B. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of
such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the Sussex County recording officer.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Township in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries are made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 67-13 ANDOVER CODE § 67-16
66:218
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 51. Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
§ 68-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Property Maintenance Code
of the Township of Andover" and may be referred to in the short form as the
"Property Maintenance Code" or in this chapter as "this code."
§ 68-2. Legislative findings.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Township structures
and vacant lots which are or may become in the future substandard with
respect to structural integrity, equipment or maintenance, and further that
such conditions, including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack
of maintenance of exterior premises and vacant lots, infestation, lack of
maintenance or upkeep of essential facilities and utilities, existence of
fire hazards and unsanitary conditions, constitute a menace to the health,
safety, welfare, and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of
the Township. It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of
maintenance and ensuing progressive deterioration, certain properties have
the further effect of creating blighting conditions and that, by reason of
timely regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, the growth of this
blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby
maintained, the desirability and amenities of dwellings and neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 68-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance and
condition of the exterior of premises; to avoid, prevent and eliminate the
maintenance of or creation of hazards to the public health or safety; to
avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or
continue, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties; to prevent the creation, continuation, extension or
aggravation of blight; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners,
operators and occupants of property; and to provide for administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 68-4. Applicability.
Every structure and the premises on which the structure(s) are situated in
the Township used or intended to be used for single- and multiple-family
dwellings, commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall comply with
§ 67-16 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 68-4
66:219
the provisions of this code and, irrespective of any permits or licenses,
which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the structure or
for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective
date of this code.
§ 68-5. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard than
that set forth in any ordinance of the Township or under the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail; but
if the provisions of this code impose a lower standard than any ordinance
of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher
standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 68-6. Effect on existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings or structures, which are deemed to
be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 68-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, be defined as follows:
DETERIORATION — The condition of a structure or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The enforcement officer in the Township shall
be the Zoning Officer or his/her authorized representative.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure,
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent
properties, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and
the open space on the premises outside any building or structure erected
thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food or by any approved pestelimination
methods.
FIRE HAZARD — Anything or any act, which increases or may cause any
increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than
customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of
preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or, which may obstruct, delay
or hinder or may become the cause of an obstruction, delay, hazard or
hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire.
§ 68-4 ANDOVER CODE § 68-7
66:220
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
NUISANCE — Any public or private condition that would constitute a
"nuisance" according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of
New Jersey, any of its agencies or this code; any physical condition existing
in or on the exterior of any premises, which is potentially dangerous,
detrimental or hazardous to the health or safety of persons on, near or
passing in proximity of the premises where said condition exists.
OCCUPANT — Any occupant, owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or
other person or corporation in charge of the premises of or having actual
possession or use of a business, single- and multiple-family dwelling unit or
other premises affected by this chapter.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity not the owner, who has charge,
care or control of a structure or a part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity:
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings,
structures and improvements thereon.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials other
than garbage; and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and the residue from burning wood, coal,
coke or other combustible material and solid commercial and industrial
waste.
Who shall have legal or equitable title in any form whatsoever to
any premises or part thereof, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
A.
Who shall have charge, care or control of any lot, premises, building,
structure or part thereof, as owner or agent of the owner; or
B.
As fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee in
possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained;
C.
Any person, group of persons or entity who is a lessee, sublessee or
assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building, structure or
land shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes
of this section and shall have responsibility over that portion of the
premises so sublet, leased or assigned.
D.
No chemicals such as those used in swimming pools, oil, gasoline or
any other chemical which could cause a fire, explosion or obnoxious gas
shall be considered "rubbish."
A.
§ 68-7 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 68-8
66:221
§ 68-8. Duties of owners, operators and occupants.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this chapter, and no such person or entity shall
be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility hereunder, nor may
any such person or entity assert, as a defense against any charge made
under this chapter, that another owner, operator or occupant or any other
third person or entity is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 68-9. Maintenance standards.
A. Exterior of premises. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free from
hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Garbage and rubbish (as defined in this chapter): only garbage and
rubbish resulting from the actual use of the premises may be
permitted on the premises; this section shall be enforced by the
Zoning Officer or its authorized representative.
(2) Unsafe structures: structurally unsafe or unsound buildings,
structures or fences or abandoned, uncovered or structurally
unsound wells, shafts, towers, exterior cellar openings, basement
hatchways, foundations or excavations.
(3) Discarded appliances: abandoned refrigerators, boilers, hot-water
heaters, television sets and other similar major appliances.
(4) Natural growth; lawns and shrubs.
(a) Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other
natural growth which by reason of rotting or deteriorating
condition or storm damage constitute a hazard to persons in
the vicinity thereof; trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to
prevent such condition.
(b) Lawns and shrubs: all lawns shall be maintained; all hedges
and shrubs shall be trimmed to a neat appearance.
(5) Overhangings: loose and overhanging objects, whether natural or
man-made, and accumulations of ice and snow, which by reason of
location, above ground level constitute a threat to the health and
safety of members of the public if caused to fall.
(6) Ground surface hazards: hidden or uncovered ground or surface
hazards, such as holes, sudden depressions, excavations, sharp or
jagged projections or obstructions.
(7) Recurring accumulations of stormwater: stagnant surface or
groundwater accumulations which create or are likely to create
breeding areas for mosquitoes and other insects.
(8) Infestation: rodents, vermin, pest infestations, and conditions
causing same.
§ 68-8 ANDOVER CODE § 68-9
66:222
§ 68-10. Administrative provisions. [Amended 9-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-10]
(9) Nuisances: as defined in this chapter.
(10) Inoperable vehicles: vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and
trailers, motorized or not, regardless of whether licensed or
registered, which vehicles or parts thereof are or have been
abandoned, dismantled or are in a state of visible disrepair.
B. Structural soundness. Every structure and accessory structure and
every part thereof shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good
repair to avoid safety, health or fire hazards, including but not limited to
the following:
(1) Foundation walls: inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, piers and
columns and other similarly unsound, damaged or defective loadbearing
components which are incapable of supporting the
imposed loads safely at all points.
(2) Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes:
structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing,
broken, rotted or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or
structures, including but not limited to porches, landings,
balconies, stairways, handrails, steps, walls, overhangs, roofs,
fences, supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes,
signs and loose, crumbling or falling bricks, stones, mortar or
plaster.
(3) Projecting surfaces: exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or
structures containing sharp, rough or projecting surfaces or
objects which might cause injury to persons coming in contact
therewith.
(4) Windows, doors, etc., Broken glass or windows, rotten, missing or
substantially destroyed window frames and sashes, door frames,
exterior doors or other junior exterior component parts of buildings
or structures are prohibited.
(5) Exterior chimneys shall be maintained and kept structurally sound,
free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform, at all
times, the functions for which they were designed.
(6) Steps, walks, driveways and parking lots, parking spaces and
similar paved areas shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage
under normal use and weather conditions. Any holes or other
hazards that may exist shall be filled, and necessary repairs or
replacement shall be performed promptly.
A. Enforcement officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Zoning
Officer or its authorized representative of the Township to enforce the
provisions of this code as herein provided.
§ 68-9 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 68-10
66:223
B. Coordination of enforcement.
(1) Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection
therewith under the provisions of this code shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the Township Zoning Officer.
(2) Wherever, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, it is necessary or
desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other
department, the Zoning Officer shall arrange for this to be done.
(3) No order for correction of any violation under this code shall be
issued without the approval of the Zoning Officer, and it shall be the
responsibility of the Zoning Officer before issuing any such order to
determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or
official of the government concerned with any matter involved on
the case in question.
C. Inspections. The enforcement officer is authorized to enter upon any
land at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his or her
duty under this code or by way of a search warrant if required by law.
D. Enforcement procedure.
(1) Notice.
(a) Whenever an enforcement officer determines that there is or
has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she
shall give notice of such violation to the person, persons or
entities responsible therefor under this section.
(b) Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(c) Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently
served if a copy thereof is sent by regular mail to the last
known address of the person or entity upon which the same is
served, as shown by the most recent tax records of the
Township, or a copy thereof handed to said person or persons,
or a copy thereof left at the usual place of abode or office of
said persons or entities.
(d) Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without the
Township and shall state that unless the violation is abated,
removed, cured, prevented or desisted within 15 days of the
date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date of service),
a summons shall be issued for such violation.
(2) Extension of time for compliance.
(a) The enforcement officer may extend the period for compliance
with the requirements of this section in regard to the violation
stated in the notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 15
days if, in his judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention,
§ 68-10 ANDOVER CODE § 68-10
66:224
§ 68-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
cessation or cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably
be effected within the fifteen-day period; and, in such cases,
the enforcement officer shall state such reasonably required
extended period in the notice, which shall then be applicable
instead of the aforesaid 15 days.
(3) Issuance of summons.
(a) In the event that the violation is not abated, removed, cured,
prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully remedied within
said fifteen-day period or within such extended period as set
forth in the notice, pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall
be issued against the person, persons, entity or entities so
notified.
E. Emergency conditions.
(1) Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency
condition in violation of this chapter exists and that such condition
requires immediate attention in order to protect the public health
or safety, he or she may issue an order by service of notice as set
forth in Subsection D above, reciting the existence of such
emergency condition and requiring that such action be taken by the
violator as soon as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon
objection in writing to the enforcement officer, any such person
shall be afforded a hearing before the governing body of the
Township as soon as is reasonably possible.
(3) After such hearing and decision by the governing body as to the
existence or nonexistence of the emergency condition, the
governing body may continue such order in effect, or modify or
withdraw it, subject to the issuance of a summons for violation
thereof if such order is continued.
A. For the first offense, by a fine not to exceed $500 or $100 per day.
B. For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or $100 per day.
C. For a third offense or any subsequent offenses, by a fine not to exceed
what is permitted by law.
D. Each day that a violation occurs may be considered a multiple violation
and it will not be necessary to issue subsequent summons for each
violation.
§ 68-10 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 68-12
66:225
§ 68-12. Repealer; effect on other provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
or inconsistent with a provision of any other ordinance which establishes a
lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety, health and
welfare of its inhabitants, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and
such other ordinance or parts thereof are hereby declared to be repealed to
the extent that they may be so found to be in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 74
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Driveways — See Ch. 45.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 68-12 ANDOVER CODE § 68-12
66:226
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 74-1. Establishment; organization; power to act as Zoning Board
of Adjustment. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1; 7-24-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-2032]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., there is hereby established a Planning
Board consisting of nine members and four alternate members. The
membership, terms, organization, powers, function and operation of the
Board shall be subject to all applicable provisions of said statute. The
Planning Board shall exercise all of the powers and duties of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 74-2. Membership classes; alternate members.
A. The Planning Board membership shall consist of the following four
classes:
(1) Class I, the Mayor.
(2) Class II, one of the officials of the Township, other than a member
of the Township Committee, to be appointed by the Mayor. If there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the
Class II member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the
Class IV members.
(3) Class III, a member of the Township Committee to be appointed by
it.
(4) Class IV, six other citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one member may be a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also
a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be a Class IV member unless there is among the Class IV
members both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a
member of the Board of Education, in which case the member of
the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be a Class II
member.
B. For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of a municipal office.
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 10-1-2006.
§ 74-1 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-2
66:227
§ 74-3. Terms of office.
C. There may be not more than four alternate members appointed to the
Planning Board in the same manner as Class IV members, who shall be
designated by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2,"
"Alternate No. 3," and "Alternate No. 4." [Amended 7-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-2033]
D. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
class; provided, however, that alternate members shall not vote in place
of Class I or Class III members with respect to variance relief under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. Voting priority shall
be based on the designated number of the alternate member, with
Alternate No. 1 having first priority. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-1; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2034]
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever the
Board member is no longer a member of the other body or at the
completion of the Class IV term, whichever occurs first. [Amended
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of their terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
Township Committee. However, no term of any member shall exceed
four years. Nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member
of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the terms for which they were appointed. Thereafter, all
Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. All terms shall run from January 1 of
the year in which the appointment is made.
D. Alternate members shall serve for terms of two years, provided that in
the event that two alternate members are appointed simultaneously, the
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 10-1-2006.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 10-1-2006.
§ 74-2 ANDOVER CODE § 74-3
66:228
§ 74-4. Vacancies; removal of members.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term,
it shall be filled by appointment as provided in § 74-3 for the unexpired
term. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Township Committee for cause.
§ 74-5. Officers.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 74-6. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 74-7. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall
not exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Committee for its use.
§ 74-8. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
initial terms of such members shall be one and two years, respectively.
Such alternate members shall be designated by the Mayor as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve in rotation in the absence
or disqualification of Board members. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-1]
E. The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that of
the alternate members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a twoyear
term and one shall be appointed for a one-year term, said terms to
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be made for a term of two years.
A. To make, adopt, and amend a Master Plan for the physical development
of the Township. The Master Plan shall include a specific policy
statement indicating the relationship of the proposed development of
the Township to the master plans of contiguous municipalities, the
master plan of the county, the state development plan and
redevelopment plan adopted pursuant to the State Planning Act, P.L.
1985, c. 398 (N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et al.) and the District Solid Waste
§ 74-3 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-8
66:229
Management Plan of the county. Said Master Plan shall be reexamined
every six years in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89.
The reexamination shall be completed at least once every six years
from the previous reexamination. The absence of the adoption by the
Planning Board of a reexamination report pursuant to statute shall
constitute a rebuttable presumption that the municipal development
regulations are no longer reasonable. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-1]
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, in accordance with the provisions of
these chapters and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To hear applications for conditional uses and in proper cases to approve
conditional use permits in accordance with provisions of Chapter 190,
Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required of the Planning Board by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, with amendments, and
recommend this program to the Township Committee.
G. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, which report shall
identify any provisions in the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment which are inconsistent with the Master Plan and
shall include recommendations concerning these inconsistencies, and
any other matters the Board deems appropriate; and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body pursuant to provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Variance or direction for issuance of a permit.
(1) Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, to grant to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 74-8 ANDOVER CODE § 74-8
66:230
§ 74-9. Time periods.
The following shall apply:
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this Subsection H, notice
of the hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
(3) The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit and a subsequent application for any required approval for
a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The separate approval
of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the
Planning Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless the approval can be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent
or purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 190, Zoning.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and assistance of
the Township Committee or other agencies or officers.
J. To consider and make a report within 45 days of its receipt upon any
petition for annexation submitted to the governing body of the
municipality and referred to the Planning Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:7-12.
K. To review a petition for inclusion of a parcel in a municipality-approved
farmland preservation program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C-21c.
A. Minor subdivisions and site plans.
(1) Minor subdivision approvals and minor site plan approvals shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the date of certification of
submission of a complete application or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board
approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law,35 or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the
applicant with the County Recording Officer, the Township
Engineer, and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 74-8 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-9
66:231
approval of the site plan by the Board, provided the Board finds
that the application conforms to the definition of "minor site plan"
and further provided that the Board may condition such approval
on terms insuring the provision of improvements pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(2) Any approvals given pursuant to this section shall be conditioned
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
B. Preliminary approval of site plans and subdivisions.
(1) Upon submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10 dwelling units or fewer, or
for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of certification of
completeness of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Upon submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves more than 10 acres, or more than 10 dwelling units, or for
a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
certification of completeness of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(3) Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision or site plan, and the
applicant shall comply with the provisions of § 74-44.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 74-8H, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 95 days after submission by the developer of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval. Application for final subdivision or site plan approval
shall be granted or denied within 45 days of certification of
completeness of the application or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
E. Preliminary and final site plan approval. When considering an
application for preliminary or final site plan approval and approval is
granted subject to a condition or conditions to be met, the applicant
shall meet the condition or conditions of the approval within six months
§ 74-9 ANDOVER CODE § 74-9
66:232
§ 74-10. Filing of applications.
§ 74-11. Citizens' advisory committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens' advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such persons shall have no power to vote or take other action required of
the Board. Such persons shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 74-12. Applications provided to Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the Township, the
Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make this informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 74-13. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt necessary rules and regulations to carry into effect
the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas,
administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County
from the date of the resolution granting the conditional approval. If
the applicant can show that literal enforcement of this subsection is
impractical or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may
grant an extension or extensions from this time limitation as may be
reasonable within the general intent of this chapter. Application for
preliminary and final site plan approval shall be granted within the time
limits set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and 40:55D-50.
A. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be
filed with the Board Secretary.
B. An applicant shall file at least 14 days before the date of the monthly
meeting of the Board. He shall provide eight copies of a sketch plat,
three copies of an application for minor subdivision approval; three
copies of an application for major subdivision approval or three copies
of an application for site plan review, conditional use approval, or
planned development. At the time of filing the application the applicant
shall also file maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision
of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board.
C. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant
of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the regular
meeting dates of the Board.
§ 74-9 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-13
66:233
and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq. shall
apply.
§ 74-14. Review by Attorney and Engineer.
In processing an application for development, whenever an applicant is
required to submit deeds, easements, bonds or other guarantees to the
Township or to others as a condition of approval, the applicant shall submit
the required documents to the Board Secretary within 14 days after the
imposition of the requirement by the Board. The Board Secretary shall
forward such documents to the Planning Board Attorney and the Township
Engineer for review within five days of receipt of the same from the
applicant, unless instructed by action of the Board or by direction of the
Board Chairman that the review is not required. Unless so instructed,
the professional review shall be required, and no condition of approval
shall be deemed satisfied until a report from the Planning Board Attorney
and the Township Engineer is received by the Secretary indicating that
the documents have been reviewed and they either are in a legal and
proper form necessary to satisfy the condition imposed by the Board or
they require revision to meet the condition imposed. In the event that the
documents require revision, the condition shall not be deemed satisfied
until the documents have been revised in accordance with the report of the
Township Engineer or Planning Board Attorney, unless authorized by the
Board.
§ 74-15. Review for completeness of application.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
shall be reviewed for completeness in accordance with the provisions of
§ 74-37A of this chapter.
§ 74-13 ANDOVER CODE § 74-15
66:234
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 74-16. Abolishment. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1;
7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2036]
§ 74-17. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and select a Secretary, who may be either a Board member or
another Township employee.
§ 74-18. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Township Attorney.
§ 74-19. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contact for and fix
the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
A. Findings. The Zoning Board of Adjustment was created by ordinance
pursuant to the terms of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69. This aforementioned
statute mandates the creation of a Zoning Board of Adjustment upon
the adoption of a zoning ordinance unless the municipality is eligible
for, and exercises, the option of creating a nine-member Planning Board
to exercise all of the powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c(1). The Township meets the criteria
established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c(1) and has determined that it is in
the public’s best interest to abolish the Zoning Board to Adjustment and
allow the Planning Board to exercise its powers and duties.
B. Abolishment of Zoning Board of Adjustment; discharge of members.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby abolished, and all of the
powers and duties granted by law to the Board are hereby
transferred to the Planning Board pursuant to the authority
established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c(1).
(2) All members, officers and employees of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as of the effective date of this section shall be
discharged from their positions, offices or employment.
C. Reference to Board of Adjustment. All references to the Board of
Adjustment contained in this Chapter 74 shall be deemed to refer to the
Planning Board.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it take effect 10-1-2006.
§ 74-16 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-19
66:235
necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Township
Committee for its use.
§ 74-20. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt necessary rules and regulations to carry into effect
the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas,
administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County
and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall
apply.
§ 74-21. Powers and duties.
The following shall apply:
§ 74-22. Appeals and applications.
The following shall apply:
A. Basic powers. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and
supplements thereto, and the provisions of this chapter.
B. Interpretation. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the
Zoning Board of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may
lawfully be conferred upon that Board, including, not by way of
limitation, the authority, in connection with any case, action or
proceeding before the Board, to interpret and construe the provisions
of this chapter, or any term, clause, sentence or word hereof, and the
Zoning Map, in accordance with the general rules of construction
applicable to legislative enactments.
C. Variances. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms
of this chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules
contained herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down, so that
equity shall be done in cases where the strict construction of the
provisions of this chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and
duties of the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by
statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it
in c. 291, P.L. 1975,37 or subsequent statutes in such case made and
provided, and shall furnish to any person requesting the same a copy of
its rules and information as to how appeals or applications may properly
be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
A. Appellant; time. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by
any interested party affected by any decision of an administrative
officer of the Township based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 74-19 ANDOVER CODE § 74-22
66:236
§ 74-23. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975,38 or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to
be made and to that end have the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 74-24. Expiration of variance.
190, Zoning, or the Official Map. Each appeal shall be taken within
the 20 days prescribed by statute by filing a notice of appeal with the
officer from whom the appeal was taken, together with five copies of
the notice with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds of the appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record on which the action appealed from is taken.
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
B. Filing. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board
of Adjustment shall be filed with the administrative officer. Five copies
of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 20 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps, or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board. The
requirements for a complete application for a variance are contained in
§ 74-41.
C. Stays. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New
Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on the cause shown.
A. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
reviewing municipal body permitting erection or alteration of any
structure or permitting a specific use of any premises shall expire by
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 74-22 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-24
66:237
§ 74-25. Powers granted by law.
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
limitation unless the construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on every structure permitted by the variance or unless the
permitted use has actually commenced within nine months from date
of adoption of the resolution granting approval; except, however, that
the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled
from the date of filing of an appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment to the Township Committee, in use variance cases, or to
a court of competent jurisdiction, until termination of such appeal or
proceeding.
B. The reviewing municipal body may grant reasonable extensions of the
time limit set forth herein, upon showing of good cause by the
applicant. All requests for extensions under this section shall be made
in writing setting forth reasons for the request.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter
190, Zoning.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or Chapter 190,
Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
Board is authorized to pass by provisions in Chapter 190, Zoning.
C. Variances.
(1) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any regulation pursuant to Chapter 190, Zoning, would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant, upon
an application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance
from the strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship;
(2) Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from the requirements of Chapter 190, Zoning, and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant a variance to allow departure from such
regulations of Chapter 190, Zoning; provided, however, that no
variance from those departures enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d
shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further that
§ 74-24 ANDOVER CODE § 74-25
66:238
§ 74-26. Additional powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to powers specified in
§ 74-25, have power given by law to:
the proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to review
a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
D. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations set forth in Chapter 190, Zoning, to permit:
(1) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
or principal structure.
(2) An expansion of a nonconforming use.
(3) Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a conditional use.
(4) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4.
(5) An increase in the permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-4, except as applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots
for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots
are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision, in which event applications would be made pursuant to
Subsection C above. A variance under this subsection shall be
granted only by affirmative vote of at least five members of the
Board.
E. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 190,
Zoning. In respect of any airport hazard areas delineated under the Air
Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq., no
variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this section
permitting the creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which
would be prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant to that
Act, except upon issuance of a permit by the Commissioner of
Transportation. An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency other than the Planning Board for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Reserved areas. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A
40:55D-34 for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
§ 74-25 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-26
66:239
§ 74-27. Time for decision. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1]
public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
B. Relationship to a street. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36 for a building or structure not related to a street.
C. Others. Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional use approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the proposed development requires
approval by the Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d. The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting the approval of a variance and a subsequent application for
any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The
separate approval of a variance shall be conditioned upon the granting
of all required subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No
such subsequent approvals shall be granted unless such approval can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and Chapter 190, Zoning. The number of votes of Board members
required to grant any such subsequent approvals shall be as otherwise
provided in this chapter for the approval in question, and the special
vote pursuant to the aforesaid N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall not be
required.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or the date of certification of completeness of an
application for development to the Board of Adjustment.
B. The review committee of the Board shall certify the completeness of any
application within 45 days of the date the application is filed with the
administrative officer; otherwise the application shall be deemed
complete. The date of certification of completeness of an application for
development to the Board of Adjustment shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of § 74-37 of this chapter.
C. The failure of the Board to render a decision within the applicable time
period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant, and the
applicant shall comply with the provisions of § 74-44.
D. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications for a use variance and then site plan approval, subdivision
approval or conditional use approval, respectively, the one-hundredtwenty-
day provision shall apply to the application for approval of the
variance, but the period for granting or denying any subsequent
approval shall be otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 74-26 ANDOVER CODE § 74-28
66:240
§ 74-28. Documents required.
On an application for development, no condition of approval shall be
deemed satisfied until all deeds, easements, bonds and guarantees required
to be submitted to the Township or to others as a condition of approval
shall have been reviewed by the Township Engineer and the Attorney for
the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedure set forth
in § 74-14.
§ 74-29. Annual review of decisions.
The Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution
a report on its findings on provisions of Chapter 190, Zoning, which were
the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for amendment
or revision of Chapter 190, Zoning, if any. The Board of Adjustment shall
send copies of the report and resolution to the governing body and Planning
Board.
§ 74-28 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-29
66:241

ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 74-30. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of the matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 74-31. Meetings.
The following shall apply:
§ 74-32. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, any findings
made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
A. Frequency. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled, unless cancelled for
lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of
the Chairman or on the request of any two Board members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
C. Quorum required. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a
quorum being present.
D. Voting. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members
present at the meeting except as otherwise required by any provision of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of a motion to receive the number of
votes required to approve an application for development shall be
deemed an action denying the application.
E. Open meetings. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be
open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in
accordance with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, c.
231, Laws of 1975.39 An executive session for the purpose of discussing
and studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 74-30 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-32
66:243
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the Township Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of the minutes. This interested party may be
charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for in
the rules of the Board.
§ 74-33. Fees.40
Fees or charges for the submission of applications or for rendering of
any service by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any
member of their administrative staffs for the review of an application for
development, for inspections or for taking of appeals shall be set forth
in any general fee ordinance of the Township or as established in any
ordinance regulating the use and development of land. Any fee paid in
connection with an informal review of a concept plan for development
for which the developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development shall be a credit toward fees for the review of the application
for development.
§ 74-34. Hearings.
The following shall apply:
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies. These rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The
40.Editor's Note: See also Art. VI, Fees and Charges, of this chapter.
§ 74-32 ANDOVER CODE § 74-34
66:244
§ 74-35. Hearing notice.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or as to any matter coming before the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof
on request to any interested party at his expense.
F. When any hearing before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings, a member of the
Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be eligible
to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that the Board member has available a transcript or
a recording of the meeting from which he was absent and certifies in
writing to the Board that he has read the transcript or listened to the
recording.
A. Newspaper. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
B. Notice to adjoining property owners. Notice shall be given to the
owners of all real property located in this state as shown on the current
tax duplicate or duplicates within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of hearing, and whether located within or
without the Township.
(1) Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the owner,
as shown on said current tax duplicates, or his agent in charge of
the property, or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his address, as shown on said current tax
duplicate or duplicates.
(2) The above requirements shall be deemed satisfied where
condominiums or horizontal property regimes are within 200 feet
of the applicant's property by making service in the following
manner:
(a) If the applicant's property abuts a condominium and the owner
of any unit is within 200 feet of the applicant's property and
said unit has a unit above or below it, by giving notice to the
condominium association.
(b) If the applicant's property abuts a horizontal property regime
and an apartment of the co-owner is within 200 feet of the
applicant's property and such apartment has an apartment
above or below it, by giving notice to the horizontal property
regime.
§ 74-34 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-35
66:245
(c) If the applicant is the owner of the condominium unit or coowner
of an apartment, notice shall be given to all other unit
owners or apartment co-owners within 200 feet of the unit or
apartment owned or co-owned by the applicant.
(3) Notice to a partnership owner may be made upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. This notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant
to Section 6b of c. 291, Laws of 1975.41
C. Adjacent municipalities. Notice of all hearings on applications for
development involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
clerk of that municipality. This notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given pursuant to Subsection B to the owners of lands in
the adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. County Planning Board. Notice shall be given by personal service or
certified mail to the County Planning Board of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situate within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Commissioner of Transportation. Notice shall be given by personal
service or certified mail to the Commissioner of Transportation of a
hearing on an application for development of property adjacent to a
state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Township Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
G. Proof of service. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall
be given at least 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the
applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding
the hearing on the application for development. When service is made
by certified mail, the mailing receipts (white) shall be postmarked by
the post officer. A return receipt (green) is not required.
H. Complete notice. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove
required shall be deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 74-35 ANDOVER CODE § 74-35
66:246
§ 74-36. List of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor of the
Township shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor, and
upon receipt of payment of the maximum fees provided for in said section of
the statute, a minimum of $10 or $0.25 per name for a list containing over
40 names, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names
and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to § 74-35B.
§ 74-37. Complete application; decisions.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Township Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
J. Documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a
hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10
days before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Township Clerk.
K. Additional notice; when required. Notice pursuant to Subsections C, D,
E and F of this section shall not be required unless public notice
pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section is required. Notice
under Subsections A and B is not required for:
(1) Review of certain site plans as specified in Chapter 131, Site Plan
Review, of the Code of the Township of Andover;
(2) Minor subdivisions; and
(3) Final approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50.
A. Checklist requirements for applications for developments are as
follows: [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1; 7-23-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-11]
Checklist 1 General Requirements
Checklist 2 Minor Subdivision
Checklist 3 Preliminary Major Subdivision
Checklist 4 Final Major Subdivision
Checklist 5 Preliminary Site Plan — Conditional Use
Checklist 6 Final Site Plan — Conditional Use
Checklist 7 Appeals, Interpretations, Special Questions, Variances
§ 74-35 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-37
66:247
Checklist 8 Soil Removal
(1) All applications must meet the requirements of the general
checklist and the specific application for development checklist,
except soil removal applications, which must meet the general and
Checklist 8 requirements only. If both preliminary and final
approvals of an application for development are being applied for
at the same time, the requirements of the general checklist and the
preliminary and final checklists shall be met.
(2) See Checklists 1 through 8, which are attached hereto and made a
part of this chapter and are included at the end of this chapter.
B. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that the agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days
of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete
upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period, unless the application lacks
information indicated on a checklist as hereinafter specified, a copy of
which shall have been provided to the applicant, and the municipal
agency or its authorized committee or designee has notified the
applicant in writing of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days
of submission of the application. The applicant may request that one or
more of the submission requirements be waived, in which event the
agency shall grant or deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein
shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in
the application process that he is entitled to approval of the application.
The municipal agency may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for the
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the agency.
C. Decisions.
(1) The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development
and shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency
shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the municipal agency on
the application for development; or
§ 74-37 ANDOVER CODE § 74-37
66:248
§ 74-38. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. This publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. The notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
such decision.
§ 74-39. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held no later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the
municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote
of a majority of such members present at the meeting at which
the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to
adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9
(resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application) shall be memorialized by resolution as provided
above, with those members voting against the motion for
approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall
be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the
municipal agency and not to be an action of the municipal
agency; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10. If the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution
or memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any
interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary
manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated
time, and the cost of the application, including attorney fees,
shall be assessed against the municipality.
(2) Copies. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within
10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented,
then to his attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the
decision shall also be mailed to all persons who have requested it
and who have paid the fee prescribed by the Board for this service.
A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the
Township Clerk, who shall make a copy of the filed decision
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated
in the same manner as those established for copies of other public
documents in the Township.
§ 74-37 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-39
66:249
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of the application or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of the taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for payment in a manner that adequately protects the Township.
§ 74-40. Disclosure of ownership by corporation or partnership.
§ 74-41. Requirements for complete variance application.
When applying for a variance, the applicant shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. A corporation or partnership applying to a municipal agency for
permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots, or
applying for a variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more
family units, or for approval of a site to be used for commercial
purposes, shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or
individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class, or at
least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
B. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of a stock of a
corporation, or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to
disclosure pursuant to Subsection A of this section, that corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders
holding 10% or more of its stock, or 10% or greater interest in the
partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall be followed
by every corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership until the
names and addresses of the noncorporate stockholders and individual
partners exceeding the ten-percent ownership criteria have been listed.
A. The applicant shall furnish proof of compliance with § 74-35 regarding
notice and publication of the application.
B. The applicant shall file a complete application form for the application
as approved in the rules and regulations of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of Andover. The application form shall be
filled out completely and, where necessary, supplemented by additional
information in order to make it clear to the Board what relief is being
sought and accompanied by the appropriate fee.
C. The applicant shall file with the application one photograph of the
subject premises depicting the area for which a variance is sought.
D. The applicant shall file with the application 14 certified and sealed
copies of a plot plan or survey, prepared to scale, on a scale not less
than one inch equals 50 feet. The plot plan or survey shall contain the
following information. The plot plan for a single-family residence shall
be prepared, certified and sealed by a licensed land surveyor. For plans
§ 74-39 ANDOVER CODE § 74-41
66:250
other than single-family, the site plan shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, architect or land surveyor as required by law.
(1) All structures within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of
the application.
(2) North point.
(3) Dimensions of lot lines and structures.
(4) Lot area, in total square feet, or acreage to the nearest hundredth
(e.g., 13.57).
(5) Title block containing tax block and lot numbers; revision lines
should be in vertical lines along the left of the title block.
(6) Zoning district(s).
(7) Names of the road or roads on which the lot fronts.
(8) Easements and rights-of-way, if any.
(9) Location of streams, if any.
(10) Location of all existing structures on subject premises and
distances of the same from lot lines.
(11) Location of the proposed structure or change, showing the front,
rear and side yard dimensions.
(12) Building area allowed (draw lines showing required front, rear and
side yard setbacks).
(13) Location, arrangement and dimensions of parking area, driveway
or service areas.
(14) Names of adjoining property owners.
(15) Location of all buildings on all adjoining properties (including all
setbacks).
(16) Description of the general topography of the land.
(17) Proposed location of wells and septics on lot.
(18) Such other pertinent information as is required in any pertinent
section of Chapter 190, Zoning, governing the application.
(19) A key map showing the following. The scale of the key map portion
of the plat shall be not less than one inch equals 400 feet.
(a) The entire tract clearly delineated by crosshatching, shading
or other appropriate means, distinguishing it from adjoining
lands.
(b) Adjoining properties.
§ 74-41 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-41
66:251
§ 74-42. Amendments to applications and documents.
In the event an applicant submits a revised application or a revised form of
any document for which an approval is sought or a revision to a document
is required to be made by the reviewing municipal agency, the applicant
shall submit, in writing, with the revision or revised document, a detailed
description of the revisions made, including their page numbers or other
location in the document, and an affidavit stating that this is a complete
list of the revisions made and that no other revisions have been made since
__________(insert date), date of last revision.
§ 74-43. Conditional approvals.
(c) The tax map lot and block designation of the subject premises
and of adjoining lands.
(d) The street on which the subject premises is located, including
state or county route number and the common road name.
(e) Reference meridian.
E. The applicant shall file, with the application, a statement complying
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 and/or 40:55D-48.2
(statement of ownership, interest of corporation or partnership).
F. Affidavit of ownership shall be filed with the application.
G. The applicant shall file with the application a proposed form of notice to
be published in the newspaper and to adjoining landowners in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. The notice shall state the lot and
block numbers of the property, the specific use or uses proposed, and
the variances being sought so far as known, together with the numbers
of the ordinances from which the variances are sought, stating the time
and place of hearing and the date after which the application may be
inspected and other approvals sought (e.g., site plan, conditional use,
subdivision, appeals, interpretations, etc.)
A. Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to specified conditions intended to be fulfilled before
the approval becomes effective, said conditional approval shall lapse
and become null and void unless all specified conditions are fulfilled
within six months of the date of conditional approval.
B. The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported in writing
to the municipal agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in
an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall any
subdivision map or site plan be assigned or any required building
permit, occupancy permit or zoning permit be issued.
C. Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to conditions which by their terms are incapable of
being fulfilled, or are not required to be fulfilled prior to the final
§ 74-41 ANDOVER CODE § 74-43
66:252
§ 74-44. Default approvals; applicant's obligations.
An applicant shall comply with the provisions of this section whenever the
applicant wishes to claim approval of his application for development by
reason of the failure of a municipal agency to grant or deny approval within
the time periods specified in the Municipal Land Use Law and this chapter:
§ 74-45. Required off-tract improvements. [Amended 3-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-1]
A developer, as a condition of approval of an application for development,
may be required to pay impact fees, or a pro rata share of the cost of
providing only reasonable and necessary street improvements,
transportation improvements, water facilities, sewage facilities, drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the
development but reasonably related to construction or improvements within
the development as set forth herein.
approval of the application, the performance of which is not guaranteed
by bonds or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such condition
within six months from the date of the final approval of the application
for development shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order
by the enforcing official and the withholding of any zoning permit,
certificate of occupancy or any other approval until such condition or
conditions are fulfilled.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
municipal agency from specifying a longer period of time within which
any specific condition must be fulfilled or from granting, upon an ex
parte application, an extension of time for fulfilling a condition for good
cause shown.
E. The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported in writing to the
municipal agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall any
subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building permit,
occupancy permit, zoning permit or other required approval be issued.
A. The applicant shall provide notice of the default approval to the
municipal agency and to all those entitled to notice by personal service
or certified mail of the hearing on the application for development; but
for purposes of determining who is entitled to notice, the hearing on the
application for development shall be deemed to have required public
notice pursuant to Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. The applicant
shall arrange publication of the notice of the default in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there is one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
B. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service and publication
with the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be.
§ 74-43 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-45
66:253
A. Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the developer. In
cases where an off-tract improvement or improvements are reasonably
related to construction or improvements within the development, and
where no other property owners receive a special benefit thereby, the
reviewing municipal board shall require the developer, as a condition of
approval, at the developer's sole expense, to provide for and construct
such improvements as if such were on-tract improvements in the
manner provided hereafter and as otherwise provided by law.
B. Contributions by developer toward required off-tract improvements.
(1) In cases where an off-tract improvement or improvements are
reasonably related to construction or improvements within the
development, and where the Planning Board determines that
properties outside the development will also be benefited by the
improvements, such determination shall be made by the Planning
Board in writing. Such resolution or determination of the Planning
Board shall specify the off-tract improvement or improvements
which are reasonably related to construction or improvements
within the development, and the terms and conditions which shall
be imposed upon the developer to insure the successful and
reasonable implementation of the same. General criteria to be
considered by the reviewing municipal board include the total cost
of the off-tract improvement, the benefits conferred and the needs
created by the development, the population and land use
projections for the general area of the developer's property and
other areas to be served by the off-tract improvement, the
estimated time for construction, and the condition and periods of
usefulness of the improvement, which periods may be based in part
upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22. In addition, the need to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the Township and
the area should be considered as well as the Township development
ordinances and Master Plan. The Board may seek the assistance of
the Board Attorney, Engineer and any other consultants, qualified
experts or Township officials.
(2) In the event that the reviewing municipal board determines that
one or more improvements constitute off-tract improvements, the
board shall notify the Township Committee, specifying the board's
recommendation relative to the estimated cost of the same, the
developer's prorated share of the cost, and possible methods or
means to implement the same, including but not limited to
performance and maintenance guarantees, cash contributions,
development agreements, construction by the developer or
construction by the Township.
(3) The reviewing board shall not grant final approval on the
development until all aspects of such conditions have been
mutually agreed upon by both the developer and the Township
Committee and a written resolution to that effect by the Township
Committee has been transmitted to the reviewing municipal board.
§ 74-45 ANDOVER CODE § 74-45
66:254
C. Methods of construction. When the recommendation of the reviewing
municipal board is received by the Township Committee, together with
estimates of the cost of construction, the Township Committee shall
then decide whether the off-tract improvement is to be constructed by
the Township as a general improvement, by the Township as a local
improvement, by the applicant solely, or by the applicant under a
formula providing for partial reimbursement by the Township for
benefits to properties other than the development.
D. Methods of implementation.
(1) Performance and maintenance guarantees. The reviewing
municipal board may require a performance guarantee and/or
maintenance guarantee to insure the construction of an off-tract
improvement as a condition of approval of the development.
(2) Developer's agreement. The reviewing municipal board may
require as a condition of approval a developer's agreement to be
entered into between the applicant and the Township Committee
governing the installation of improvements within and outside of
the development, including off-tract improvements. Said
agreement shall be approved as to form by the reviewing municipal
board, board attorney and board engineer. The agreement shall
specify the manner of construction of the improvements, the
amount of cash contributions, and amount and form of performance
and maintenance guarantees, the timing of the installation and
payment of contributions and the posting of performance
guarantees and maintenance guarantees and other appropriate
obligations of the parties.
(3) Cash contributions; method of payment. Where a cash contribution
is required by this chapter, such contributions shall be deposited
with the Treasurer of the Township with a copy of the applicant's
transmittal letter forwarded to the Township Committee, the
Township Engineer and the Planning Board. Any and all monies
received by the Treasurer shall be deposited in an escrow account
for the purpose of undertaking the improvements specified. Where
the Township has received funds from a developer for the purpose
of providing facilities, the Township shall deposit those funds in an
interest-bearing bank account until used. If the Township has not
expended those funds in eight years of collection, the funds shall be
returned to the developer with accrued interest, upon application
of the developer for the return of the funds.
(4) Cash contributions; when not required. Cash contributions for offtract
improvements shall not be required under the following
conditions:
(a) Where another county or state agency has jurisdiction over the
subject improvement and requires a cash contribution,
§ 74-45 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-45
66:255
guarantee or other surety of the applicant in lieu of such
conditions imposed by the Township.
(b) Where a benefit assessment or other similar tax levy is
imposed upon the applicant for the off-tract improvement
provided.
(c) Where the applicant, where permitted by the reviewing
municipal board, undertakes the improvement in lieu of the
Township, subject to standards and other conditions as may be
imposed by the board and Township Committee.
(5) Pro rata formula for determining applicant's share of off-tract
improvements. Where an off-tract improvement is required, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate
share of such improvement to the applicant:
(a) Streets; circulation improvements. For street widening,
alignment, corrections, channelization of intersections,
constructions of barriers, new or improved traffic signalization,
signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not
covered elsewhere and the construction of new streets and
other similar street or traffic improvements, the applicant's
proportionate share shall be computed considering the
following factors, and the ratio thus calculated shall be
increased by 10% for contingencies:
Total cost of the roadway
improvement and/or
extension
Future peak-hour traffic
=
Developer's cost Future peak-hour traffic
generated by the
development
[1] Existing and projected traffic patterns.
[2] Quality of roads, sidewalks and other improvements in the
area.
[3] Other factors related to the need created by the
application and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(b) Water distribution facilities. For water distribution facilities,
including the installation of new water mains, the extension of
existing water mains, the relocation of such facilities and the
installation of other appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the
estimated daily use of water from the property and properties
in gallons to the sum of the deficiency in gallons per day for the
existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily use of
§ 74-45 ANDOVER CODE § 74-45
66:256
water for the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated
shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
(c) Sanitary sewage distribution facilities. For sanitary sewage
distribution facilities, including the installation, relocation or
replacement of collector and interceptor sewers and the
installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith, the applicant's proportionate cost shall
be in the ratio of the estimated daily flow in gallons to the sum
of the present deficient capacity for the existing system or
subsystem and the estimated daily flow from the proposed
project or development; in the case where the peak flow period
for the proposed development may occur during the peak flow
period for the existing system, the ratio shall be the estimated
peak flow rate from the proposed development in gallons per
minutes to the sum of the present peak flow deficiency in the
existing system or subsystem and the estimated peak flow rate
from the proposed development. The greater of the two ratios
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies
and shall be the ratio used to determine the cost to the
applicant.
(d) Stormwater and drainage improvements. For stormwater and
drainage improvements, including the installation, relocation
or replacement of storm drains, culverts, catch basins,
manholes, riprap or improved drainage ditches and
appurtenances thereto and the relocation or replacement of
other storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated
therewith, the applicant's proportionate share shall be
determined as follows:
[1] The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a
method described in Urban Hydrology for Small
Watershed Technical Release 55, Soil Conservation
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, January
1975, as amended, and shall be computed by the
developer's engineer and approved by the Township
Engineer or Board Engineer.
[2] The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved
system required for the development and areas outside of
the developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be
determined by the developer's engineer, subject to
approval of the Township Engineer. The plans for the
improved system shall be prepared by the developer's
engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged system
calculated by the developer's engineer. The prorated share
for the proposed improvement shall be computed as
follows:
§ 74-45 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-45
66:257
Total enlargement or
improvement cost of
drainage facilities Total tributary cfs
=
Developer's cost Development cfs
[3] The ratio thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for
contingencies.
[4] Where no drainage system exists which will receive the
flow of surface water from the development, the developer
shall furnish all drainage rights-of-way deemed necessary
by the reviewing municipal board.
E. Watercourses. Where a development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction as both will be
adequate for the purpose to the Township or other entity as designated
by the reviewing municipal board.
F. General municipal facilities. (Reserved)
G. Cultural facilities. (Reserved)
H. Educational facilities. (Reserved)
I. General considerations. In calculating the proportionate or pro rata
amount of the cost of any required off-tract improvement which shall be
borne by the developer, the reviewing municipal board shall also
determine the pro rata share of the cost to be borne by other owners of
lands which will be benefitted by the proposed improvements, if any.
J. Impact fees. For the purpose of this subsection, “impact fees” means
cash or in-kind payments required to be paid by a developer as a
condition of approval of a development for the developer's proportional
share of the cost of providing new or expanded reasonable and
necessary public improvements located outside the property limits of
the development but reasonably related to the development based upon
the need for the improvement created by, and the benefits conferred
upon, the development.
§ 74-45 ANDOVER CODE § 74-45
66:258
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 74-46. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Any appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer of the
Township based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 190, Zoning,
or the Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a
notice of appeal in the manner set forth in § 74-22 of this chapter and in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-64, as amended.
§ 74-46 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-46
66:259

ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 74-47. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in c. 291, Laws of
1975,42 that term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of the term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 74-48. Repealer.
All sections of Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land, Chapter 190, Zoning,
Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, or any other ordinance of the Township
which contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
and are hereby, to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 74-49. Regulations continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, Laws of 1975, § 81,43 the substantive
provisions of the existing Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land, Chapter 190,
Zoning, and Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, of the Township and the
development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and
effect for a period of six months from the effective date of said Act or
until the Township exercises the authority delegated by the Act to regulate
development, whichever occurs first.
§ 74-50. Lot-line adjustment approvals. [Amended 3-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-03]
A. Application. An application for approval of a lot-line adjustment shall be
submitted to the Land Use Board. The applicant shall submit five copies
of the application and a survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor
indicating the existing and proposed lot lines and all existing structures
and buildings, as well as such other information as the Land Use Board
Engineer may require. The applicant shall also submit an application
fee of $250 and an initial escrow fee of $1,500. Upon approval of the lotline
adjustment, the applicant shall also submit to the secretary an
administrative fee in the amount of $100 to cover the cost of revisions
to the municipal tax maps. [Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10]
B. Findings. The Land Use Board has the jurisdiction to grant lot-line
adjustment approval. The Land Use Board Engineer may recommend a
lot-line adjustment subject to the following criteria: [Amended
10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10]
(1) The adjustment involves one lot line between two adjoining lots;
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 74-47 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-50
66:261
§ 74-51. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Andover."
§ 74-52. Ordinances to be filed with County Planning Board.
The Township Clerk shall file with the County Planning Board copies of all
ordinances of the Township relating to land use, such as subdivision, zoning
and site plan review ordinances, and all amendments thereto. In accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16, development regulations, except
for the Official Map, shall not take effect until a copy thereof shall be
filed with the County Planning Board. A zoning ordinance or amendment
or revision thereto which, in whole or in part, is inconsistent with or not
designed to effectuate the land use plan element of the Master Plan shall
not take effect until a copy of the resolution required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
shall be filed with the County Planning Board.
§ 74-53. Protection of freshwater wetlands and streams.
Applicants for major subdivision, site plans and conditional uses, and for
"D" variances for nonresidential uses, shall comply with the provisions of
§ 159-11L, Protection of freshwater wetlands. Subsection L deals with the
protection of freshwater wetlands and streams and is applicable to those
applications.
§ 74-54. Wastewater management plan.
(2) Owner(s) of both lots consent(s) in writing to the adjustment;
(3) No new lots are created;
(4) Both lots are conforming after the adjustment, or any preexisting
nonconformities are not increased; and
(5) If approved, the applicant must perfect the subdivision by deed
recorded in the Sussex County Clerk's Office.
C. Subsequent subdivision. Subsequent subdivision of either of the
adjusted lots within two years of the filing of the adjusted lot deeds in
the County Clerk's office shall be accepted only as a major subdivision.
D. Report by the Land Use Board Engineer. Upon review of an application
for lot-line adjustment approval, the Land Use Board Engineer shall
submit a report to the Land Use Board in regard to the merits of the
applications. The Land Use Board may approve the lot-line adjustment
based solely on the recommendation of the Land Use Board Engineer as
long as the conditions outlined in Subsection B are satisfactorily
addressed. [Added 10-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10]
A. The Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq., as well as the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Regulations,
§ 74-50 ANDOVER CODE § 74-54
66:262
N.J.A.C. 7:15-1 et seq., require that Andover Township adopt a
wastewater management plan. This plan should be included in the
Township Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-28b(5). The
funding of said plan, together with any revisions thereto, should be
fairly allocated among developers of land who are to benefit from said
study.
B. A wastewater management plan escrow account is hereby created. Said
account is to be permanent in nature and to be used for the payment for
the preparation of the original wastewater management plan and any
revisions thereto.
C. All developers of land in Andover Township who anticipate or who may
be reasonably expected to construct an on-site disposal system treating
2,000 gallons or more per day, or who expect to apply for connection to
a public sewer system, or intend to propose a package plant for their
property or propose alternative methods of on-site wastewater disposal,
shall participate in the funding of the wastewater management plan.
D. Each developer shall contribute to the wastewater management
account his or its pro rata share of the cost of the preparation of the
plan at the time the Township signs the contract for the preparation of
the wastewater management plan.
E. After the completion of the original wastewater management plan, any
developer who wishes to supplement and amend the plan may apply to
do so at his own cost and expense in lieu of a contribution to the
wastewater management plan escrow account calculated as set forth
above.
§ 74-54 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-54
66:263

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Costs
§ 74-55. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
§ 74-56. Professional review and expert witness fees.
A. Whenever it is required as a condition to subdivision approval, site plan
approval, or conditional use approval that a performance guarantee
must be furnished in favor of the municipality in an amount not
exceeding 120% of the estimated cost of any required improvements
within a stated time, the time allowed for installation of the
improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided
may be extended by the Township Committee by resolution. As a
condition of or as a part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may
be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as
determined as of the time of passage of the resolution. The Township
Committee shall have the authority to review the performance
guarantee and have the right to require the applicant to increase the
amount of the performance guarantee posted to cover any increase in
the cost of the improvements. Said increase shall only be required in
the event the Township Engineer, in writing, certifies to an increase in
the cost of the improvements.
B. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of the same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the Township Committee in writing of such
completion or substantial completion as provided for in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53d, and, after inspection and report of the Municipal Engineer,
the Township Committee may approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the bond of the
obligor may be reduced, provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to insure completion of
all improvements. Notice shall be given to the obligor as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53e.
A. Escrow deposits. The Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall require escrow deposits in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Such deposits shall be utilized to pay the cost
of any professional services incurred for the review of an application for
development to the Board. They shall also be utilized to pay the cost of
review and/or testimony by an expert witness or witnesses retained by
the Municipal Board. The chief financial officer of the municipality shall
make all of the payments to professionals for services rendered to the
municipality or approving authority for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspections of
improvements or other purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 74-55 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-56
66:265
B. Professional services defined. The term “professional services” as
utilized herein shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer,
surveyor, planner, attorney, scientist, realtor appraiser, or other
professional or expert who provides services for review, advice,
preparation of reports and/or expert testimony, for inspection of the
property and surrounding area and for tests performed in order to
assist the Board in the review of the application before it. The
municipality shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the review of
applications, both as to completeness and as to content, and for the
review and preparation of documents, such as but not limited to
drafting resolutions, developers' agreements, correspondence
regarding an application and inspection of improvements or other
purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. Amount of escrow. Subject to the provisions of Subsection D, each
applicant shall, prior to the application being ruled complete pursuant
to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law and this section,
submit sums in accordance with § 74-57 of this chapter to be held in
escrow in accordance with the provisions hereof. [Amended
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
D. Completeness of application.
(1) The Planning Board and/or the Board of Adjustment or its
authorized committee or designee, as the case may be, shall, in
conjunction with the appropriate representatives of the staff of the
Township of Andover, review said application for development to
determine whether the escrow amount set for the above is
adequate. In conducting such review said Board shall consider the
following criteria:
(a) The presence or absence of public water and/or sewer
servicing the site.
(b) Environmental considerations, including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(c) Traffic impact of the proposed development.
(d) Impact of the proposed development on existing aquifer and/or
water quality.
(2) Upon completion of said review, the Board or its authorized
committee shall determine whether the escrow amount specified
above is sufficient, excessive or insufficient. In the event the Board
or its authorized committee shall determine that amount is
excessive, it shall specify the amount that shall be deemed
sufficient, including a specification, if appropriate, that no escrow
be posted. In the event the Board or its authorized committee shall
determine the amount specified above is insufficient, it shall so
specify and shall further set forth the amount required to be posted
in light of the criteria specified herein.
§ 74-56 ANDOVER CODE § 74-56
66:266
(3) No application for development shall be deemed complete until
such time as the applicant shall have posted with the Township of
Andover in cash, certified check or money order the amount of
escrow deposit determined by the Planning Board and/or Board of
Adjustment to be required in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
E. Additional escrow deposits. The Board may require additional escrow
deposits by the applicant to be posted during the course of the review of
an application, provided the original amounts escrowed pursuant to this
section have been exhausted and additional professional services or
expert services must reasonably be incurred because of the presence of
one or more factors enumerated in Subsection D in order to complete
the review of the application and to properly decide the same. In the
event additional escrow monies are required, they shall not be deemed
items required for the application to be complete but may be required
as additional information reasonably required to decide the application.
In the Board's discretion, their payment may be required as a condition
of any approval granted.
F. Charges for certain professional services to the applicant. The
applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the municipality with
regard to certain specific professional services in accordance with the
following:
(1) No applicant shall be required to reimburse the municipality for the
cost of attendance by the municipality’s professional employees at
any regularly scheduled meeting of the municipal agency or board
at which a hearing is held on the application. However, the
municipality shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the cost of the
attendance of its professional consultants at meetings and/or
hearings at which the application in question is reviewed. Where
review of other applications occurs at the same meeting and/or
hearing at which the attendance of the municipality’s professional
consultant is also required, the cost of the attendance of the
municipality’s professional consultant shall be reimbursed to the
municipality based on the time spent reviewing each application.
[Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12]
(2) The municipality shall be entitled to be reimbursed for attendance
of its professional personnel at special meetings of a municipal
agency or board which were requested to be called by the
applicant.
(3) The cost of the preparation of documents, including but not limited
to resolutions or memorializing resolutions, setting forth the
findings of fact and conclusions of law of the municipal agency or
board with respect to an application shall be reimbursable to the
municipality. The escrow provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
relating to escrow and escrow fees shall be followed.
§ 74-56 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-56
66:267
(4) The fees for other professional services incurred by the Board shall
be reimbursed by the applicant to the Township.
G. Reasonable charges for professional and expert services. No
professional personnel submitting charges to the municipality for any of
the services referred to in this section shall charge for any of the
services at any higher rate or in any different manner than would
normally be charged the municipality for similar work as ascertained by
the professional's contract of employment with the municipality or by
provisions of the municipal salary ordinance. The charges shall be
reasonable. Payment of any bill rendered by a professional to the
municipality with respect to any service for which the municipality is
entitled to reimbursement under this section shall in no way be
contingent upon receipt of reimbursement by the developer, nor shall
any payment to a professional be delayed pending reimbursement from
a developer.
H. Deposit of escrowed funds; refunds. Deposits received from any
applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the Municipal Treasurer
in a special interest-bearing deposit account, and, upon receipt of bills
from professionals duly approved by the board or governing body, as
appropriate, the Treasurer may use such funds to pay the bills
submitted by such professionals or experts. The municipality shall not
be required to refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit which
does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds
$100, that entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be
refunded to him by the municipality annually or at the time the deposit
is repaid or applied to the purposes for which it was deposited, as the
case may be, except that the municipality may retain for administrative
expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of that entire
amount which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial
expenses. All sums not actually so expended shall be refunded to the
applicant within 90 days after the final decision by the appropriate
board with respect to such application, upon certification by the Board
Secretary that such application has been finally decided.
I. Reimbursement for inspection of improvements. The developer shall
reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection fees paid to the
Municipal Engineer for the inspection and/or testing of improvements.
The municipality may require the applicant to make a deposit for all or a
portion of the reasonably anticipated fees to be paid for the Municipal
Engineer for such inspections pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53h.
J. Inspection of improvements. All of the improvements in a subdivision or
site plan shall be inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
The subdivider or his agent, employee or contractor shall notify the
Township Engineer and the Secretary of the reviewing municipal board
when the work is ready for any required inspection specified herein or
required to be performed by the Township Engineer, the Construction
Official or the appropriate subcode official. This notice shall be given at
least 48 hours prior to the start of the construction and at least 48 hours
§ 74-56 ANDOVER CODE § 74-56
66:268
§ 74-57. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-12;
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
prior to the time the inspection is desired. Inspection shall be
performed within three business days of the time for which it was
requested. The work shall not proceed in a manner which shall preclude
the inspection until it has been made. No underground installation shall
be covered until inspected and approved.
A. Minor subdivision (including lot line adjustment and/or amended
application):
(1) Application fee: $250.
(2) Escrow deposit: $3,000. (Replenish at $1,500.)
B. Major subdivision:
(1) Preliminary major subdivision application fee: $500 plus $100 per
lot.
(2) Resubdivision application fee: $250 minimum or 25% of
preliminary, whichever is greater.
(3) Preliminary major subdivision escrow deposit: $750/lot, $3,500
minimum (Replenish at 30% of initial deposit.), $20,000 maximum
initial deposit.
(4) Final major subdivision application fee: $500 minimum or 25% of
preliminary, whichever is greater.
(5) Final major subdivision escrow deposit: $250/lot, $2,500 minimum
(Replenish at 30% of initial deposit.), $10,000 maximum initial
deposit. (Section 74-57B(3) applies to combined preliminary and
major subdivision applications.)
(6) Amended preliminary major or final major application fee: $500.
(7) Amended preliminary major or final major escrow deposit: $300/
lot, $2,500 minimum (Replenish at 30% of initial deposit.), $10,000
maximum initial deposit.
C. Site plan:
(1) Application fee: $250 minor; $500 preliminary major and final
major.
(2) Minor site plan escrow deposit: $3,000. (Replenish at $1,500.)
(3) Preliminary major site plan escrow deposit: $2,000/acre of
disturbance, $3,500 minimum (Replenish at 30% of initial deposit.),
$20,000 maximum initial deposit.
§ 74-56 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-57
66:269
(4) Final major site plan escrow deposit: $1,000/acre of disturbance,
$2,500 minimum (Replenish at 30% of initial deposit.), $10,000
maximum initial deposit. (Section 74-57C(3) applies to combined
preliminary and final major site plan applications.)
(5) Amended minor, preliminary major or final major application fee:
$250.
(6) Amended minor, preliminary major or final major escrow deposit:
$3,500. (Replenish at $1,500.)
D. Variances:
(1) Appeals and interpretations under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a and b:
(a) Residential application fee: $100 each.
(b) Commercial/industrial/other application fee: $500 each.
(c) Escrow deposit: $1,000 each.
(2) Bulk variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c:
(a) Residential application fee: $100 each ($300 maximum).
(b) Additions to existing residential structure application fee: $100
each ($300 maximum).
(c) New dwelling structure/lots on improved street application
fee: $400.
(d) New dwelling structure/lots on unimproved street application
fee: $800.
(e) Commercial application fee: $500.
(f) Industrial application fee: $2,500.
(g) Escrow deposit as identified above, or $3,000 (Replenish at
$1,500.), whichever is greater.
(3) Use variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d:
(a) Residential application fee:
[1] Single-family: $200. Where proposed residential
development does not comply with the density
requirements of Chapter 190, Zoning, the fee shall be
$200 for each proposed lot not conforming to the density
requirements.
[2] Multifamily:
Units Fee
2 to 5 $500
§ 74-57 ANDOVER CODE § 74-57
66:270
6 to 10 $1,000
11 to 25 $1,500
26 to 50 $2,000
51 to 100 $3,000
101 to 500 $5,000
501 and up $10,000
(b) Commercial application fee: $500.
(c) Industrial application fee: $2,500.
(4) Escrow deposit.
(a) Single-family as identified above, or $2,000 (Replenish at
$1,000.), whichever is greater.
(b) Multifamily, commercial, industrial and others as identified
above, or $3,000 (Replenish at $1,500.), whichever is greater.
E. Conditional use application fees.
(1) Residential zones: $300, except for townhouses and commercial
recreation.
(2) Multifamily: $2,500.
(3) Business/residential mix: $2,500.
(4) Business: $1,000.
(5) Commercial recreation: $2,500.
(6) Industrial: $3,500.
(7) Soil removal: $3,500.
(8) BPO/R: $1,000.
(9) BPO/1: $1,000.
(10) Townhouses: $2,500.
(11) All others: $1,000
(12) Escrow deposit as identified above, or $3,000 (Replenish at
$1,500.), whichever is greater.
F. Transcription fees, one-hundred-percent estimated costs: $4.50 per
page.
G. Revision fees for application previously approved: minimum of $100 or
25% of original fee, whichever is greater.
H. Concept plan.
§ 74-57 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-57
66:271
(1) Application fee: $300.
(2) Escrow deposit for minor site plan and minor subdivision: $2,000.
(3) Escrow deposit for major site plan and major subdivision: $3,000.
I. Fees for items not covered: $300.
J. Special meeting fees: $650 or the actual cost to the Township of
Andover, whichever is greater. The applicant shall deposit the sum of
$650 with the Township at least five days in advance of the special
meeting. Any balance owed shall be paid within seven days after the
conclusion of the meeting.
K. Zoning permit: $100 plus all fees for normal subdivisions and site plans.
L. Application for certification of nonconforming use under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-68:
(1) Single-family: $200.
(2) Anything other than single-family: $500.
M. Escrow for all other applications:
(1) Single-family: $550, or as determined by the Township Engineer.
(2) Multifamily, commercial, industrial and others: $1,000, or as
determined by the Township Engineer.
N. All deposits for engineering, legal and other technical review fees shall
be made prior to the performance of the professional services which the
deposit is intended to cover. When an escrow account is reduced to the
replenishment amount identified in §§ 74-57A through M, the applicant
shall be required to replenish the account to not less than 100% of the
original amount required, or as determined by the appropriate
Township of Andover official. Failure to deposit the additional sum in
accordance with § 74-56E shall render the application incomplete or
missing additional information reasonably required to decide the
application. In the Board's discretion, the application shall not be heard
until such sum is deposited.
O. All site improvements and utility installations for both site plans and
subdivisions shall be inspected during the time of their installation
under the supervision of the Township Engineer, Land Use Board
Engineer, or Township designee to ensure satisfactory completion. The
cost of said inspection shall be the responsibility of the owner who shall
pay to the chief financial officer a sum equal to 4% of the amount of the
estimated costs for the required improvements for payment of the
inspection costs.
P. Where one application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
§ 74-57 ANDOVER CODE § 74-58
66:272
§ 74-58. Liens.
A. Should any fees for applications for development, expert witness fees,
consultant's fees, review fees, inspection fees or fees of any nature
connected with an application for development be due and unpaid by an
applicant for development and/or owner of the subject property for a
period of 14 days after written notice of the amount due was mailed to
the owner and applicant, the Township Clerk, or Mayor or Assistant
Clerk or other officer or employee of the Township of Andover, may
execute a written statement of lien showing the amount due to the
Township and may record the same in the Sussex County Clerk's office
as a lien on the subject property. The lien shall include interest at the
rate of 12% per annum, recording fees and a reasonable attorney fee.
B. Should the lien remain unpaid, the Township Tax Collector, Clerk or
other officer authorized by the Township Committee shall have the
power to sell the property to collect the amount of the lien, together
with interest, attorney fees, and recording fees, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19 et seq. and other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 74-58 HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX § 74-58
66:273
Chapter 78
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Genearl penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Amusements — See Ch. 16.
Body art establishments — See Ch. 24.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 59.
Games of chance — See Ch. 63.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 111.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 163.
Sale of vehicles — See Ch. 183.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide a uniform set of procedures
for administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued
by the Township, except alcoholic beverage licenses and dog licenses, and
except as may be specifically otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code.
§ 78-2. Application for license; fee.
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to or through the Township Clerk on forms provided by him.
A. In addition to such other information as may be specifically called for,
applications may require:
(1) The name and permanent and local addresses of the applicant and,
if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
(2) If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the
address and a description of the premises.
(3) If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license
number.
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of
the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship.
(5) The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the
licensed activity will be conducted.
(6) A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property
or services to be sold or supplied.
(7) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
§ 74-58 ANDOVER CODE § 78-2
78:274
§ 78-3. Investigation; issuance or denial of license; appeals.
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police officer
designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct the licensed activity he considers necessary for the
protection of the public. He shall communicate his findings in writing to the
Township Clerk within two weeks after the application has been filed.
§ 78-4. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Township Committee prescribes by
resolution and shall contain the following information:
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of
the offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
(8) Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
B. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications by corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all the information required by this section
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
A. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability or
business responsibility is unsatisfactory or the products, services or
activities are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove the application,
and the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license and so notify the
applicant. Otherwise the Township Clerk shall issue the license
immediately, provided that the required license fees have been paid,
except in cases where approval of the Township Committee is required.
B. In the case of an application for a solicitor's, peddler's or canvasser's
license, the license may be issued immediately subject to the
investigation.
C. In the event of the refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may
appeal to the Township Committee for hearing. The appeal shall be filed
in writing with the Township Clerk by personal service or by registered
mail within 14 days after notification of the refusal. The Township
Committee shall hold its hearing within 10 days thereafter and its
decision shall be final.
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
§ 78-2 LICENSING § 78-4
78:275
§ 78-5. Record of licenses.
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
Township Committee and shall contain the same information required by
§ 78-4 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of
the fee paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the
date of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license or
a renewal, and any other information which the Township Committee may
require by resolution.
§ 78-6. Display of license.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any police officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
§ 78-7. Transfer of license.
Except as otherwise provided, a license shall apply only to the person
to whom it was issued and shall not be transferable to another person.
Licenses may be transferred from place to place in cases where the licensed
activity is conducted at a fixed location, but only with the approval of the
Township Committee by resolution. The fee for the transfer of a license from
place to place shall be $5.
§ 78-8. Expiration of license; renewal; fee to be prorated.
§ 78-9. Revocation of license or permit.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Township Committee may
require by resolution.
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for the
renewal of licenses shall be made not later than December 1 of the year
of issue.
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month.
§ 78-4 ANDOVER CODE § 78-9
78:276
§ 78-10. Reinstatement of revoked or denied license.
The Township Committee may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if after
hearing it is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which
led to the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise no person
whose license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him,
directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same
activity.
A. Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Township Committee after notice and a hearing for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) A violation of any provision of this Code.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
B. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter,
such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
is such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
C. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set
forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the
time and place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the
licensee at his last known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing
D. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard,
to be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own
behalf, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent
record made of the proceedings at his own expense. The Township
Committee shall revoke or suspend the license if it is satisfied by a
preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts
charged.
§ 78-9 LICENSING § 78-11
78:277
§ 78-11. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may by resolution make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective.
No regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision
of this chapter and no regulation shall impose an requirement which is
in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
§ 78-12. Payment of taxes and assessments.
No license or permit requiring the approval of the Township of Andover
shall be issued unless the owner thereof has paid any delinquent property
taxes or assessments on the property wherein the business or activity for
which the license or permit is sought or wherein the business or activity is
to be conducted.
Chapter 82
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 26.
Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 103.
Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 175.
§ 82-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. The Township Committee shall have the power to revoke or suspend
any license or permit when any licensee who is an owner of the
property upon which the licensed business or activity is conducted has
failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
quarters. Upon payment of delinquent taxes or assessments the
revoked or suspended license or permit shall be restored.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage licenses or permits issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. or any dog licenses.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future; words used in the plural number
include the singular number; and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
§ 78-11 ANDOVER CODE § 82-1
78:278
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top,
cap, or detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar, match of any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material but does not include the
waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container for the depositing of litter,
whether it be a metal or plastic can or drum, with or without a plastic
liner which shall be emptied or serviced regularly by a proprietor,
owner, lessee, tenant, sponsor, occupant or person in charge of any
dwelling, business or activity. Plastic or paper bags not placed in a
litter receptacle as defined herein shall not be deemed to meet the
requirement of this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used, whether wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, ground, walk, driveway,
porch, steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, and
any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
PUBLIC STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Any structure or building
owned or operated by the federal, county or state government or any
governmental agency.
REFUSE — All putrescible solid waste, except body wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, dismantled automobiles and parts thereof, scrap metal,
junk, machinery and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible wastes, such as but not limited to paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, grass,
bedding, crockery, building materials and other similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and also including vehicles
designed for propulsion on snow and ice.
§ 82-1 LICENSING § 82-2
78:279
§ 82-2. Littering prohibited. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-17]
§ 82-3. Illegal dumping. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17]
§ 82-4. Adequate containerization required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise
place litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than
in a litter receptacle.
B. No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring same into the Township for the purpose
of dumping or disposing thereof without prior necessary approvals.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street,
roadway, private property, on or off any right-of-way or any other place
not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or
disposal, any litter, including but not limited to household or
commercial solid waste, rubbish, vehicles or vehicle parts, rubber tires,
appliances, furniture or any other personal property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or bury any
asphalt, road millings, tree stumps, rock or concrete without having
first obtained governmental approvals as required by law.
Notwithstanding receipt of any required governmental approvals, it
shall be unlawful to place, deposit or bury any asphalt, road millings,
tree stumps, rock or concrete in pieces over 12 inches in any dimension
on any parcel of land, public or private.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, dump, discard or deposit in
or about any dumpster, bulk container or demolition container any offsite
accumulated garbage, litter, refuse, or rubbish, including
construction, demolition, industrial, building, institutional and
commercial debris and materials without having first obtained
governmental approval as required by state or local law and the
permission of the property or business owner.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including: sidewalks used
by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a
receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; campground and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and
fueling stations; boat and launching areas; public and private piers
operated for public use; beaches and bathing areas; and at special
events to which the public is invited, including sporting events,
parades, carnivals, circuses, and festivals.
§ 82-2 ANDOVER CODE § 82-4
78:280
§ 82-5. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Township.
§ 82-6. Handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street, road or other public place within
the Township, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbills in any public place; provided, however, that it shall
not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, road or other public place within
the Township for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to
accept it.
§ 82-7. Uncovered vehicles.
§ 82-8. Storage of household solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
§ 82-9. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 82-10. Construction sites.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
A. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or
parked on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to
prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leading or otherwise
escaping therefrom.
B. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have
fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle,
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately
cause the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall
pay the costs therefor.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter
§ 82-4 LICENSING § 82-10
78:281
§ 82-11. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 82-12. Commercial establishments and residences.
§ 82-13. Improper disposal of waste.
before, during, or after completion of any construction or demolition
project.
B. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate
flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction
areas, and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and
with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or
nuisances of every kind, and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards,
courts and alleyways free from litter and other offensive material.
B. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
C. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be
collected and properly containerized for disposal.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping
or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of Andover so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
(1) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 82-10 ANDOVER CODE § 82-13
78:282
(2) PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
(3) STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person shall spill, dump or dispose of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system;
or spill, dump or dispose of materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
D. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to this section:
(1) Water fine flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(2) Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
(3) Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact
cooling water).
(4) Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
(5) Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
(6) Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
(7) Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
(8) Flows from fire-fighting activities.
(9) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use
for its intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does
not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 82-13 LICENSING § 82-14
78:283
§ 82-14. Enforcing officer. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-17]
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Health Officer,
the Township Recycling Coordinator, Township police officers and/or the
Township Zoning Officer.
§ 82-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16; 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17]
Chapter 86
(RESERVED)
Chapter 93
MOTORIZED BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
§ 93-1. General use restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized bicycles (mini-bikes) or any
type of unregistered motor-driven vehicle or conveyance, including but
not limited to snowmobiles, trail bicycles, motor scooter, gas buggies,
motorcycles and four-wheel motor vehicles known as go-carts, under the
following circumstances:
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of
one or more of the following: a fine of not less than $2,500 for a first
offense, up to $5,000 for a second offense and up to a maximum of
$10,000 for a third and each and every subsequent offense,
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or to a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of
the Municipal Court Judge. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5).
B. Additionally, each individual convicted of a violation of this chapter of
the Code must make restitution in the form of reimbursement to the
Township and/or the property or business owner for all costs and
expenses incurred from the storage and/or legal disposal of such
materials.
§ 82-14 ANDOVER CODE § 93-1
78:284
§ 93-2. Responsibility for acts of minors.
Any parent who knowingly permits his minor child to operate any
unlicensed motor-driven vehicle or conveyance in violation of any provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 96
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Peace and good order — See Ch. 107.
A. On private property of another without the express permission to do so
by the owner of the property.
B. On any private street or right-of-way located within the Township.
C. On public grounds within the Township without the express permission
or approval of the proper public authority and then only in accordance
with such rules and regulations as such public authority may impose.
D. In a manner which creates loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
E. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner which endangers the safety
of any person or the property of any person.
§ 93-1 LICENSING § 93-2
78:285

ARTICLE I
General Noise Prohibitions
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 6-2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 96-1. Noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 96-2. Enumeration of types of prohibited noise.
Without intending to limit the generality of § 96-1, the following acts are
hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
in violation of this article. The enumeration is intended to give typical
illustrations of prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
A. Radios; televisions; phonographs. The playing, use or operation of any
radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which
the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The
operation of such a set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., so that it is clearly
audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle
in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
B. Yelling; shouting, Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
C. Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity, but nothing herein contained is intended to apply
to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with Chapter 20 of this
Code.
D. Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except when required by law, or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a
warning of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or to
persons on the street. No person shall sound a horn or warning device
on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits an
unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for an unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
§ 96-1 LICENSING § 96-2
78:287
§ 96-3. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to:
§ 96-4. Sound trucks.
E. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises.
F. Defect in vehicle or load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
G. Construction or repair. The carrying on of excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work other than between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; the carrying on of construction, repair or
alteration work by a homeowner on his own dwelling or property, other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. In case of urgent
necessity or in the interest of public health or safety, the Director of
Public Works may grant a permit for excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work for a period not to exceed three
days, by the terms of which permit such work may be carried on
between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
H. Schools; courts; churches; hospitals. The creation of excessive noise on
a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or court
while in use or adjacent to a hospital, which unreasonably interferes
with the working of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys
patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed
in such a street indicating that it is in a school, hospital or court street.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by churches engaged in
church activities.
B. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
C. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of municipal officials.
D. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air, where duly authorized.
A. Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following
regulations upon the issuance of a permit by the Township Committee
for each occasion and each location:
(1) Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the
Township before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
§ 96-2 ANDOVER CODE § 96-4
78:288
(2) Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the
Township before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
(3) Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme right-hand side of
the road and shall proceed at a speed of not less than 10 miles per
hour.
(4) Stationary sound trucks are prohibited in all residential zones in
the Township, but may be operated in commercial zones during the
hours referred to above.
B. For the purposes of this section "residential zones" shall mean the
zones so designated in Chapter 190, Zoning, and "commercial zones"
shall mean and include all parts of the Township other than residential
zones.
§ 96-4 LICENSING § 96-4
78:289

ARTICLE II
Engine Braking
[Adopted 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-09]
§ 96-5. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ENGINE BRAKING — The use or operation of any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression, or deceleration of
any motor vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive
noise from such vehicle.
EMERGENCY SITUATION — One in which there is imminent danger of a
collision with property, persons, and/or animals and/or what is necessary for
the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
EXCESSIVELY LOUD — Sound audible at a distance of 100 feet from the
building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this article.
§ 96-6. Prohibition.
It is unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to activate or use an
internal-combustion-engine-powered vehicle on any posted public ways,
including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, easements, or rights-of-way
established for vehicle operation within the Township of Andover, while
said vehicle or operator is utilizing an engine brake without an exhaust
muffler sufficient to prevent the creation of excessively loud noises by
said vehicle due to improperly maintained, defective, or modified muffler
systems, except when the use of such engine brake is necessary in an
emergency situation. This article is not intended to prohibit the passage of
vehicles equipped with engine brakes in posted areas, but rather limit the
use of such equipment in posted areas under the aforesaid circumstances.
§ 96-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in emergency situations
as described herein:
A. Noise caused by the application of engine brakes, also known as
"compression braking," which is effectively muffled or if the application
is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community is
exempt from the provisions of this article.
B. Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes are
also exempt.
§ 96-5 LICENSING § 96-8
78:291
§ 96-8. Posting of signs.
The Township is hereby authorized to post at reasonable locations within
the Township signs indicating the prohibition of engine braking in a
nonemergency situation.
§ 96-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article
shall be mandated to a court appearance, fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, and required to pay court costs and fees for each
offense.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 96-8 ANDOVER CODE § 96-9
78:292
Chapter 103
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 20.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Loitering — See Ch. 86.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 107.
§ 103-1. Applicability.
The rules and regulations promulgated in this chapter shall apply to public
parks and recreational areas and, where applicable, to other lands owned
or controlled by the Township and devoted to public use or purpose. Such
activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or
hereafter shall be adopted.
§ 103-2. Prohibited activities.
No person in a public park and recreation area shall:
A. Ride or drive an authorized vehicle except on established roads and
ways and then only at posted speeds.
B. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area,
and such shall be in accordance with posted directions thereat and with
the instruction of any attendant who may be present.
C. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking areas
or elsewhere in the park area.
D. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
E. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided, or ride a bicycle in other than designated areas.
F. Have animals in any area except those designated by the Recreation
Commission.
G. Hitch a horse or other animal except where rails or posts are provided
for such purpose.
H. Allow any dog or animal to run at large in the parks. Any dog or animal
found in any park shall be deemed to be running at large unless the
owner of such dog or animal carries him or leads him by a leash, strap
or rope.
I. Kill, injure or disturb any animal or bird, or have in his possession the
young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or
§ 96-9 LICENSING § 103-2
78:293
bird; or damage any grass, tree, shrub, plant, soil, rock, sand or any
building, sign, structure or equipment upon any premises under the
jurisdiction of the Township, except during a controlled deer hunt
running concurrent with the State of New Jersey firearm deer seasons.
[Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
J. Carry or use firearms or explosives, fireworks, air rifles, bows and
arrows, sling shots or any weapon. At the discretion of the Mayor and
Committee, a permit for a properly supervised fireworks display, in
accordance with all applicable state statutes, may be issued as set forth
in § 107-20 of the Township Code. [Amended 11-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-15; 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-11; 3-12-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
K. Fish, except in such places and at such times and circumstances that
the Recreation Commission shall direct and control.
L. Use or ride legally licensed and insured motorcycles, minibikes, or
snowmobiles, or any motorized vehicle except in those areas designated
by the Recreation Commission.
M. Scatter litter or any form of waste material; or break, throw, or place
any glass on lawns, walks, roads, benches, tables, wooded or other
areas on any park property.
N. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to
any park or tributary system, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which shall or
may result in the pollution of the waters.
O. Coast with hand sleds, bobs, skis, carts or other vehicles on wheels or
runners, except in places designated.
P. Throw, cast, catch, kick or strike any baseball, football or basketball or
any other object prohibited except in places designated.
Q. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor
and in compliance with such regulations and hours as are herein set
forth or shall be hereinafter adopted.
R. Ice skate, ice boat or ice fish on the ice of any of the waters except such
areas as designated, and provided a safety signal is displayed.
S. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other such water craft upon any
waters, except at places designated for boating. Such activity shall be
in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or hereafter shall
be adopted.
T. Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to annoy,
frighten, or endanger, unjustifiably or unnecessarily, the occupant if any
other boat.
§ 103-2 ANDOVER CODE § 103-2
78:294
§ 103-3. Rules of conduct.
While in a Township park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner and, in particular, no person
shall:
U. Use a gasoline motorized boat on Township waters.
A. Occupy any grounds for picnic parties, assemblages, business or
entertainment, or occupy a camp upon the grounds, except when
permitted by the Recreation Commission.
B. Sell, vend or give away in or upon any of the parks or drives, any
articles of merchandise whatever without the express permission of the
Recreation Commission.
C. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.
D. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Recreation Commission.
E. Have alcoholic beverages in one's possession except as allowed under
park hall contract and written permission of the Recreation
Commission and the Township; nor shall any person in the park be
under the influence of intoxicating beverages at any time.
F. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
G. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose.
H. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If
no such trash receptacles are available, then trash shall be carried
away from the park area by the picnicker to be disposed of properly
elsewhere.
I. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulation as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars,
tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park, or on any
highways, roads or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
J. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected
any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to
the park, except in areas designated by the Recreation Commission.
K. Utilize designated athletic fields in Hillside Park and Goodale Park
between December 1 and April 1. This period of prohibition of use of the
athletic fields may be extended by the Supervisor of Public Works as
§ 103-2 LICENSING § 103-3
78:295
§ 103-4. Open times and closing of parks.
§ 103-5. Enforcement.
weather conditions dictate. [Added 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-11;
amended 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-10]
L. Smoking. [Added 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) Smoke within the boundary of any of the parks, playgrounds or
recreational areas which are property of the Township of Andover,
aside from designated smoking zones. To the extent possible,
"Smoke Free Area" signs shall be clearly, sufficiently and
conspicuously posted at properties where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter. The signs shall feature the words “Smoke Free Area”
in lettering that is not less than two inches in height and shall
contain the international no smoking sign.
(2) This subsection excludes the forty-foot perimeter surrounding the
two recreation banquet halls at Hillside Park, 150 Lake Iliff Road.
However, smoking is prohibited inside the recreation banquet halls,
as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 26:3D-58.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, smoking shall not be prohibited within
the parking lots or vehicular access lanes to such parks,
playgrounds and/or recreational areas unless prohibited by other
applicable law.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, the park shall be open
to the public every day during the designated hours and months. The
opening and closing hours and months for the park shall be posted
therein for public information.
B. Any section or part of the park may be declared closed to the public at
any time, and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular
and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and either entirely or merely
for certain uses.
A. Enforcement by Recreation Commission; park attendants. The
Recreation Commission and park attendants shall, in connection with
their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Confiscation of property. The Recreation Commission and any park
attendants shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property,
thing or device in the park, as used in violation of this chapter.
C. Ejection from park. The Recreation Commission and any park
attendants shall have the authority to eject from the park area any
person or persons acting in violation of this chapter.
§ 103-3 ANDOVER CODE § 103-5
78:296
§ 103-6. Proscribed behavior.
No person or persons shall engage in behavior proscribed by § 107-18 of
this Code.
§ 103-7. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance with Chapter
1, Art. II, General Penalty, of this Code.
Chapter 107
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 107-1. Assault and battery.
§ 107-2. Bad checks.
D. Enforcement by police. This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police
Department.
A. No person shall commit an assault or an assault and battery. No
persons, two or more in number, shall fight together or commit or
attempt to commit assaults and batteries upon each other, either in
public or in a private place, nor be present, aiding, assisting or abetting
the same.
B. No person shall willfully engage in any fight, assault, quarrel, brawl,
battery, or altercation; nor shall any person participate in or incite by
overt act or acts any disturbance or riot, or any unruly, boisterous,
noisy, unlawful or disorderly assemblage constituting a breach or
disturbance of the peace.
A. Intent to defraud. No person, either for himself or as agent or
representative of another person, or as an officer or agent of any
corporation, or as a member of a partnership, with intent to defraud,
shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the
payment of money in a sum not in excess of $100 upon any bank or
other depository knowing, at the time of so doing, that the maker or
drawer has no funds or insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank
or other depository for payment in full of such instrument upon its
presentation, although no express representation is made in reference
thereto.
B. Evidence of intent to defraud. The making, drawing, uttering or
delivering of a check, draft or order as stated in Subsection A shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and the certificate of protest
of nonpayment of same shall be presumptive evidence that there were
no funds or insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other
depository and that the person making, drawing, uttering, or delivering
§ 103-5 LICENSING § 107-2
78:297
§ 107-3. Billboards and other signs.
No person shall erect or maintain a billboard, sign or other structure for
advertising purposes within the Township except as provided for in Article
XI, Signs, of Chapter 190, Zoning.
§ 107-4. Concealed weapons.
No person shall conduct himself in or about the Township having concealed
upon him any picklock, key, crow, jack, bit or other implement with an
intent to break or enter into any building or shall have upon him any pistol,
hanger, cutlass, bludgeon or other offensive or dangerous weapon, nor shall
any person be apprehended having upon him, whether concealed or not,
any of the foregoing articles or things with the intent of committing any
unlawful act, nor shall any person be found in or near any dwelling, house,
warehouse, stable, barn, coach house, garage, smoke house or any place of
public resort or assemblage for business, worship or amusement, or other
lawful purpose, with intent to steal any goods or chattels, provided that this
section shall not apply to law officers and other persons duly authorized
under certain statutes of this state to carry proper weapons of defense.
Possession of any of the foregoing articles on public thoroughfares shall be
prima facie evidence of such intent.
§ 107-5. Sale of cigarettes to minors; penalty.
§ 107-6. Malicious destruction of property.
the instrument knew that there were no funds or insufficient funds in
or credit with such bank or other depository.
A. No person shall directly or indirectly, acting as agent or otherwise, sell,
give or furnish to a minor under the age of 16 years, any cigarette made
of tobacco or of any other matter or substance which can be smoked, or
any cigarette, paper or tobacco in any form.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $100.
A. Vandalism. No person shall maliciously destroy, deface, damage or
injure property. Where the damage does not exceed the sum of $200,
any person violating this section may be adjudged a disorderly person.
B. Demolition. No person possessed of a dwelling house or other building,
or part thereof, held for any term of years or other less term, or at will,
or held over after the termination of any tenancy, shall unlawfully or
maliciously:
(1) Pull down or demolish or begin to pull down or demolish the same
or any part thereof.
(2) Pull down or sever from the freehold any fixture fixed in or to such
dwelling house or building or part thereof.
§ 107-2 ANDOVER CODE § 107-7
78:298
§ 107-7. Behavior associated with intoxication.
§ 107-8. False alarms.
No person shall, by word, act or other means, willfully and maliciously give
or cause to be given a false fire alarm, a false police alarm or a false alarm
for medical treatment or first aid.
§ 107-9. Gambling.
No person shall, in or about the Township, play for money or other valuable
thing at cards, dice, or other game, with one or more dice or with any
other instrument, engine or device in the nature of dice, having one or more
figures or numbers, or at billiards, pool, tennis, bowling, or shuffleboard, or
A.B.C. or E.O. tables, or other tables, or at faro bank, or other bank of a like
nature by whatever name known or with any slot machine or device in the
nature of a slot machine or with any other instrument, engine, apparatus or
device having one or more figures or numbers thereon.
§ 107-10. (Reserved)44
§ 107-11. Interference with officials or official bodies.
No person shall interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct the proceedings,
functions or deliberations of the Township Committee, the Board of Health,
or any other officials of the Township, nor shall any person molest, obstruct,
hinder, or interfere with any officer of the Township or any official engaged
in the performance of his duty, or knowingly resist or oppose any person
authorized by law to make arrests or to serve any writ, bill, order or process
when the person so authorized is acting in the performance of his duty.
A. No person shall be drunk or intoxicated in, on, near or about any public
or private place within the Township to the annoyance of or danger to
any other person or against the peace of the Township.
B. No person, whether owner, tenant, occupant or guest, shall suffer or
take part in any drunken, riotous or other disorderly conduct that shall
disturb the peace and quiet of any family or neighbor, or of any of the
inhabitants of this Township.
C. No person, under the influence of intoxicating liquor, shall loiter or
create a disturbance in any public street or public or quasi-public place
or in any public conveyance, nor shall go in or upon any private
property not his own without the permission of the owner or other
person having authority to grant such permission.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 107-10, Indecent behavior, was repealed 9-28-2009 by Ord. No
2009-33.
§ 107-7 LICENSING § 107-12
78:299
§ 107-12. Lottery slips.
No person shall have in his possession or custody any illegal lottery slips,
books or records pertaining to a lottery, nor shall any person have in his
possession or have in his automobile in his custody any ticket or tickets,
slip or slips, paper, document or memoranda in any way pertaining to the
business of a number game. "Number game," as used in this section, shall
mean any betting on any number or numbers or sets or arrangements of
numbers on or according to any plan or method whatsoever. This section
shall not apply to any lottery or number game authorized by law.
§ 107-13. Prostitution; disorderly houses.
§ 107-14. Abandoned refrigerators; penalty.
No person shall discard or abandon in any public or private place accessible
to children, whether or not such children are trespassers, any refrigerator
or icebox having a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more, with an attached lid
or door which may be opened and fastened shut by means of an attached
latch, or being the owner, lessee or manager or such place, shall knowingly
permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or chest to remain
there in such condition. Any person violating this section shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than five days, or both.
§ 107-15. Machines and devices using coins.
A. No person shall practice prostitution nor shall any person, by word, act,
sign or any device, invite or solicit unlawful sexual intercourse or any
other unlawful indecent, lewd or lascivious act.
B. No person shall maintain, or cause or permit to be maintained, a
disorderly house or house of ill fame in any building or structure, or on
any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him; nor shall any
person permit any building or other structures or any premises owned
or occupied or controlled by him to be frequented or used by noisy,
riotous or disorderly persons, or by prostitutes, gamblers, or vagrants.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, or shall attempt to
operate or cause to be operated, any automatic vending machine, slot
machine, coin box, telephone, or other receptacle designed to receive
lawful coin of the United States of America in connection with the sale,
use or enjoyment of property or service, by means of a slug or any false,
counterfeited, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means,
method or trick or device not lawfully authorized by the owner, lessee,
or licensee of such machine, coin box, telephone or receptacle.
B. No person shall take, obtain or receive from or in connection with any
such automatic vending machine, slot machine, coin box, telephone or
other receptacle, any goods, wares, merchandise, gas, electric current,
article of value, or the use or enjoyment of any telephone or telegraph
§ 107-12 ANDOVER CODE § 107-15
78:300
§ 107-16. Defacing or removing warning signs.
§ 107-17. Relinquishing telephone party lines.
No person shall fail to relinquish a telephone party line, consisting of a
subscriber line telephone circuit with two or more main telephone stations
connected therewith each having a distinctive ring or telephone number,
after he has been requested to do so, to permit another to place a call, in an
emergency in which property or human life are in jeopardy and the prompt
summoning of a fire or police department or medical aid or ambulance
service is essential. No person shall request the use of such a party line
by falsely stating that the line is needed for any of such purposes knowing
the statement to be false, provided that such party line at the time of the
request not being used for any other emergency call.
§ 107-18. Lake Iliff Bridge.
No person while on or upon the Lake Iliff Bridge (County Bridge No. A-9)
shall fish, swim or dive therefrom or cause to be dropped or thrown any
article or thing from said bridge.
§ 107-19. General prohibition.
All acts constituting lewd, immoral or indecent conduct, unlawful
destruction of property, willful injuries to or unlawful interference with
facilities or service, or any musical instrument, phonograph or other
property or service, without depositing in and surrendering to such
machine, coin box, telephone or receptacle lawful coin of the United
States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee,
or licensee of such machine, coin box, telephone or receptacle.
A. Trespass signs.
(1) No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, deface or alter any
notice posted pursuant to law and forbidding trespassing, with
intent to destroy such notice.
(2) Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both.
B. Highway signs.
(1) No person shall mutilate or remove any notice or damage, destroy
or remove, any warning sign or signal or remove any barricade
placed or posted on any highway in connection with or relating to
the closing of any road.
(2) No person shall drive any vehicle over or upon the closed portion of
any highway nor violate any rule or regulation for the use of any
highway.
§ 107-15 LICENSING § 107-19
78:301
persons, hazards to the public health and breaches or disturbances of the
peace not expressly hereinbefore mentioned are severally prohibited.
§ 107-20. Fireworks. [Added 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01;
amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
Chapter 111
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Licensing — See Ch. 78.
Peddling in parks — See Ch. 103, § 103-3C.
A. Compliance with statutory provisions. No person or entity shall offer or
expose for sale, sell, distribute, possess, use or explode any fireworks or
pyrotechnics or any devices in which explosives are used for fireworks
or pyrotechnics except under the provisions of N.J.S.A. §§ 21:3-1 to
21:3-9, as amended, as relates to public displays.
B. Permit required. In accordance with N.J.S.A. §§ 21:3-3 and 21:3-4, in
addition to all state permits and requirements set forth therein, a
permit must be obtained from the Township Committee for any
fireworks display to be conducted within the Township. The permit shall
be issued providing all conditions of N.J.S.A. §§ 21:3-3 to 21:3-9 are
complied with by the applicant.
C. Fees.
(1) The permit fee for a fireworks display is $600.
(2) Five hundred dollars of this permit fee shall be specifically
dedicated by the Township to an account for maintenance and/or
capital improvements of Fire Department vehicles and equipment.
D. Noncompliance with this section shall result in a violation of N.J.S.A.
§ 21:3-8.
E. Waiver. In the event that the applicant demonstrates to the Mayor and
Township Committee that a donation has been made to the Fire
Department which will sufficiently cover the cost for the use of
equipment and resources of the Department, then the Township
Committee may waive up to $500 of the application fee.
§ 107-19 ANDOVER CODE § 107-20
78:302
ARTICLE I
Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 7-2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 111-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Township or not,
traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, food, ice cream, fruit ices, soda water, garden
farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. "Hawkers," "hucksters"
and "vendors" shall be included in this definition.
§ 111-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of a peddler within the corporate
limits of the Township without first obtaining a license.
§ 111-3. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $75.
§ 111-4. Use of streets.
§ 111-5. Time restrictions.
No person shall sell, offer for sale, hawk or peddle in the Township any
of the items listed in § 111-1 before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. nor on
Sundays or holidays.
§ 111-6. Duty of police to enforce.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to require any
person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly
A. No peddler shall have an exclusive right to any location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might
impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
B. No peddler shall park his vehicle within 200 feet of the nearest public,
private or parochial school at any time during which school may be in
session, nor shall any licensee park his vehicle for longer than it takes
to make a sale to a customer.
§ 111-1 LICENSING § 111-6
78:303
licensed, to produce his peddler's license, and to enforce the provisions of
this article against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 111-7. Exceptions.
§ 111-8. Inspection of equipment.
A. This article shall not be construed to include:
(1) The delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or such other
necessary and perishable articles of food or merchandise of the
type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis at intervals of
less than one week.
(2) Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to
federal, state or local laws.
B. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
license, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
sections of this chapter.
A. The equipment used or employed by peddlers of ice cream, foods,
beverages, confections and other related commodities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to the
inspection of the Board of Health or its authorized agents.
B. Any violation found and not immediately corrected shall be grounds for
revocation of the license.
§ 111-6 ANDOVER CODE § 111-8
78:304
ARTICLE II
Solicitors and Canvassers
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 7-3 of the 1973 Code]
§ 111-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR — A person, also known as a canvasser, whether a resident
of the Township or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor
truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house, or from street to street who takes or attempts to take orders
for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of the sale and whether or not he accepts an advance
payment for the goods. Any person taking a poll or a survey from house to
house or on the streets, or distributing advertisements or handbills, shall be
included in this definition.
§ 111-10. License required.
No solicitor or canvasser shall engage in such business within the Township
without first obtaining a license.
§ 111-11. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any person who has obtained a charitable
solicitor's permit in accordance with Article III of this chapter nor shall
it apply to any person distributing literature or handbills on behalf of a
candidate for public office.
§ 111-12. Application.
In addition to the information required by § 78-2, the application for a
solicitor's license shall indicate the place where the goods or property
proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured
or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
§ 111-13. Fees.
The annual fee for a solicitor's or canvasser's license shall be $75.
§ 111-14. Badges.
A. The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery
of his license a badge on which shall appear the words "Licensed
Solicitor," the period for which the license is issued and the number of
§ 111-9 LICENSING § 111-14
78:305
§ 111-15. Time restrictions.
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or
later than 9:00 p.m., nor or Sundays or holidays.
the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of
10 feet.
B. During the time the licensee is engaged in soliciting, his badge shall be
worn constantly and conspicuously on the front of his outer garment.
§ 111-14 ANDOVER CODE § 111-15
78:306
ARTICLE III
Charitable Solicitations
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 7-4 of the 1973 Code]
§ 111-16. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHARITABLE and PHILANTHROPIC — Includes patriotic, religious,
eleemosynary, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal associations,
societies and the like.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes the giving of alms, food, clothes, money
subscriptions, pledges or property of any nature or kind.
PERSON or ORGANIZATION — Any individual, firm, copartnership,
corporation, company, association, church, religious denomination, society,
class or league.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, of money,
credit, property, financial assistance, and other things of value on the plea
or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for a charitable and philanthropic purpose
as defined in this article. Solicitation shall be deemed to be complete
when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any
contribution.
§ 111-17. Permit required; exemption.
No person or organization shall solicit charitable and philanthropic
contributions within the Township without first obtaining a permit
authorizing such public solicitations, provided that the provisions of this
article shall not apply to any established organization authorized and not
operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such
organization are conducted among the members thereof or if the
solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular
assembly or meetings of any such organization.
§ 111-18. Application for permit.
Application for a permit to make a public solicitation of funds by charitable
and philanthropic organizations shall be made to the Township Clerk on
forms provided by the Township.
A. In addition to the application required by § 78-2, the application herein
required shall contain the following information:
(1) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made and the
estimated amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby.
(2) A specific statement showing the need for the solicitation.
§ 111-16 LICENSING § 111-18
78:307
§ 111-19. Investigation and approval of application by Chief of
Police.
The investigation required under § 78-3 shall be limited to that sufficient for
the Chief of Police to make a determination that the person or organization
is bona fide. Upon making such a determination the Chief of Police shall
approve the application and notify the Township Clerk.
§ 111-20. Approval or disapproval of application.
If the application is approved, the Township Clerk shall immediately notify
the applicant and issue the permit without charge. If the application is
disapproved, notification stating the reasons therefor shall immediately be
sent to the applicant by the Township Clerk.
§ 111-21. Appeal of disapproval.
If the application is disapproved, the applicant may appeal the decision to
the Township Committee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk
within 14 days after the notice of disapproval. The Township Committee
shall hold a hearing within 10 days thereafter, and its decision shall be final.
(3) The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of
conducting the solicitation.
(4) The names and addresses of all persons making the proposed
solicitation.
(5) A brief outline of the method to be used in conducting the
solicitation.
(6) The time and dates when such solicitation shall be made, giving
preferred dates and alternate dates for the beginning and ending of
such solicitation.
(7) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions or expenses to be paid
to any person or organization for conducting such solicitation and
the names and addresses of all such persons.
(8) A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable and
philanthropic work conducted by the applicant within the
Township.
(9) A statement to the effect that if the permit is approved, it will not
be used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the
proposed solicitation by the Township or by any of its officers or
departments.
B. If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit
granted thereunder, there is any change in fact, policy or method that
would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall
notify the Township Clerk in writing within 24 hours after such change.
§ 111-18 ANDOVER CODE § 111-22
78:308
§ 111-22. Calendar of solicitations.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to keep a current calendar of
approved solicitations to be conducted within the Township. The Township
Clerk shall have the right to propose alternate dates for a solicitation if
the requested dates should unfairly conflict with other solicitations being
conducted within the Township.
§ 111-23. Fee.
There shall be no fee payable to the Township for a charitable and
philanthropic solicitation permit.
§ 111-24. Time limit.
No permit may grant the right to solicit for a period longer than 90
consecutive days.
§ 111-25. Written receipts required.
Any person or organization receiving money or any other thing for a value of
$1 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to this
article shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor
showing the date and the amount received; provided that this section
shall not apply to any contribution collected by means of a closed box or
receptacle used in solicitation where the use thereof has been approved by
the Township Committee, where it is impractical to determine the amount
of each contribution.
§ 111-26. Regulation of hours of solicitation.
A. All solicitations conducted under the authority of this article shall take
place between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and no
solicitations shall be conducted on Sundays.
B. Any person or organization desiring to solicit at hours other than those
stated herein shall make special request therefor on their application,
and this special request shall be approved or disapproved by the
Township Committee.
C. If approval is given by the Township Committee for the solicitation to be
conducted at other than the hours stated in this section, the approval
shall be plainly stamped on the permit issued by the Township Clerk.
§ 111-22 LICENSING § 111-26
78:309

ARTICLE IV
Restrictions
[Adopted 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08; amended 9-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 111-27. Entering on posted property prohibited.
No individual obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter shall enter onto
any property on which is located a sign or signs stating "no solicitors" or
carrying a similar message forbidding the entry of any persons onto the
property.
§ 111-28. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a
nonsolicitation list.
§ 111-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or such other
penalties consistent with N.J.S.A. § 40:49-5. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a nonsolicitation list. The
Office of the Administrator/Township Clerk shall collect, prepare and
maintain a list of addresses of those premises where the owner and/or
occupant has notified the Township Clerk that soliciting and canvassing
is not permitted on his/her premises. To be included on the
nonsolicitation list, residents shall complete a form which will be
available in the Municipal Building's General Office during normal
business hours, Mondays through Fridays from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
except on weekends and legal holidays.
B. The Administrator/Township Clerk and/or the Deputy Township Clerk
shall submit the nonsolicitation list to the Chief of Police on a quarterly
basis, which nonsolicitation listing shall be distributed to applicants
seeking a license to solicit or canvass pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. The licensee shall not solicit or canvass at any address on the
nonsolicitation list.
C. Updating of nonsolicitation list. On or about January 1, April 1, July 1
and October 1 of each year, the Office of the Township Clerk shall
update the list. The updated list shall then be forwarded to the Chief of
Police for distribution to solicitors and/or canvassers.
D. Any individual violating the provisions of § 111-28B described above
shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment as prescribed in
§ 111-29.
§ 111-27 LICENSING § 111-29
78:311
Chapter 115
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 115-1. Applicability of other laws, rules and collective bargaining
agreements.
§ 115-2. Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
A. Civil Service Law and Rules. The New Jersey State Civil Service Law
and the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey applicable to
municipalities provide the basic framework for employment in the
Township government. This chapter and all its provisions shall at all
times be subject to the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey,
which prescribe basic minimum standards. To the extent that this
chapter should at any time and in any particular provide standards less
liberal than those embodied in the Civil Service Rules of the State of
New Jersey, the latter rules shall be deemed applicable. To the extent,
however, that the provisions of this chapter contain benefits or
provisions more liberal than the minimum requirements of the Civil
Service Rules of the State of New Jersey, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
B. Fair Labor Standards Act. The provisions of the Fair Labor Standards
Act as applicable to governmental employees shall also apply within the
Township. To the extent that this chapter should at any time and in any
particular provide standards less liberal than those embodied in the
Fair Labor Standards Act, the latter rules shall be deemed applicable.
To the extent, however, that the provisions of this chapter contain
benefits or provisions more liberal than the minimum requirements of
the Fair Labor Standards Act, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
C. Collective bargaining agreements. It is recognized that within the
Township certain employees are governed by a collective bargaining
agreement. This chapter shall not be applicable to those employees.
The provisions of their collective bargaining agreement shall control
the terms and conditions of their employment in the event of conflict of
the agreement and the provisions of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter and other personnel matters shall be
administered by the Local Government Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual of the Township of Andover, which shall be filed
with the Township Clerk and disseminated to all department heads.
B. Employees shall be apprised of relevant personnel policies and
procedures by the Employee Policies and Procedures Manual of the
Township of Andover, which shall be filed with the Township Clerk and
distributed to all employees.
§ 111-29 ANDOVER CODE § 115-3
78:312
§ 115-3. Appointment.
§ 115-4. Promotions.
A. Basis for original appointment. Original appointments to vacancies in
the Township service shall be based on merit, fitness and ability, which
shall be determined by competitive examinations insofar as practicable,
and shall be in accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Temporary assignments. In the absence of an appropriate list or for the
filling of temporary or seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case of
emergencies, vacancies may be filled by temporary appointments by
the Township Committee. Temporary appointments shall have a
maximum duration of four months.
C. Provisional appointments. Pending the establishment of an appropriate
eligible list, vacancies in permanent positions may be filled by
provisional appointments. Such appointments shall continue only until
an appropriate eligible list is established. Provisional employees shall
possess minimum qualifications established for the vacant position.
D. Physical examination. Any job applicant may be required to submit to a
physical examination by the Township Physician or a designated
alternate. Psychological or psychiatric examinations by a psychologist
or psychiatrist designated by the Township may also be required.
E. Probationary period.
(1) All employees appointed permanently to the classified service shall
serve a probationary period of 90 days. At the expiration of the
probationary period, the Township Committee may discontinue the
service of any employee if, in the Township Committee's opinion,
the employee is unwilling or unable to perform the duties of his
position in a satisfactory manner, or if the employee is of such
reputation and habits as not to merit continuance in the service of
the Township. In every case, the Township Committee shall notify
the employee in writing of the discontinuance and the reasons for
the same, and shall forward a copy of the notice to the Department
of Civil Service of the State of New Jersey.
(2) A ninety-day probationary period shall also apply to an employee
promoted to a higher classification. Probationary status shall in no
way affect the rights and status in the original or lower
classification.
F. Permanent status. Classified employees who satisfactorily complete
their probationary period shall have permanent employment status,
conditioned upon good behavior and satisfactory job performance. They
shall be subject to removal only for cause or for reason of economy,
after proper notice and the opportunity to be heard, as set forth under
the Civil Service Rules of the State of New Jersey.
§ 115-3 LICENSING § 115-4
78:313
§ 115-5. Separation from service.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PROMOTION — An advancement in classification having:
(1) New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility.
(2) A salary range having greater maximum.
B. Effect of reclassification. When there is a major change in the duties or
responsibilities of a position resulting in its reallocation to a higher
classification, the position shall be considered vacant and subject to
filling under promotional procedures. The incumbent in the reclassified
position may be permitted to serve pending promotional procedures.
C. Permanent promotions.
(1) Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing competitive promotional
examinations, in accordance with the Civil Service Rules of the
State of New Jersey.
(2) Where the Township Committee, after consultation with the New
Jersey Civil Service Department, finds that no employee is qualified
for promotion to the vacancy, it may order an open competitive
examination, open to candidates outside the Township's employ. In
post-examination selection, the Township Committee shall give
appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record
of past performance and the length and quality of his service.
(3) Selection shall be made from the top three candidates as
determined by the examination process of the Civil Service
Department of the State of New Jersey.
D. Provisional promotions. Pending the availability of a suitable eligibility
list, vacancies may be filled by a provisional promotion. A provisional
promotion shall have a maximum duration of six months.
A. Types of separation. Classified employees who have acquired
permanent employment status may be temporarily suspended from the
Township's employ by layoff or suspension, or permanently separated
by resignation or dismissal, subject at all times to the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Department of the State of New Jersey.
B. Layoff. Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a
reduction in the number of employees in a department of the Township
government, the required reductions shall be made in such job
classification or classifications as the Township may designate.
(1) As determined by the Township Committee, employees shall be laid
off in the reverse order of their length of service within each
affected job class in a particular department or division.
§ 115-4 ANDOVER CODE § 115-5
78:314
§ 115-6. Compensation.
(2) All provisional employees shall be laid off before probationary
employees, and all probationary employees shall be laid off before
any permanent employees.
(3) Permanent (including probationary) employees so affected shall be
given a minimum of 45 days' notice. Provisional employees so
affected shall be given a minimum of two weeks' notice or two
weeks' pay in lieu thereof.
C. Retirement.
(1) Employees enrolled in the Public Employees Retirement System of
the State of New Jersey shall be subject to the requirements and
provisions of that plan and shall be eligible to retire and receive
benefits as provided therein.
(2) Retired employees shall be entitled to health benefits in
accordance with Resolution R87-22, adopted February 25, 1987,
which adopted the provisions of Chapter 88, Public Laws of 1974,
as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the
State Health Benefits Commission thereunder. A copy of said
resolution is on file in the Township Clerk's office. Employees who
commence employment on or after January 1, 2012, shall be
required to be employed by and serve at least 25 years with the
Township of Andover in order to be eligible for retiree health
benefits in accordance with Resolution R87-22. [Amended
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
D. Resignation. An employee may resign from his position by tendering a
written resignation to his department director who in turn shall forward
it to the Township Committee.
(1) Unless there are disciplinary charges pending against the
employee, the Township Committee shall notify the employee in
writing of acceptance of his resignation in good standing.
(2) An employee shall give a minimum of 14 days' notice before the
effective date of his resignation. Failure to do so may result in loss
of vacation, sick and personal day credits. Oral resignation shall be
considered to be binding, but not as a resignation in good standing.
E. Involuntary separation of full-time classified employees. In the event of
the involuntary separation of a full-time classified employee, the
employee shall receive 60 days' notice (including accumulated vacation
leave), or be compensated at the rate of one day's wages for each day
less than the 60 days for which notice is required to be given, except in
cases of disciplinary dismissal for cause.
A. Pay periods. The Township normally shall pay its employees on a
biweekly payroll schedule, or a total of 26 times annually.
§ 115-5 LICENSING § 115-6
78:315
B. Computation of daily and hourly rates. Each payroll period normally
shall consist of 10 working days, so that the daily rate of pay of each
employee normally shall be 1/260th of his annual salary. The hourly rate
shall be computed by dividing the weekly rate by the number of hours in
the employee's prescribed workweek.
C. Deductions for leave without pay. Deductions in salary for leave without
pay shall be computed on the basis of hourly rate for less than a full day
or 1/260th of annual salary for a full day.
D. Compensation for overtime.
(1) All employees entitled to receive overtime pay under the provisions
of the Fair Labor Standards Act as amended shall be paid for such
authorized overtime at the rate of 1 1/2 times their hourly rate for
all overtime hours worked in excess of their regular forty-hour
week.
(2) Overtime pay shall be computed in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act as amended, the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder and the Civil Service and union contract.
(3) No overtime shall be permitted unless prior approval is granted by
the Township Committee or the persons delegated by the Township
Committee to approve overtime.
(4) The Township Committee in consultation with the Road Foreman or
the Chief of Police may grant compensatory time off in lieu of
overtime pay to employees under their supervision in accordance
with the Fair Labor Standards Act as amended and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
(5) The Township Committee may, upon recommendation of the
Administrator, grant compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay
to Township employees in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act as amended and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
E. Salary increments. Salary increments may be granted to each employee
effective January 1 of each year until the employee's salary has reached
the maximum salary provided for his position title. No employee,
however, shall be granted an annual salary increment until his
department head has certified in writing to the Township Committee
that during the past year the employee's performance and service were
such as to be deserving of an increase, setting forth the basis for such
conclusion. In the case of employees who will have served less than one
full year as of January 1, the salary increase, if any, to be effective at
that time shall be specified by the Township Committee at the time of
employment.45
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Longevity, which followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22, which also provided: "All current employees who
§ 115-6 ANDOVER CODE § 115-7
78:316
§ 115-7. Hours of work.
§ 115-8. Holidays and personal days.
A. Regular workweek.
(1) The normal workweek of the Township shall be a five-day week as
follows:
(a) Public works employees and police dispatchers: 40 hours per
week.
(b) All other employees not governed by collective bargaining
agreements: 35 hours per week.
(c) Employees governed by collective bargaining agreements: as
per agreements.
(2) It is recognized that the duties of certain employees require
attendance at meetings scheduled outside regular work hours. The
time spent at such meetings as part of the regular duties of the
employee shall receive overtime pay under the provisions of the
Fair Labor Standards Act as amended for all overtime hours
worked in excess of their regular workweek. This provision does
not govern full-time employees who are parties to collective
bargaining agreement.
B. Emergency. A department head or committee liaison may require any
officer or employee to be in attendance for work on any day that he
determines that a public emergency so requires.
A. Holidays.
(1) Not applicable to Police Department and union contracts. Due to
the emergency nature of work of the Police Department, the
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the members of
that Department. Members of the Department of Public Works and
public safety communication operators will be governed by their
respective union contracts.
(2) Paid holidays.
(a) The following official holidays with pay shall be observed by
the Township for permanent full-time employees:
[1] New Year's Day.
are not members of a collective bargaining unit and who had previously received longevity
pay under § 115-6F shall receive a one-time increase in annual salary, effective January 1,
2007, equal to the amount of annual longevity pay most recently received by that
employee plus an additional $250. Any employee who is not a member of a collective
bargaining unit and who has not previously received a longevity payment (i.e., employees
working five or less years for the Township) shall receive a one-time increase in annual
salary in the amount of $250, effective January 1, 2007."
§ 115-7 LICENSING § 115-8
78:317
[2] Martin Luther King's Birthday Observance.
[3] Presidents' Day Observance.
[4] Good Friday.
[5] Memorial Day Observance.
[6] Independence Day.
[7] Labor Day.
[8] Columbus Day Observance.
[9] General Election Day. (Office personnel may take another
day in lieu of Election Day with the understanding that the
time be taken within that calendar year.)
[10] Veterans' Day.
[11] Thanksgiving Day.
[12] Friday after Thanksgiving.
[13] Christmas Day.
[14] Lincoln's Birthday. [Added 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-25]
(b) Permanent part-time employees shall be governed by
Subsection E of this section. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it
shall be observed on the following Monday. If a holiday falls on
a Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding Friday.
(3) Compensation for working on holidays. When it is necessary to
require an employee to work on an official holiday, the Township
Committee, in consultation with the department head, may approve
the compensation of the employee at twice his hourly rate or may
permit the employee to take two hours off as compensatory time
with pay on a regular working day at a time approved by the
department head for each hour worked on the holiday.
(4) Not charged against vacation or sick leave. If an official holiday is
observed during an employee's vacation, he shall be entitled to an
additional vacation day, and if an official holiday occurs while an
employee is on sick leave, he shall not have the holiday charged
against his sick leave.
(5) Holiday pay for part-time employees. All provisional and permanent
part-time employees, who regularly work a consistent percentage
of the regular and normal workweek, shall receive pay credit for
the holiday on a proportionate basis, provided their work schedule
would have included work time on that holiday. The following chart
shall be used to compute pay credit for holidays:
§ 115-8 ANDOVER CODE § 115-8
78:318
§ 115-9. Personal days.
Holiday Leave Credits Prorated
Percentage of Full-
Time Position
Seven-Hours-Per-Day Position
(Hours/Month)
20 1.40
25 1.75
30 2.10
40 2.80
50 3.50
60 4.20
70 4.90
75 5.25
80 5.60
90 6.30
To calculate holiday leave credit for the year, multiply the
appropriate (hours/month) figure times the number of holiday
days in the year.
A. Amount of personal leave.
(1) All permanent, full-time employees of the Township whether in the
classified or unclassified service, shall be granted three personal
days during each calendar year.
(2) During the employee's first year of employment with the Township,
the employee shall earn one personal day for each four months of
employment for a total of three days after 12 months of
employment.
(3) After the first year of employment, the employee will be granted
three personal days each year.
B. Part-time employees. Permanent, part-time employees shall be eligible
for personal leave on a prorated basis.
C. Accumulation. Accumulation of personal leave beyond that earned in
any year shall not be permitted.
D. Personal leave upon separation. An employee who is retiring or who has
otherwise separated in good standing shall be entitled to the personal
leave allowance for the current year prorated upon the number of
months working in the calendar year in which the separation or
retirement becomes effective.
E. Compensation for working on holidays. Where it is necessary to
maintain regular service which requires an employee to work on an
§ 115-8 LICENSING § 115-9
78:319
§ 115-10. Vacations.
official holiday, he shall be compensated by receiving twice his hourly
rate or by being permitted to take two hours off as compensatory time
with pay on a regular working day at a time approved by the appointing
authority for each hour worked on the holiday.
F. Not charged against vacation or sick leave. If an official holiday is
observed during an employee's vacation, he shall be entitled to an
additional vacation day, and if an official holiday occurs while an
employee is on sick leave, he shall not have that holiday charged
against his sick leave.
G. Requirement for holiday pay. To be eligible to receive holiday pay an
employee must work the regularly scheduled work day before the
holiday and the regularly scheduled work day after the holiday, unless
he has been excused by his supervisor or unless his supervisor is
satisfied that his absence was justified.
A. Amount of vacation leave. All permanent, full-time employees of the
Township other than policemen working under a collective bargaining
agreement, whether in the classified or unclassified service, shall be
granted annual leave with pay for vacation purposes during each
calendar year in accordance with the following schedule based on
length of employment as of the 31st day of December of the preceding
calendar year. If not defined by a collective bargaining agreement, the
length of employment for policemen shall be calculated as of the
preceding anniversary date of their original appointment.
Length of Employment Vacation Leave
Up to one year of service One working day for each month
of employment.
After one year and up to
completion of
five years of service
12 working days
After five years and up to
completion of
10 years of service
15 working days
After 10 years and up to
completion of
15 years of service
18 working days
After 15 years and up to
completion of
20 years of service
20 working days
After completion of 20 years of
service
Add one working day per year
§ 115-9 ANDOVER CODE § 115-10
78:320
B. Amount of vacation leave for part-time, temporary or provisional
employees.
(1) Permanent part-time employees shall be eligible for vacation leave
on a prorated basis based upon the following chart:
Vacation Leave Credits
Prorated
Percentage of
Full-Time
7 Hours/Day
Position
12 Days/Year
(1-5 Years)
15 Days/Year
(5-15 Years)
20 Days/Year
(15 Years*)
Hours
(Hours/
Month) (Hours/Year) (Hours/Year) (Hours/Year)
20 1.40 17 21 28
25 1.75 21 26 35
30 2.10 25 31.5 42
40 2.80 33.5 42 56
50 3.50 42 52.5 70
60 4.20 50.5 63 84
70 4.90 59 73.5 98
75 5.25 63 79 105
80 5.60 67 84 112
90 6.30 75.5 94.5 126
EXAMPLE: If a part-time employee works 40% of the normal seven-hour per day position
(35 hours per week), that person shall be credited with vacation credit at a rate of 2.8 hours
per month. For the first five this would be a total of 33.5 hours vacation credit per year.
(2) Temporary or seasonal employees shall not be eligible for vacation
leave. New probationary and provisional employees shall be
entitled to one working day of vacation leave for each month of
service completed as of January 1.
C. Accumulation. Accumulation of vacation leave beyond that earned in
any year shall be permitted only wherein by reason of pressure of
Township business, such vacation periods or parts thereof not granted
shall accumulate and shall be granted during the next succeeding
calendar year only.
D. Choice of time. Vacations shall be scheduled by the Township
Committee so as to cause the least interference with the efficient
conduct of the Township business. So far as possible, the preference of
employees shall be accepted, with the preferences of those employees
having seniority given first recognition. Where seniority is equal,
determination shall be by lot. Subject to the approval of the Township
Committee, vacation leave may be taken from time to time in units of
full days.
§ 115-10 LICENSING § 115-10
78:321
§ 115-11. Leave of absence.
E. Vacations leave due upon separation. An employee who is retiring or
who has otherwise separated in good standing shall be entitled to the
vacation allowance for the current year prorated upon the number of
months working in the calendar year in which the separation or
retirement becomes effective and any vacation leave which may have
been carried over from the preceding calendar year.
A. Sick leave.
(1) As used in this subsection, "sick leave" shall mean paid leave that
may be granted to each permanent classified or unclassified
employee who through sickness or injury becomes incapacitated to
a degree that makes it impossible or highly impractical for him to
perform the duties of his position or who is quarantined by a
physician because he has been exposed to a contiguous disease.
Temporary employees shall not be eligible for sick leave.
(2) Full-time employees shall accumulate sick leave on the basis of 15
days of sick leave per year. In the first year of employment,
employees shall be entitled to one day of sick leave for each month
of employment. After the first year of employment, employees shall
be entitled to 1.25 days of sick leave for each month of
employment.
(3) Part-time permanent employees shall be eligible for sick leave on a
prorated basis based on the following chart:
Sick Leave Credits
Prorated
Percentage of
Full-Time
7 Hours/Day
Position
12 Days/Year
(first year) 15 Days/Year
Position (Hours/Month) (Hours/Year) (Hours/Year)
20 1.40 17 21
25 1.75 21 26
30 2.10 25 32.5
40 2.80 33.5 42
50 3.50 42 52.5
60 4.20 50.5 63
70 4.90 59 73.5
75 5.25 63 79
80 5.60 67 84
90 6.30 75.5 94.5
§ 115-10 ANDOVER CODE § 115-11
78:322
Sick Leave Credits
Prorated
Percentage of
Full-Time
7 Hours/Day
Position
12 Days/Year
(first year) 15 Days/Year
EXAMPLE: If a part-time employee works 40% of the normal seven-hour-per-day position
(35 hours per week), that person shall be credited with sick leave at the rate of 2.8 hours
per month. For every month of the first calendar year of employment this would be a total
of 33.5 hours sick leave credit. For every year thereafter, a total of 42 hours per year
should be credited.
(4) Sick leave may be accumulated during each employee's length of
service. [Amended 7-23-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-13]
(a) At the time of retirement or separation, the employee shall be
entitled to a maximum payment of $15,000 computed at the
rate of 1/2 day per full day of verifiable sick leave accumulated
and not previously used. Any employee who, at the time of the
adoption of this section, has accumulated sick leave that would
entitle him/her to pay of above $15,000 if he/she were to retire
or separate from employment with the Township as of the date
of the adoption of this section shall be entitled to such amount
in excess of $15,000 if he/she does not use the time before the
date of actual retirement or separation. However, the amount
to which such employee shall be entitled in excess of $15,000
shall not increase and can be no greater than said amount at
the time of adoption of this section.
(b) Annual buyback. Any employee who is not subject to a
collectively negotiated agreement (“noncontractual
employee”) shall be entitled to sell accumulated sick time back
to the Township as provided herein. Any noncontractual
employee may annually sell back to the Township any accrued
unused sick time in his/her bank in excess of 75 days, in an
amount not to exceed $5,000. A noncontractual employee(s)
must maintain at least 75 days in his/her sick bank. Sick days
sold back shall be compensated at a rate of 75% of the
employee’s then-current per diem rate. Requests for sick time
buyback must be submitted to the Administrator no later than
September 1 of each year. If the request is accepted by the
Township Committee, then payment shall be made on the first
regular payday of November. [Added 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
(c) Sick leave buyback upon retirement. An employee who is
retiring and has filed his/her application with the State of New
Jersey Division of Pensions and Benefits, who has submitted
his/her intent to retire in writing to the governing body and
intent has been confirmed by adoption of a resolution, may
§ 115-11 LICENSING § 115-11
78:323
request a waiver of the seventy-five-day minimum
requirement. Requests must be in writing to the Township
Administrator upon adoption of the resolution accepting the
application to retire with the amount not to exceed $5,000.
[Added 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-11]
(5) Sick leave due upon separation. An employee who is retiring or who
has otherwise separated in good standing shall be entitled to the
sick allowance for the current year prorated upon the number of
months working in the calendar year in which the separation or
retirement becomes effective and any sick leave accumulated as
per Subsection A(4).
(6) Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness in his immediate family (not to exceed five working
days in one calendar year without the approval of the Township
Committee), quarantine restrictions, or pregnancy or disabling
injuries. The term "immediate family" is defined as father, mother,
wife or husband and the employee's children, or any member of the
immediate household.
(7) When an employee is absent from work because of illness for more
than one day, his supervisor may require an employee to submit a
certificate from the employee's physician or the Township
Physician relating to his illness. In the case of illness of a chronic or
recurring nature causing an employee's repeated absence for
periods of one day or less, his department director may require one
medical certificate for every six-month period.
B. Death in immediate family. Each employee of the Township shall receive
a leave of absence with pay for five consecutive days if there is a death
in the employee's immediate family. "Immediate family" is defined as
father, mother, wife or husband, the employee's children, brother, sister,
grandparents, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-inlaw.
"Five consecutive days off" is defined as five working days and shall
not include nonworking days which fall within the five-day period
immediately following the death. The working days which the employee
takes off in the event of such death shall not be charged against the
employee's accrued sick leave.
C. Special leave.
(1) If an employee is unable to report to work due to a weather
emergency or civil emergency, he may charge the time off to
accrued vacation leave, personal leave or sick leave, provided that
he properly notifies his supervisor of his inability to report to work
(2) If an employee wishes to observe a religious or national holiday for
which no regular holiday has been declared, he may charge the
time off to accrued vacation, personal or sick leave, provided that
he gives proper notification to his supervisor.
§ 115-11 ANDOVER CODE § 115-11
78:324
D. Leave of absence as result of injury in line of duty.
(1) If a full-time employee is injured in the line of duty, the Township
Committee may, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-7, pass a resolution
giving the employee up to one year's leave of absence with pay.
When such an action is taken, the employee shall not be charged
any sick leave time for time lost due to such injury.
(2) Prior to the passage of the resolution referred to in Subsection
D(1), the employee shall agree in writing to reimburse the
Township to the extent of any temporary disability benefits under
workers' compensation he may receive as a result of the injury.
(3) Prior to and as a condition of the Township Committee's grant of
extended leave under this subsection, a Township-appointed
physician must examine the employee and certify the injury or
disability to the Township Committee.
E. Court leave and jury duty.
(1) Court leave. Court leave is the authorized absence, without charge
to leave and without loss of compensation, of an employee from
official duty for attending court in a nonofficial capacity as a
witness on behalf of the government. The court may be a state,
federal, county or municipal court.
(a) Appearance in court in connection with official Township
business is considered normal duty time.
(b) Appearance in court at the call of government when not jobconnected
is chargeable to court leave.
(c) Appearance in court under other circumstances is a private
matter chargeable to personal leave only.
(2) Jury duty. An employee who is under proper summons from a court
to serve on a jury shall be granted leave of absence with pay for the
entire period regardless of the number of hours per day or days per
week actually served on the jury during the period as per N.J.S.A.
2A:69-5.46
F. Military leave.
(1) Any permanent employee, part-time or full-time, who is a member
of the National Guard, Naval Militia, Air National Guard, or a
reserve component of any of the Armed Forces of the United States
who is required to engage in field training, shall be granted a
military leave of absence with regular pay for the period of such
training as is authorized by law. The paid leave of absence shall be
in addition to his vacation. Permanent part-time employees shall
receive pay for such leave on a prorated basis.
46.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1995, c. 44. See N.J.S.A. 2B:20-1 et seq.
§ 115-11 LICENSING § 115-11
78:325
§ 115-12. Benefits.
(2) When a full-time or part-time permanent employee is called to
active duty or inducted into the military or naval forces of the
United States, he shall be granted an indefinite leave of absence
without pay for the duration of such active military service,
provided that he does not voluntarily extend such service. Each
employee shall be reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority
provided he reports for duty with the Township within 60 days
following his honorable discharge from military service. He shall
notify the Township of his intent to report for duty 30 days prior to
his discharge from military service.
G. Leave without pay. Leave without pay may be granted to full-time or
part-time permanent employees and to full-time unclassified
employees. Normally, it shall be granted only when the employee has
used his accumulated sick and vacation leave in the case of illness, or
his vacation leave if leave without pay is requested for reasons other
than illness. Written request for leave without pay shall be initiated by
the employee and approved by the Township Committee, upon
favorable recommendation of his department director. Such leave,
except for military leave without pay, shall not be approved for a period
of longer than six months at one time. The Township Committee may
extend such leave for an additional six months or any portion thereof.
H. Requests for leave. A request for any type of leave shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Township Committee. Such request, whenever
possible, shall be made far enough in advance to permit approval, and
at the same time to permit coverage for the particular employment so
that municipal service shall not suffer. In the case of sick leave, the
employee shall notify his supervisor immediately if he is unable to
report for work.
A. Hospitalization; medical surgical; major medical benefits insurance.
(1) The Township shall provide medical and surgical benefits under the
New Jersey State Health Benefits Plan for all employees whose
normal workweek is 30 hours or more; provided, however, that all
employees who are working 20 hours per week or more and are
receiving benefits pursuant to the ordinance as it existed on
November 21, 1995, shall continue to receive said benefits
regardless of the hours they may be required to work.
(2) The insurance coverage provided for herein shall extend to the
spouse of an eligible employee and to an eligible employee's
dependent, unmarried children as may be provided for in the policy
in effect.
(3) Retired employees are entitled to health benefits in accordance
with § 115-5C(2).
§ 115-11 ANDOVER CODE § 115-12
78:326
§ 115-13. Political activity.
(4) All employees upon retirement or separation shall be covered by all
benefits under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1985, as amended.
B. Dental plan; prescription; eye glasses/exam; deferred compensation
plan; disability insurance. The Township shall provide a dental plan,
prescription, eye glasses/exam, deferred compensation plan and
disability insurance for all employees whose normal workweek is 30
hours or more; provided, however, that all employees who are working
20 hours per week or more and are receiving benefits pursuant to the
ordinance as it existed on November 21, 1995, shall continue to receive
said benefits regardless of the hours they may be required to work. If
available, the deferred compensation plan and disability insurance plan
are voluntary.
C. Educational incentive pay for employees. The Township will pay
incentive pay to all employees for courses taken in accordance with the
following policy:
(1) The employee must have been employed by Andover Township for a
minimum of 18 months, and there must be no letter of resignation
on file.
(2) Only courses which are job-related and which will further develop
the employee's career with the Township will be eligible for
reimbursement.
(3) The courses must be approved by the Township Committee prior to
attendance.
(4) The yearly maximum amount allowable under this provision shall
be $250 payable on or before December 15 and shall not be added
to base pay.
(5) In order to be eligible for reimbursement, proof must be produced
that the course was completed and successfully passed.
(6) Courses eligible to be included under these provisions shall be
defined as a court consisting of 20 hours or more. Seminars and
conferences shall be deemed to be ineligible under these
provisions.
A. Policy. It shall be the policy of the Township to appoint all employees,
either classified or unclassified, without regard to political
considerations. For the purposes of this section, Township employees
are defined to include full-time, temporary probationary, seasonal or
part-time personnel receiving an annual or hourly reimbursement for
their services from the Township.
B. Prohibited political activities.
§ 115-12 LICENSING § 115-13
78:327
§ 115-14. Conflicts of interest.
§ 115-15. Outside employment.
(1) Township employees shall not engage in any political activities
during working hours or on Township property.
(2) Township employees shall not make financial contributions for the
purpose of supporting the nomination or the election of any person
to public office or party position within the Township. No person
holding a position of authority over an employee shall directly or
indirectly invite, demand or accept payment or contribution from
Township employees for campaign purposes.
(3) Township employees whose principal employment is in connection
with any activity financed in whole or in part by loans or grants
made by the United States or by any federal agency may also be
subject to the restrictions of the Federal Hatch Act. The Hatch Act
restrictions shall apply only to political activity which is partisan.
C. Rights preserved. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
Township employees from becoming or continuing to be members of
any political party, club or organization, provided that they do not serve
as officers of such party, club or organization; attending political
meetings; expressing their views on political matters outside of working
hours and off Township property; circulating petitions on public
questions; or voting with complete freedom in any election.
A. Conflicts of interest prohibited. No officer of employee elected or
appointed in the Township shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in
any contract with the Township, or in the compensation for work done
or for materials or supplies furnished to the Township or to any
contractor or other person furnishing the same to the Township, nor
shall he participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or
receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward for his
services except the fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to law.
B. Violations. Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this
section or of any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest
shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal
from office therefor. Any officer or employee who knowingly permits
any provision of this section to be violated by any of his subordinates
shall also be guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal
therefor.
A. Full-time employees in either the classified or unclassified service shall
not accept outside employment or engage in outside business activities
without the prior approval of the department head and the Township
Committee. Applications for permission to accept outside employment
shall be made in writing to the department director who shall forward
the same to the Township Committee with his recommendation. The
§ 115-13 ANDOVER CODE § 115-15
78:328
§ 115-16. Disciplinary actions.
application shall set forth pertinent information concerning the type
of activity to be engaged in, the name and address of the prospective
employer, and the hours of such employment.
B. No application for permission to accept outside employment shall be
approved by the Township Committee if in its judgment, there is any
reasonable probability that such outside employment will interfere with
the employee's performance or compromise the employees position
with the Township through a conflict of interest or if such employment
shall exceed 20 hours per week.
A. Causes for disciplinary action. An employee who has acquired
permanent status may be disciplined in accordance with civil service
regulations, general law and this chapter. The causes for which
disciplinary action may be invoked include, but are not limited to the
following:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Incompetency.
(3) Inefficiency.
(4) Incapacity due to mental or physical disability.
(5) Insubordination.
(6) Serious breach of discipline.
(7) Intoxication while on duty.
(8) Chronic or excessive absenteeism.
(9) Disorderly conduct.
(10) Immoral conduct.
(11)Willful violation of any of the provisions of the civil service statutes,
rules or regulations or other statutes relating to the employment of
public employees.
(12) Criminal conviction for any act or offense.
(13) Negligent or willful damage to public property.
(14) Negligent or willful waste of public supplies.
(15) Conduct unbecoming an employee in the public service.
(16) The use or attempted use of one's authority or official influence to
control or modify the actions of a Township employee who is acting
in accordance with his assigned duties.
§ 115-15 LICENSING § 115-16
78:329
§ 115-17. Personnel records.
The Township Clerk shall provide that adequate personnel records are
maintained for each employee of the Township. Such records shall include
dates of appointment and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings
and any appropriate information. Upon written request to the Township
Clerk, an employee may review his personnel file.
§ 115-18. Medical examinations.
The Township Committee may schedule medical examinations for all
Township employees annually or more frequently if required.
§ 115-19. Surety bonds.
(17) Participation in any form of political activity during working hours.
B. Suspension. When in the opinion of the Township Committee an
employee's performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of
dismissal, the Township Committee may suspend or furlough the
employee without pay or with reduced pay.
C. Right of appeal. An employee who is suspended, fined or demoted more
than three times in any one year or who is suspended for more than five
days at one time or for a period exceeding 15 days in aggregate in any
calendar year shall have the right of appeal to the Civil Service
Department, and the Civil Service Department shall have the power to
revoke or modify the action of the Township Committee.
D. Unionized employees. Employees who are covered by the police labor
contract shall be guided by the procedures outlined in their contract
pertaining to disciplinary action.
A. Required. Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of
his office or position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or
expenditure of public moneys or funds, and any other officer or
employee who may be required to do so by the Township Committee
shall, before entering upon the duties of his office or position, execute
and deliver a surety bond in such amount as may be fixed by the
Township Committee, binding him to the Township in its corporate
name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his
duty. Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall
execute such bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the
Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his bond to the Treasurer,
before he enters upon the discharge of his duties of the office or
employment.
B. Failure to obtain. If any officer or employee neglects to execute and
deliver his bond as herein required within 30 days after due notification
§ 115-16 ANDOVER CODE § 115-19
78:330
§ 115-20. Driver's license record check.
§ 115-21. Criminal background checks. [Added 11-30-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-25; amended 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26; 2-26-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-1]
of his election or appointment, his office or position may be declared
vacant by the Committee.
C. Form and requisites. In every case where any person is required by the
laws of the state or by any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for
the faithful performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a
corporate surety authorized to do business in this state and the
premium shall be paid by the Township. Each bond shall be approved by
the Township Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more blanket
bonds when so approved.
A. Statement of policy. It is the policy of the Township of Andover that a
driver's license record check shall be required for:
(1) All full-time employees hired after the effective date of this chapter.
(2) All employees who are required to operate Township-owned
vehicles.
(3) All members of the Township Fire Department.
B. Confidentiality. All information secured as a result of the driver's
license record checks shall be confidential and shall be released only to
appropriate officials of the Township of Andover involved in reviewing
and acting on applications.
C. Procedure.
(1) All applicants for employment within the Township of Andover shall
complete the authorization for permitting the Township to obtain
the motor vehicle record as well as any other information relevant
to the employment of such applicant.
(2) All information obtained herewith shall be provided to the members
of the Andover Township Committee to be considered in connection
with the application process.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A
determination whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and the
State Bureau of Identification of the Division of State Police.
§ 115-19 LICENSING § 115-21
78:331
DEPARTMENT — The Township of Andover Police Department.
VOLUNTEER — A person who has direct, nonsupervised and ongoing
interaction in the course of his/her service with minors. This includes
but is not limited to a coach, assistant coach and manager of a team.
YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, association or
other organization which provides recreational, cultural, charitable and
social activities for persons younger than 18 years of age.
B. Request for criminal background check; costs.
(1) The Township requires that all employees and volunteers of a
youth-serving organization, as a condition of utilizing Township
facilities, request through the Department that the State Bureau of
Identification in the Division of State Police conduct a criminal
history record background check on each prospective and current
employee or volunteer of the organization.
(2) The Division of State Police shall inform the Department whether
the person's criminal history record background check reveals a
conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in
Subsection C of this section.
(3) The Township shall conduct a criminal history record background
check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check from
the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
(4) The organization shall bear the costs associated with conducting
criminal history background checks in accordance with the fees
established by the State Bureau of Investigation in the Division of
State Police.
C. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service. A person
may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a
nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal history
record background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the
following crimes and offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:1.4-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
§ 115-21 ANDOVER CODE § 115-21
78:332
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes, except Paragraph (A) of Subsection A of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection C(1) of this section.
D. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
(1) Prospective or current employees and volunteers of youth-serving
organizations shall submit their name, address, fingerprints and
written consent to the organization for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The organization shall submit
this documentation to the Andover Township Chief of Police, who
shall coordinate the background check.
(2) The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting
criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
section.
(3) Nothing in this chapter shall restrict a prospective or current
employee or volunteer of a youth-serving organization from
participating in such organization once the background check
information has been submitted to the State Police and prior to the
Township receiving the results of said background check.
(4) The Chief of Police or his designee shall coordinate a criminal
history record background check every three years after the initial
check is performed.
E. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record information.
(1) Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal
justice purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted
to authorized personnel of the youth serving organization, on a
need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule
or regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance
or resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal
history record information obtained under this section.
(2) Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal
history record information solely to the authorized purpose for
which it was obtained, and criminal history record information
furnished shall not be disseminated to persons or organizations not
authorized to receive the records for authorized purposes. Use of
this record shall be limited solely to the authorized purpose for
which it was given, and it shall not be disseminated to any
unauthorized person. This record shall be destroyed immediately
after it has served its intended and authorized purpose. Any person
§ 115-21 LICENSING § 115-21
78:333
violating the federal or state regulations governing access to
criminal history record information may be subject to criminal and/
or civil penalties.
F. Employee or volunteer may challenge accuracy of report. If this
criminal history record may disqualify an applicant for any purpose, the
person making the determination shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record. The applicant shall be afforded
a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, in which to correct
and complete this record. A person is not presumed guilty of any
charges or arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on
the record.
G. Evidence of affirmative rehabilitation. Notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, if such prospective employee's or volunteer's criminal
history record background check reveals a disqualifying offense, but
such person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, such
rehabilitation may be considered as a factor in the determination of
whether or not to disqualify such individual from service.
H. Exemptions. The Township shall only permit the following exemptions
under this chapter:
(1) Any person who, by virtue of his or her occupation, is required by
statute to undergo a federal and state criminal history record
background check similar in nature to the requirements contained
herein, and who can provide proof of the results of such
background check, is exempt from the requirement hereunder until
three years have elapsed since the most current background check.
(2) Any police officer actively employed on a full-time basis by either
the State of New Jersey, or a county or municipality thereof, is
exempt from the requirement hereunder.
I. Township assistance. In the event the State Police will not perform the
criminal history background check for the youth-serving organization
which utilizes Township facilities, the Township may submit the
application for state and federal criminal history background checks on
its behalf. The youth-serving organization shall pay all fees associated
with the criminal history background checks.
J. Remedies for breach by youth-serving organizations. Any violation of
this chapter by a youth-serving organization is considered a serious
threat to the health and life of the youth of the Township. As a result,
upon violation, the Township may suspend or terminate use of Township
facilities, and the youth-service organization and the officer who
executed the affidavit shall be subject to fines and other penalties. In
determining the remedy such factors as whether the breach was
intentional, the severity of the noncompliance, and the good-faith steps
taken to cure the violation should be considered.
§ 115-21 ANDOVER CODE § 115-21
78:334
Chapter 119
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Personnel policies — See Ch. 115.
§ 119-1. Establishment. [Amended 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-29]
There is hereby created in and for the Township of Andover, a Police
Department which shall consist of a Chief of Police, one Lieutenant, three
Sergeants and no more than 10 police officers. The Township Committee
shall determine the compensation for each position.
§ 119-2. Power and duties of Department.
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Township of Andover; direct and control traffic;
provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement agencies;
and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 119-3. Designation of appropriate authority. [Amended 8-14-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-21; 9-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-24; 4-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-6; 10-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the governing body is the appropriate
authority. The appropriate authority shall be responsible for the overall
performance of the Police Department and shall adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations for the government of the Police Department and for the
discipline of its members.
§ 119-4. Power and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
routine day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the
appropriate authority, the Chief of Police shall:
A. Administer and enforces rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the Police Department
and its officers and personnel;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
§ 115-21 LICENSING § 119-4
78:335
§ 119-5. Qualifications for appointment.
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey statutes. The Township Committee may also
require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department shall
successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological examination.
§ 119-6. Suspension or removal of members or officers.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended, removed
or fined for any cause other than for incapacity, misconduct or disobedience
as provided in the New Jersey statutes and the Police Department's rules
and regulations.
§ 119-7. Special law enforcement officers.
The Township Committee may appoint from time to time special law
enforcement officers in accordance with New Jersey statutes for terms
not exceeding one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers
and duties provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall
not be continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall
not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of Police may authorize special law
enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the same powers and
authority as regular members of the Police Department including the
carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 119-8. Contracted off-duty employment. [Amended 11-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-18]
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision; and
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such forms as
shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the Police
Department during the preceding month, and make such other reports
as may be requested by such authority.
A. Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Andover
Township Police Department (Police Department) and to authorize the
outside employment of Township police while off-duty, the Township
hereby establishes a policy regarding the use of said officers.
(1) Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police-related employment for private employers or school districts
only during off-duty hours and at such times as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency
duty for the Township.
§ 119-4 ANDOVER CODE § 119-8
78:336
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the written approval of the Chief of Police, which approval
shall be granted if in the sole opinion of the Chief, such employment
would not be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good
reputation of the Police Department, and officer or officers who are
to perform the work.
B. Escrow accounts.
(1) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer shall obtain approval of the Chief of Police by
providing an estimate of the number of hours such law enforcement
services are required, establishing an escrow account with the
Township Treasurer by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the
rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth in
Subsection D hereof for the total estimated hours of service, as well
as any additional escrow amounts as may be required.
(2) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify
that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees
for the number of hours specified in the request for services. No
services shall be performed by any off-duty law enforcement officer
unless all fees and compensation required in the manner described
above have been deposited with the Township Treasurer. No officer
shall provide any such services for more hours than are specified in
the request for services.
(3) In the event the funds in the escrow account become depleted, the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease, and
continuing services shall not be performed or posted until
additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
(4) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
C. Requests for services. All requests to the Township for the services of
off-duty law enforcement officers in the Andover Township Police
Department shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for posting at least
10 days before such services are required. Any law enforcement
officers, when so employed by the Township, shall be treated as an
employee of the Township; provided, however, that wages earned
outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of
law enforcement officers so employed, nor shall hours for outside
employment be considered in any way compensable as overtime.
[Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-18]
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services.
§ 119-8 LICENSING § 119-8
78:337
§ 119-9. Effect on previous procedures, rules, regulations and
orders.
All rules, regulations, procedures and orders previously adopted by the
Township Committee by resolution not in conflict with the provision of this
amended chapter shall remain in force.
Chapter 122
(1) Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be $76.50 per hour effective through
December 31, 2019. Effective January 1, 2020, the rate of
compensation shall be based on a rate equal to time and one-half of
top step Sergeant, according to the salary guide within the
collective bargaining agreement between the Township of Andover
and FOP Lodge No. 177. [Amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-01]
(2) An additional fee of $5 per hour is hereby established to cover
administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of the
Township of Andover. [Amended 8-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-13]
(3) Payment to off-duty law enforcement officers for outside
employment shall be made through the Township payroll process
and shall be made on a separate check and shall not be added to
the base pay.
E. Indemnification and hold harmless. Prior to the performance of services
by any off-duty law enforcement officer, the person or entity requesting
such services shall agree, in writing, to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless Andover Township, its officers, officials, agents and
employees from any and all liability, claims, losses, suits, actions,
demands, damages, costs and attorneys' fees that may arise as a result
of activities or actions of such officers which arise from the police
officers' employment.
F. Insurance. The person or entity requiring such services shall provide
Andover Township, prior to utilization of the Township police officer,
with a certificate of insurance from an insurance company acceptable
to the Township evidencing:
(1) Workers' compensation and employer's liability coverage in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey; and
(2) Commercial general liability insurance with limits of $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 general aggregate; combined
single limit for bodily injury and property damage; including
premises/operations, broad-form contractual liability and personal
and advertising injury.
§ 119-8 ANDOVER CODE § 119-9
78:338
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 68.
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that is determined to be
abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
BUILDING — Any building, or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings, and
appurtenances belonging thereto.
INTERESTED PARTIES — Includes any resident of the Township of Andover,
any owner or operator of a business within the Township of Andover, or
any organization representing the interests of residents, business owners or
otherwise engaged in furthering the revitalization and improvement of the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage, or other interest secured by a building or any part thereof.
OWNER — The holder or holders of title in fee simple.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — A person designated or appointed by the Township
Committee pursuant to P.L. 1942, N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5, or any officer of the
municipality qualified to carry out the responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq. as designated by resolution of the Township Committee.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings, the provision of affordable housing, the restoration of abandoned
property, the revitalization and improvement of urban neighborhoods, or
similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by virtue of its staff,
professional consultants, financial resources, and prior activities to carry
out the rehabilitation of vacant buildings, as set forth under N.J.S.A.
55:19-80.
§ 122-2. Abandoned Property Rehabilitation Act.
The Township of Andover does hereby adopt and enact all provisions of the
Abandoned Property Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
§ 122-3. Abandoned property criteria.
§ 119-9 LICENSING § 122-3
78:339
A. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one of
the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the Township Committee that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the Township Committee and no rehabilitation has taken place
during that same six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of a determination by the Township Committee pursuant to
this section;
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property as of the date of a determination by the
Township Committee pursuant to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the
Township Committee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 for one
or more of the following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the municipality has secured the property in order
to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., so
long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the building was
previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
§ 122-3 ANDOVER CODE § 122-3
78:340
§ 122-4. Designation of public officer.
Pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1942, c. 112,47 the Township Committee
is hereby designated as the public officer for the purpose of carrying
out the responsibilities established by this chapter and shall have all the
responsibilities established by this chapter and shall have all the
responsibilities and powers provided by all applicable laws.
§ 122-5. Establishment of abandoned property list.
the time of the determination of abandonment by the Township
Committee.
A. The Township Committee shall identify abandoned property within the
Township of Andover for the purpose of establishing an abandoned
property list. The abandoned property list shall include, for each
abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot number, the name
of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot. The
Township Committee may add properties to the abandoned property list
at any time and may delete properties at any time when it finds that the
property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the Township of Andover has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate which has been
placed on the abandoned property list may be removed if the owner of
the certificate pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the property
within 30 days after the property is placed on the list; provided,
however, that if the owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property was first placed on the
list, the property shall be restored to the abandoned property list in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The Township Committee shall establish the abandoned property list
and any additions or deletions thereto by authorizing the publication of
the list in the official newspaper of the Township of Andover, which
publication shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after
publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property
included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify
property determined to be abandoned, setting forth the owner of
record, if known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The
Township Committee, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also
send out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization that receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5.
§ 122-3 LICENSING § 122-5
78:341
owner of record is not known for a particular property and cannot be
ascertained by the exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector,
notice shall not be mailed but instead shall be posted on the property
in the manner as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall
indicate the factual basis for the Township Committee's finding that
the property is abandoned property, as that term is defined herein and
in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and shall specify the information relied upon in
making such finding. In all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice
shall also be filed by the Township Committee in the office of the Sussex
County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a
formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be captioned with
the name of the Township of Andover as plaintiff and the name of the
property owner as defendant, as though an action had been commenced
by the Township against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
Township Committee within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the
certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was
sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the Township
Committee shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was
published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a
property on the abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the
Township Committee shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30
days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings contained in
the notice, the Township Committee shall schedule a hearing for
redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the list shall be
presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner, through the
submission of an affidavit or certification asserting that the property is
not an abandoned property, can demonstrate that the property was
erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be
accompanied by supporting documentation, such as, but not limited to,
photographs, repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole
ground for appeal shall be that the property in question is not
abandoned property as that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The Township Committee shall decide any timely filed appeal
within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the
property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the Township Committee pursuant to Subsection D of this
section, by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules,
a summary trial proceeding in the Superior Court, Sussex County. Such
action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of
decision mailed by the Township Committee. The sole ground for appeal
and new hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in
question is not an abandoned property as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
§ 122-5 ANDOVER CODE § 122-5
78:342
§ 122-6. Interested parties may request additions to abandoned
property list.
§ 122-7. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
determination, except that for good cause shown the Court may extend
the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The Township Committee shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined by it or on appeal not
to be abandoned and may, in its discretion, remove properties from said
list whenever it deems such removal appropriate under the
circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
of Andover shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect
to properties on the list, at any time after at least one property has been
placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for appeal
with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an appeal
brought by the property owner of that first property.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-105, any interested party may submit a
written request to the Township Committee asserting that any property
within the Township of Andover should be included on the abandoned
property list. The written request must specify the street address and
block and lot number of the property to be included and the grounds for
its inclusion. Within 30 days of receipt of any such request, the
Township Committee shall provide a written response to the party,
either indicating that the property will be added to the list or, if not, the
reasons for not adding the property. For the purposes of this section,
the term "interested parties" shall include any resident of the Township
of Andover, any owner or operator of a business within the Township of
Andover or any organization representing the interests of residents,
business owners or otherwise engaged in furthering the revitalization
and improvement of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
B. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the Township Committee
shall provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such
hearing. The party shall provide the Township Committee with notice at
least 10 days before the hearing of its intention to participate and the
nature of the testimony or other information that it proposes to submit
at the hearing.
A. An owner may request removal of his/her property from the abandoned
property list prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes
and Township liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
§ 122-5 LICENSING § 122-7
78:343
§ 122-8. Sale of restricted tax liens.
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and by posting cash
or a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required
on the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner, and reviewed and approved by the Township
Committee, stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the
cost of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Township Committee
that the conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the Township
Committee finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating
the conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned, as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on
the property, the Township Committee may grant an extension of
time of not more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work,
during which time no further proceedings will be taken against the
owner or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the
Township which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other Township liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list or, if
an appeal has been filed as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax Sale
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., on or after the 90th day following the
expiration of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The Township of Andover may, at its option, require that the sale of the
tax sale certificate or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax
sale certificate held by the Township be subject to the express condition
§ 122-7 ANDOVER CODE § 122-8
78:344
that the purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude
any rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from
the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and to post a
bond in favor of the Township to guarantee the rehabilitation or repair
of the property. The Township Committee may waive a requirement
to post a bond imposed by the Township for any purchaser, assignee
or transferee of a tax sale certificate that provides documentation
acceptable to the Township Committee that the purchaser, assignee
or transferee is a qualified rehabilitation entity as defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-80. The cost of rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond
shall be added to the amount required to be paid by the owner for
redemption of the property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of
the tax sale certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the
property shall be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the
Tax Collector, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts
of monies expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of
the property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at
the delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the Township of Andover, shall be
permitted to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of
appraising the costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all
other acts required to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation
or repair of the property. No rehabilitation or repair work shall be
commenced, however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement, holding the Township of Andover harmless,
has been filed with the Township Committee.
C. If the Township of Andover acquires the tax sale certificate for a
property on the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written
notice to the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the
filing of the notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, the Township shall be
permitted to enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that
caused the property to be included on the abandoned property list. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day period
the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the Township in writing that
the owner or mortgagee has elected to perform the remediation itself.
When the owner or mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself,
it shall be required to post bond in favor of the Township of Andover in
order to ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the bond
shall be determined by the Township Committee.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the Township of Andover, as so
certified by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the
remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and
right to any other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after
the filing of any lien by the Township, except for Township taxes, liens
and assessments and any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill
§ 122-8 LICENSING § 122-8
78:345
§ 122-9. Special tax sale; criteria for bidders.
Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together
with any interest thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and
recorded as a lien by the entity incurring the cost with the Sussex
County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this chapter
shall be considered a public purpose and public use for which the power
of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
A. The Township of Andover may hold special tax sales with respect to
those properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which
are also on the abandoned property list.
B. The Township Committee shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on
properties at the sale which may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with Township plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property, consistent with Township plans and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the Township Committee may determine are
necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold will be
rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
C. The Township Committee may establish minimum bid requirements for
a special tax sale that are less than the full amount of the taxes, interest
and penalties due to help ensure that the properties will be
rehabilitated or otherwise utilized in a manner consistent with the
public interest.
D. The Township Committee may combine properties in said special tax
sale into bid packages and require that bidders place a single bid on
each package, rejecting any and all bids on individual properties that
are submitted.
E. The Township Committee may sell said properties subject to the
provision that, if the purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that
has been set forth as a condition of sale or misrepresents any material
qualification that has been established as a condition of eligibility to bid
pursuant thereto, then the properties and any interest thereto acquired
by the purchaser shall revert to the Township, and any amount paid by
the purchaser at the special tax sale shall be forfeit to the Township.
§ 122-8 ANDOVER CODE § 122-9
78:346
§ 122-10. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
§ 122-11. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the Township may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the Township and his/her interest in the property or
properties reverts to the Township, the Township may subsequently
designate the entity previously designated as an eligible purchaser as
the winning bidder for the property or properties and assign the tax
sale certificates to that entity on the basis of that entity's bid at the
special tax sale, subject to the terms and conditions of the special tax
sale.
G. The Township of Andover shall provide notice of a special tax sale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms
of sale established by the Township pursuant to this section. Nothing
shall prohibit the Township from holding a special tax sale on the same
day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the Township of Andover acquires a
tax sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property list at tax
sale, the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of
redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months following
the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the Township of Andover is the purchaser at tax sale of any
property on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an
action to foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remedied in
full.
A. If an entity other than the Township of Andover has purchased or taken
assignment from the Township of a tax sale certificate on a property
that has not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that
§ 122-9 LICENSING § 122-11
78:347
§ 122-12. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
property shall not be added to the abandoned property list under the
following limited circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Township taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either Subsection a or b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86,
as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure proceedings in a
timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed abandoned only if
it meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property, under the
provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the Township Committee
or the Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester
with a certification that the property fulfills the definition of an
abandoned property according to the criteria established in N.J.S.A.
55:19-81 and 55:19-82.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the Township of
Andover may be brought by the Township in the Superior Court, Sussex
County. If the Court shall find that the property is abandoned pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, and that the owner or party in interest has failed to
submit and initiate a rehabilitation plan, then the Court may authorize
the Township to take possession and control of the property and to
develop its own rehabilitation plan for the property.
B. Where the Township has been granted possession and control, the
Township may commence and maintain those further proceedings for
the conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part
thereof, that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost
and expenses of rehabilitation, and for the sale of the property;
provided, however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the
property if the owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control
and possession of the property as permitted by N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the Township, obtain appropriate construction permits
for rehabilitation or, in the alternative, submit formal applications for
§ 122-11 ANDOVER CODE § 122-12
78:348
funding the cost of rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies
providing such funding, within the initial six-month period, shall be
deemed clear prima facie evidence that the owner has failed to take any
action to further the rehabilitation of the property.
D. A complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84 and Subsection A of this
section shall include:
(1) Documentation that the property is on the municipal abandoned
property list or a certification by the public officer that the property
is abandoned; and
(2) A statement by an individual holding appropriate professional
qualifications that there are sound reasons that the building should
be rehabilitated rather than demolished based upon the physical,
aesthetic or historical character of the building or the relationship
of the building to other buildings and lands within its immediate
vicinity.
E. Within 10 days of filing a complaint, the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis
pendens with the County of Sussex recording officer.
(1) At least 30 days before filing the complaint, the Township shall
serve a notice of intention to take possession of an abandoned
building. The notice shall inform the owner and interested parties
that the property has not been legally occupied for six months and
of those criteria that led to a determination of abandonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
(2) The notice shall provide that unless the owner or a party in interest
prepares and submits a rehabilitation plan to the appropriate
Township officials, the Township will seek to gain possession of the
building to rehabilitate the property and the associated cost shall
be a lien against the property, which may be satisfied by the sale of
the property, unless the owner applies to the Court for
reinstatement of control of the property as provided in N.J.S.A.
§ 55:19-92.
(3) After the complaint is filed, the complaint shall be served on the
parties in interest in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of
Court.
(4) After serving the notice of intention pursuant to this subsection, the
Township may enter upon that property after written notice to the
owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, in order to
secure, stabilize or repair the property, or in order to inspect the
property for purposes of preparing the plan to be submitted to the
Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-89.
F. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
§ 122-12 LICENSING § 122-12
78:349
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the Township Committee
or the Court to be the projected cost of rehabilitation.
G. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
Court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
H. The Court shall approve any plan that, in the judgment of the Court, is
realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and reuse
of the property, which is the subject of the complaint.
(1) If the Court approves the owner's plan, then it may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the
owner fails to carry out any step in the approved plan, then the
Township may apply to the Court to have the owner's bond
forfeited, possession of the building transferred to the Township to
complete the rehabilitation plan and authorization to use the bond
proceeds for rehabilitation of the property.
(2) The owner shall provide quarterly reports to the Township on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the
property. The owner shall provide those reports to the Court on its
activities that the Court determines are necessary.
(3) The Court may reject a plan and bond if it finds that the plan does
not represent a realistic and expeditious means of ensuring the
rehabilitation of the property or that the owner or his
representatives or agents, or both, lack the qualifications,
background or other criteria necessary to ensure that the plan will
be carried out successfully.
I. Where the Court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the Township Committee to act as
§ 122-12 ANDOVER CODE § 122-12
78:350
§ 122-13. Township rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
monitor of compliance and progress. If the owner fails to carry out
any step in the approved plan, then the Township may apply to the
Court to have the posted bond forfeited, to transfer possession of the
building to the Township to complete the rehabilitation plan, and to
grant authorization to use the bond proceeds for the rehabilitation.
The owner or other party in interest shall provide bimonthly reports
to the Township Committee on its activities and progress toward
rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
J. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a plan
and posting a bond meeting the same conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-87. The plan must be submitted within 60 days following the
Court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the
mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause
shown. If the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's
plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation and reuse and may appoint the
Township Committee to act as monitor of the party's compliance. The
mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
quarterly reports to the Court and the Township on its activities and
progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
K. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Court and the Township Committee on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
If the mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material step
in the approved plan, then the Township Committee shall notify the
Court which may order the posted bond forfeit, grant the Township
possession of the property, and authorize the Township to use the
proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation of the property.
L. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including Court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement, or, in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
M. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the Township may submit a plan to the Court which
conforms with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall
designate whether the Township or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall
undertake the rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-90.
§ 122-12 LICENSING § 122-13
78:351
A. The Court shall grant the Township possession of the property if it finds
that:
(1) The proposed rehabilitation and reuse of the property is
appropriate and beneficial;
(2) The Township is qualified to undertake the rehabilitation and reuse
of the property; and
(3) The plan submitted by the Township represents a realistic and
timely plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
B. The Township shall take all steps necessary and appropriate to further
the rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with the plan
submitted to the Court. In making its findings pursuant to this section,
the Court may consult with qualified parties, including the Department
of Community Affairs, and, upon request by a party in interest, may hold
a hearing on the plan.
C. The Township Committee may designate a qualified rehabilitation entity
for the purpose of exercising the Township's rights where that
designation will further the rehabilitation and reuse of the property
consistent with Township plans and objectives.
D. Regardless of whether the Township exercises its rights directly or the
Township Committee designates a qualified rehabilitation entity
pursuant to this section, while in possession of a property the Township
shall maintain, safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property.
Notwithstanding the Township's possession of the property, the owner
of the property shall not be relieved of any civil or criminal liability or
any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the owner.
E. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the Township of
Andover to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security
interests with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than
municipal liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court must find
as follows:
(1) The Township sought to obtain the necessary financing from the
senior lienholder which declined to provide such financing on
reasonable terms;
(2) The Township sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the
senior lienholder which refused to provide such subordination; and
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
Court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Sussex
County.
F. Where the Township has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to
act on its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide
bimonthly reports to the Township Committee on its activities and
§ 122-13 ANDOVER CODE § 122-13
78:352
§ 122-14. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The Township
or qualified rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall provide such
reports to the Court as the Court determines to be necessary. If the
Court finds that the Township or its designee has failed to take diligent
action toward rehabilitation of the property within one year from the
grant of possession, then the Court may request that the Township
designate another qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights,
or if the Township fails to do so, may terminate the order of possession
and return possession and control of the property to its owner.
G. The Township of Andover shall file a notice of completion with the
Court, and shall also serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage
holder or lienholder, at such time as the Township has determined that
no more than six months remain to the anticipated date on which
rehabilitation will be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of
the Township Committee, attesting that the rehabilitation is anticipated
to be completed within six months, and a statement setting forth the
actions as it plans to undertake consistent with the plan.
H. Notwithstanding the granting of possession to the Township, nothing in
this chapter shall be deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any
obligation the owner or any other person may have for the payment of
taxes or other Township liens and charges, or mortgages or liens to any
party, whether those taxes, charges or liens are incurred before or after
the granting of possession. The granting of possession shall not
suspend any obligation the owner may have as of the date of the
granting of possession for payment of any operating or maintenance
expense associated with the property, whether or not billed at the time
of the granting of possession.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the grant of
possession, but no later than 30 days after the Township has filed a
notice of completion with the Court or, in the event the notice of
completion is filed within less than one year of the grant of possession,
within 30 days after the Township has filed notice. The Court may allow
additional time for good cause if that additional time does not
materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place undue hardship
on the Township, or affect any of the terms or conditions under which
the Township has applied for or received financing for the rehabilitation
of the property.
B. Any petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of
the property shall:
(1) Include a plan for completion of the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property consistent with the plan previously approved by the
Court;
§ 122-13 LICENSING § 122-14
78:353
§ 122-15. Obligations of owner prior to grant of petition.
§ 122-16. Procedure of Township seeking to gain title to property;
authorization to sell; proceeds.
(2) Provide legally binding assurances that the owner will comply with
all conditions of any grant or loan secured by the Township or repay
those grants or loans in full, at the discretion of the maker of the
loan or grant; and
(3) Be accompanied by payment equal to the sum of: 1) all Township
liens outstanding on the property; 2) all costs incurred by the
Township in bringing action with respect to the property; 3) any
costs incurred by the Township not covered by grants or loans to be
assumed or repaid pursuant to this section; and 4) any costs
remaining to complete rehabilitation and reuse of the property, as
determined by the public officer, which payment shall be placed in
escrow with the Clerk of the Court, County of Sussex, pending
disposition of the petition.
A. Prior to the granting of a petition on the part of the owner by the Court
pursuant to § 122-14, the owner may be required to post a bond or
other security in an amount determined by the Court, after consultation
with the public officer, as likely to ensure that the owner will continue
to maintain the property in sound condition. That bond or other security
shall be made available to the Township to make any repair on the
property in the event of a code violation which is not corrected in timely
fashion by the owner.
B. The owner may seek approval of the Court to be relieved of this
requirement after five years, which shall be granted if the Court finds
that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during that
period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety of the
tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has
remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion.
A. If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and
possession of the property within 30 days after the Township has filed a
notice of completion or in any event within two years after the initial
grant of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that
may be set by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition, upon
petition from the Township, the Court may grant the Township title or
authorize the Township to sell the property, subject to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 55:19-96.
B. Where the Township seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase
the property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall
approve, and may place the proceeds of the sale in escrow with the
Court.
§ 122-14 ANDOVER CODE § 122-16
78:354
§ 122-17. Authority of public officer to place lien on property;
remedies.
The public officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on the
property to cover any costs of the Township in connection with a proceeding
under this chapter, incurred prior to the grant by the Court of an order
of possession, which may include costs incurred to stabilize or secure the
property to ensure that it can be rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner.
§ 122-18. Eminent domain proceedings; establishment of fair
market value.
C. The Court may authorize the Township to sell the building free and
clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all such liens,
claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to the proceeds of sale
with the same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with the
provisions of this section, except that municipal liens shall be paid at
settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be
distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. The Township may seek approval of the Court to sell the property to a
third party when the Court finds that such conveyance will further the
effective and timely rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
E. Upon approval by the Court, the Township shall sell the property on
such terms and at such price as the Court shall approve, and may place
the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying Court costs in the order
of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97. The proceeds paid pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-96 shall be distributed in the following order of priority:
(1) The costs and expenses of sale;
(2) Other governmental liens;
(3) Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or
indebtedness incurred by the Township and granted priority lien
status pursuant to Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 55:19-98;
(4) A reasonable development fee to the Township consistent with the
standards for development fees established for rehabilitation
programs by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency;
(5) Other valid liens and security interests, in accordance with their
priority; and
(6) The owner.
A. With respect to any eminent domain proceeding carried out under
N.J.S.A. 55:19-56, the fair market value of the property shall be
established on the basis of an analysis which determines independently:
§ 122-16 LICENSING § 122-18
78:355
§ 122-19. Property deemed not abandoned; criteria; certification of
abandonment.
(1) The cost to rehabilitate and reuse the property for such purpose as
is appropriate under existing planning and zoning regulations
governing its reuse or to demolish the existing property and
construct a new building on the site, including all costs ancillary to
rehabilitation such as, but not limited to, marketing and legal costs;
(2) The realistic market value of the reused property after
rehabilitation or new construction, taking into account the market
conditions particular to the neighborhood or subarea of the
Township in which the property is located; and
(3) The extent to which the cost exceeds or does not exceed the market
value after rehabilitation, or demolition and new construction, and
the extent to which any "as is" value of the property prior to
rehabilitation can be added to the cost of rehabilitation or
demolition and new construction without the resulting combined
cost exceeding the market value as separately determined.
B. If the appraisal finds that the cost of rehabilitation or demolition and
new construction, as appropriate, exceeds the realistic market value
after rehabilitation or demolition and new construction, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption in all proceedings under this subsection that
the fair market value of the abandoned property is zero, and that no
compensation is due the owner.
A. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and the furtherance of
rehabilitation work as authorized by said permits.
B. If an entity or person other than the Township has purchased or taken
assignment for the Township of a tax sale certificate on a property that
has not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property
shall not be placed on the abandoned property list if:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all Township taxes
and liens on the property in the tax year when due; and
(2) The owner of the certificate takes action to initiate a foreclosure
proceeding within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, and diligently pursues
foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
C. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
D. Upon request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate seeking
to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property pursuant to
§ 122-18 ANDOVER CODE § 122-19
78:356
§ 122-20. Registration fees. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $250. The fee for the
first renewal is $500, the fee for the second through fifth renewal is $1,500
each year, and the fee for all renewals after the fifth is $5,000 each year.
Chapter 125
RECORDS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government, public
records — See Ch. 3, Art. XXV.
§ 125-1. Policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of this Township that in accordance
with the Public Open Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.) all government
records kept in the course of official duties by any Township officer or
employee shall be readily accessible for inspection, copying or examination,
with certain exceptions for the protection of the public interest.
§ 125-2. Government records.
N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the Township Tax Collector shall,
in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a certification of
abandonment that the property satisfies the definition of an abandoned
property in accordance with this chapter.
A. For purposes of this chapter, a government record is any paper, written
or printed book, document, drawing, map, plan, photograph, microfilm,
data-processed or image-processed document, information stored or
maintained electronically or by sound recording or in a similar device,
or any copy thereof, that has been made, maintained or kept on file in
the course of his or its official business by any officer, commission,
agency or authority of the state or any political subdivision thereof,
including subordinate boards thereof.
B. The term "government record" shall not include interagency or
intraagency advisory, consultative, or deliberative material.
C. A government record shall not include the following information, which
is deemed to be confidential for the purposes of P.L. 1963, c.73 (N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.), as amended and supplemented:
(1) Any copy, reproduction or facsimile of any photograph, negative or
print, including instant photographs and videotapes of the body, or
any portion of the body, of a deceased person taken by or for the
medical examiner at the scene of death or in the course of a post-
§ 122-19 LICENSING § 125-2
78:357
mortem examination or autopsy made by or caused to be made by
the medical examiner except:
(a) When used in a criminal action or proceeding in this state
which relates to the death of that person;
(b) For use as a court of this state permits, by order after good
cause has been shown and after written notification of the
request for the court order has been served at least five days
before the order is made upon the county prosecutor for the
county in which the post-mortem examination or autopsy
occurred;
(c) For use in the field of forensic pathology or for use in medical
or scientific education or research; or
(d) For use by any law enforcement agency in this state or any
other state or federal law enforcement agency.
(2) Criminal investigatory records.
(3) Victims' records, except that a victim of a crime shall have access
to the victim's own records.
(4) Trade secrets and proprietary commercial or financial information
obtained from any source. For the purposes of this item, "trade
secrets" shall include data processing software obtained by a
public body under a licensing agreement which prohibits its
disclosure.
(5) Any record within the attorney-client privilege. This item shall not
be construed as exempting from access attorney or consultant bills
or invoices, except that such bills or invoices may be redacted to
remove any information protected by the attorney-client privilege.
(6) Administrative or technical information regarding computer
hardware, software and networks which, if disclosed, would
jeopardize computer security.
(7) Emergency or security information or procedures for any building
or facility which, if disclosed, would jeopardize security of the
building or facility or persons therein.
(8) Security measures and surveillance techniques which, if disclosed,
would create a risk to the safety of persons, property, electronic
data or software.
(9) Information which, if disclosed, would give an advantage to
competitors or bidders; information generated by or on behalf of
public employers or public employees in connection with any
sexual harassment complaint filed with a public employer or with
any grievance filed by or against an individual or in connection with
§ 125-2 ANDOVER CODE § 125-2
78:358
§ 125-3. Custodian of records; records request form.
collective negotiations, including documents and statements of
strategy or negotiating position.
(10) Information which is a communication between a public agency
and its insurance carrier, administrative service organization or
risk management office.
(11) Information which is to be kept confidential pursuant to court
order, and that portion of any document which discloses the social
security number, credit card number, unlisted telephone number or
driver's license number of any person, except for use by any
government agency, including any court or law enforcement
agency, in carrying out its functions or any private person or entity
acting on behalf thereof, or any private person or entity seeking to
enforce payment of court-ordered child support, except with
respect to the disclosure of driver information by the Division of
Motor Vehicles as permitted by section 2 of P.L. 1997, c. 188
(N.J.S.A. 39:2-3.4), and except that a social security number
contained in a record required by law to be made, maintained or
kept on file by a public agency shall be disclosed when access to the
document or disclosure of that information is not otherwise
prohibited by state or federal law, regulation or order or by state
statute, resolution of either or both houses of the Legislature,
executive order of the Governor, rule of court or regulation
promulgated under the authority of any statute or executive order
of the Governor.
D. The personnel or pension records of any individual in the possession of
a public agency, including but not limited to records relating to any
grievance filed by or against an individual, shall not be considered a
government record and shall not be made available for public access,
except that:
(1) An individual's name, title, position, salary, payroll record, length of
service, date of separation and the reason therefor, and the amount
and type of any pension received shall be a government record;
(2) Personnel or pension records of any individual shall be accessible
when required to be disclosed by another law, when disclosure is
essential to the performance of official duties of a person duly
authorized by this state or the United States, or when authorized by
an individual in interest; and
(3) Data contained in information which disclosed conformity with
specific experiential, educational or medical qualifications required
for government employment or for receipt of a public pension, but
not including any detailed medical or psychological information,
shall be a government record.
§ 125-2 LICENSING § 125-3
78:359
§ 125-4. Inspection and copying of public records.
§ 125-5. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation or
executive order, the Clerk will fulfill the request as soon as possible, but not
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk is
designated as the custodian of records.
B. The Township hereby designates the Assistant Municipal Clerk as the
deputy custodian of records and the Chief of Police as deputy custodian
of records for the Police Department.
C. The Clerk shall adopt forms for the use by any person who requests
access to a record, and such form shall contain all of the information
required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(f).
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk or
designated deputy custodian of records, during regular business hours,
on the form(s) provided. All requests for public records shall be as
specific as possible, including the type of record and date created, if
known.
B. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Municipal Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
"government record," as defined by law, or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the Attorney,
who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the
Municipal Clerk.
C. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from a
copy of the record that portion which is exempt from public access and
shall promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
D. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record once the record is available.
E. If request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
F. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations, agreements and individual employment contracts) and
public salary and overtime information.
§ 125-3 ANDOVER CODE § 125-5
78:360
later than seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the
record is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event
that the Clerk fails to respond within seven days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected
not to provide a name, address or telephone number or other means of
contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required to respond until
the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the
original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the
requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk
receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 125-6. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 125-7. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a record,
the record and the requestor will remain in the presence of the Municipal
Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times. Under no
circumstances shall any government record be removed from the office
where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the custodian or his or her
authorized representative.
§ 125-8. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records. [Amended 2-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record, provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
A. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in
size: $0.07 per page.
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps.
(1) Zoning Map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied utilizing paper 8 1/
2 inches by 11 inches or 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in size; or the
actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
§ 125-5 LICENSING § 125-8
78:361
(2) Street Map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied utilizing paper 8 1/
2 inches by 11 inches or 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in size; or the
actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
(3) Site plan: actual cost.
(4) Subdivision plat: actual cost.
(5) Tax Maps: $7 or actual cost.
(6) Engineering plans: actual cost.
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) Copy of the Code Book: actual cost charged by publisher.
D. Police reports and photographs. [Amended 9-26-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-12]
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person during regular business hours.
(2) Police accident reports, if requested other than in person: same as
Subsection A above, in addition to an administrative fee of up to $5
per report, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
(3) Photographs. Copies of color photographs under eight by 10
inches: $2 per page; photographs larger than eight by 10: $7.50,
provided, however, that where a photostatic copy is required, then
in that event, the charge will be in accordance with Subsection A
above.
E. Electronic records.
(1) Copy of videotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: $1 per tape.
(2) Copy of audiotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: $1.50 per
tape.
(3) Copy of electronic document or database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described in Subsection G below. For security
reasons, the use of a floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is
prohibited.
(a) Floppy disk: $0.40.
(b) CD: $0.40.
(4) Where a copy of a video, audio or electronic record is requested
and the requestor has provided videotape, audio cassette,
computer diskette or CD, there will be no charge if the record can
be duplicated in-house by Township employees. However, where it
§ 125-8 ANDOVER CODE § 125-8
78:362
§ 125-9. Effect on preexisting ordinances.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances and specifically Chapter 3 of the
Code of the Township of Andover setting forth general fees, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
is necessary to out-source the request, a special service charge
may apply.
F. Miscellaneous medium.
(1) Microfilm: actual cost.
G. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred.
H. Conversion of records from one medium to another. Cost of duplication
plus special service charges as follows:
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form: actual cost.
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: actual cost.
(3) If the request for a record is: a) not in a medium not routinely used
by the Township; b) not routinely developed or maintained by the
Township; or 3) requires substantial amount of manipulation or
programming of information technologies, the Township will
impose a special charge based on the cost for extensive use of
information technology or for labor cost of personnel providing the
services that is actually incurred by the Township or attributable to
the Township for the programming, clerical and supervisory
assistance required, or both. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior
to it being incurred.
I. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated
cost of filling the request.
K. For purposes of this chapter, "actual cost" shall mean the cost of
materials and supplies used to make a duplicate.
§ 125-8 LICENSING § 125-9
78:363
Chapter 127
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 115.
§ 125-9 ANDOVER CODE § 125-9
78:364
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16]
§ 127-1. Participation required for eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 127-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 127-3. Participation deemed not required.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 127-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 127-2 above,
the pension certifying officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program if that individual:
A. Township Administrator;
B. All Township department heads who are appointed by the Township
Committee and who report directly to the Township Administrator;
C. Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal Court Judge; and
D. Any gubernatorial appointees who serve in county or municipal
government for a fixed term.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Registered Municipal Clerk;
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector; and
I. Principal Public Works Manager/Superintendent.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
§ 127-1 LICENSING § 127-3
78:365
§ 127-4. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 127-2 herein and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 127-3 ANDOVER CODE § 127-4
78:366
Chapter 131
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Soil removal — See Ch. 140.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 127-4 LICENSING § 127-4
78:367

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 131-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Site Plan Review
Ordinance of the Township of Andover.”
§ 131-2. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations, and
standards to guide in the preparation and review of site plans which
shall insure the orderly development of the Township.
B. All site plan proposals shall comply to the requirements set forth for the
zone district in which it shall be located. In addition, the Board shall be
empowered to require the applicant to provide such on-site, off-site
and/or off-tract improvements or proportion thereof as may be deemed
reasonable in light of the proposed standards for these improvements
and the project's impact on the community at large.
C. This site plan chapter shall set forth guidelines pertaining to, but not
limited to, performance standards, submittal requirements,
environmental impact statement procedures, exemptions,
requirements, guarantees required, and other appropriate matters.
§ 131-1 LICENSING § 131-2
78:369

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 131-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or permit to build in a mapped area or for a structure not related
to a street.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
FINAL SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The approval required prior to issuance of
a building permit or other permit authorizing the development of land.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by a township for the maintenance of any improvement
required by this act.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which:
Does not involve:
(1) A planned development, when permitted;
(2) Any new street;
An extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42;
(3)
(4) Industrial uses;
(5) Natural production uses;
(6) Garden apartments;
(7) Residential uses of more than three units;
(8) Service stations and public garages;
(9) Cemeteries;
(10)Mortuaries;
(11)Public utilities;
(12)Tourist homes;
A.
§ 131-3 LICENSING § 131-3
78:371
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by a
township, including cash, provided that the township shall not require more
than 10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development, planned industrial development, or other similar type
development, if permitted.
PRELIMINARY ARCHITECTURAL PLANS — Architectural drawings
prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project
illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to its site
and immediate environs, including front view and elevations of buildings.
PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN APPROVAL — Indicates that the preliminary
site plan as submitted meets all requirements of applicable Township
ordinances and confers upon the applicant all of the benefits provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
REVIEWING BOARD — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
whichever has jurisdiction over the particular application.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
(13)Wholesale establishments;
(14)Warehouses;
(15)Car washes;
(16)Mental health and drug treatment facilities;
(17) Juvenile and criminal supervision and correction facilities;
(18)A plan with 10 or more off-street parking spaces.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements established by
ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
B.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings. drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, water and sewer facilities, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting, and screening devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
C.
§ 131-3 ANDOVER CODE § 131-3
78:372
ARTICLE III
Applicability of Site Plan Requirements
§ 131-4. Site plan review and approval required.
Site plan review and approval shall be required before any change of use,
or before any excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site or placing of
any fill on lands contemplated for development, and, except as hereinafter
provided, no building permit shall be issued for any building or use, or
reduction or enlargement in size or other alteration of any building or
change in use of any building including necessary structures unless a
site plan is first submitted and approved by the reviewing board and no
certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
development conform to the plans as approved by the reviewing board.
§ 131-5. Exceptions.
§ 131-6. Performance standards.
In reviewing any site plan, the board shall consider:
A. Site plan approval shall not be required for any detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings or any uses accessory thereto, such as a private
garage or storage shed incidental to residential uses; but this shall not
limit the requirements for submission and approval of subdivision plats
as otherwise required by Township ordinances.
B. The Land Use Board has the jurisdiction to waive site plan approval
under certain circumstances. The Land Use Board Engineer shall issue
a report making a recommendation in regard to an application for site
plan waiver. The Land Use Board may waive site plan approval
requirements if the construction or alteration or change of occupancy
or use does not affect existing circulation, drainage, relationship of
buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other
considerations of site plan review. [Amended 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10]
C. An application for approval of site plan waiver shall be submitted to the
Land Use Board. The applicant shall submit five copies of the
application along with a survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor
indicating the existing lot lines and all existing structures and buildings
as well as such other information as the Land Use Board Engineer may
require. The applicant shall also submit an application fee of $250 and
an initial escrow fee of $750. [Added 10-22-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-10]
A. Circulation.
(1) Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to
the site shall be reviewed with particular emphasis on the provision
and layout of parking areas, off-street loading and unloading,
§ 131-4 LICENSING § 131-6
78:373
movement of people, goods and vehicles from access roads, within
the site, between buildings and vehicles and particularly firefighting
and emergency equipment.
(2) The appropriate Township body shall require that all parking
spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. Access
to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to interfere
as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and to provide
vehicles with a rapid and safe ingress and egress.
B. Building layout. The design and layout of buildings, streets, drives, and
parking areas shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically
pleasing design and efficient arrangement. Particular attention shall be
given to safety and fire protection, impact on surrounding development
and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands, and preservation of
existing natural resources.
C. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to insure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards
shall be a type approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the
design standards of Article X. Directional lights shall be arranged so as
to eliminate glare and reflection on adjacent properties.
D. Buffering. Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to
minimize effects of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement
of people and vehicles, and to shield activities from adjacent properties
when necessary. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs,
bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
E. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be provided as part of the overall
site plan design and integrated into building arrangements, topography,
parking and buffering arrangements. Landscaping shall include trees,
bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture,
art and the use of building and pavement materials as set forth in this
chapter.
F. Signs. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians
and shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Township ordinances.
G. Drainage, water and sewers. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal,
water supply and garbage disposal shall be reviewed and considered.
Particular emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of existing systems
and the need for improvements, both on-site and off-site, to adequately
carry runoff and sewage and to maintain an adequate supply of water at
sufficient pressure.
H. Garbage disposal. Garbage disposal shall be adequate to insure
freedom from vermin and rodent infestation. All disposal systems shall
§ 131-6 ANDOVER CODE § 131-6
78:374
§ 131-7. Submission of application; requirements.
meet state and municipal requirements as to installations and
construction, including Township health ordinances.48
I. Environmental impact. Environmental elements relating to soil erosion
and sediment control as contained in Township ordinances,
preservation of significant structures of historical or architectural
importance to the Township, preservation of trees, protection of
watercourses and resources, noise, topography, soil and animal life
shall be reviewed and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse
impact on these elements.
J. Zoning compliance. The development shall be consistent with the
provisions of the Township zoning ordinances,49 including but not
limited to height, minimum lot area, and mandatory open spaces,
except where application is being made for a variance.
K. Design standards. The design standards contained in Article X herein
shall be followed unless the board grants an exception therefrom
pursuant to § 131-17.
L. Taxes. All taxes and assessments against the site shall be paid prior to
any preliminary approval.
M. Recycling. All site plans shall be prepared to include an area for the
storage and pickup of recyclable materials. All site plans for the
construction of 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing and
any commercial or industrial development proposal for the utilization of
1,000 square feet or more of land shall include separate specific
facilities for the separation, collection and pickup of recyclable
materials on or within the site. The provisions of Chapter 144, Solid
Waste, Article I, Recycling, of this Code shall be complied with.
A. The applicant shall file, at least 14 days before the date of the regular
public monthly meeting of the Planning Board, eight certified copies of
a site plan and three copies of an application for site plan review,
together with all other plans, drawings, and documentation required
herein or by any rule of the Planning Board, with the Township Clerk.
(1) The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Township
Clerk.
(2) The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to
be taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of
the Board.
B. A fee shall accompany the application in the amount set forth in Article
VII.
48.Editor's Note: See Part II, Board of Health Legislation, of this Code.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 131-6 LICENSING § 131-7
78:375
§ 131-8. Preliminary approval; site plan details.
A complete application for preliminary approval shall also consist of the
following:
C. The applicant shall file an application with the County Planning Board
of the County of Sussex together with four copies of the site plan and
one copy of the Township application for site plan approval.
A. A properly completed site plan application form.
B. The required fees.
C. Eight copies of the site plan prepared and certified by a licensed civil
engineer or surveyor on which the following is set out:
(1) A survey of the subject property, the scale of which shall not exceed
one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Locator map showing the nearest roads and intersections.
(3) All existing structures, wooded areas and topography with two-foot
intervals, except where the slope exceeds 25%, in which case
contour intervals may be 10 feet, along with proposed grading and
contours. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7; 5-29-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(4) All lot lines, dimensions and area in square feet and owners of lots
within 200 feet of the site and locations of all structures within 100
feet of the property and, for plans with areas greater than 50 acres,
owners within 500 feet and structures within 200 feet.
(5) The location and designation of streams, ponds, brooks, national
wetlands, floodplains, and other natural features, sidewalks,
driveways, streets, easements, watercourses and right-of-way,
existing and proposed, showing size and locations, curbing,
sightlines and radii, and the location of existing and proposed
property lines, buildings, watercourses, railroad, bridges, culverts,
drain pipes, and any natural features such as wooded areas and
rock formations. Streets and driveways in the development shall be
of sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably located to
accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting
and emergency equipment to buildings and coordinated so
as to compose a convenient system consistent with the official map
and the circulation element of the Master Plan, and so oriented as
to permit, within the limits of practicability and feasibility, the
buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar gain.
(6) Existing zones of the development site and of any different zones
within 200 feet of the property and, for plans with areas greater
than 50 acres, owners within 500 feet and structures within 200
feet.
§ 131-7 ANDOVER CODE § 131-8
78:376
(7) Title, key map location of development and the name and address
of record owner and development applicant and tax map lot and
block and site planner preparing the site development plan.
(8) Proposed use or uses of the land and buildings, "including a
description of industrial process to be carried out."
(9) Scale and graphic scale.
(10) North arrow, in same direction on all sheets exclusive of
architectural plans.
(11) Utility and drainage plan details and calculations, existing and
proposed.
(12) Preliminary architectural plans showing front view or front
elevation of the proposed structure's or structures' first floor and
finished grade elevations at all corners and entrances and locations
of structures with areas, setbacks, side lines and rear yard
distances.
(13) Preliminary plans for parking, lighting, loading, signs, landscaping,
buffering, etc., with dimensions of parking lot, parking spaces,
loading areas, access drives, traffic circulations, types of surface,
paving and curbing, lighting specifications and radius of light
source, and specific type of landscaping and garbage disposal in
conformance with the design standards shown in Article X, and
plans for model homes as set forth in Subsection C(26) of this
section.
(14) Any off-tract improvements necessitated by the proposed
development.
(15) A copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, required
by Chapter 136 of this Code.
(16) All existing or proposed exterior lighting, freestanding and/or on
building, for size, nature of construction, lumens, heights, area and
direction of illumination, radius of light source, footcandles
produced, as well as time controls proposed for outdoor lighting
and display.
(17) All existing and proposed signs and their sizes; nature of
construction and location, height and orientation, including all
identification signs, traffic directional signs and arrows,
freestanding and facade signs and time control for sign lighting, if
any.
(18) Landscape plan, which shall be signed by a licensed landscape
architect.
(19) Environmental impact statement in accordance with Article IV.
§ 131-8 LICENSING § 131-8
78:377
(20) Comparative table of zoning requirements and development
proposals.
(21) The site plan shall include, within the limits of practicability and
feasibility, provisions for the conservation of energy and use of
renewable energy sources, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-41(e).
(22) The proposed location of all drainage, sewage and water facilities
and fire protection facilities, with proposed grades, sizes,
capacities and types of materials acquired or required across
adjoining properties. The method of sewage and waste disposal and
waste incineration, if any, shall be shown, and percolation tests
from sufficient locations on the site to allow a determination of
adequacy by the Township Board of Health where septic tanks and
leaching fields are proposed and permitted shall be included. Such
plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, with
recommendations to the Planning Board. In some circumstances
additional information beyond these may be required of the
applicant. If so, these should be carefully indicated by the
reviewing board as early in the proceedings as possible for the
orderly presentation of the application.
(23) A written description of the proposed operations of the building or
buildings, including the number of employees or members of
nonresidential buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be
worked and the maximum number of employees on each shift;
expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic; emission of noise, glare,
air and water pollution; safety hazards; and anticipated expansion
plans incorporated in the building design. If the use is located in
the industrial zone district, describe in detail all processes and
manufacturing or assembling or fabricating to be conducted on
site.
(24) If applicant plans to warehouse, store, wholesale or sell any of the
following listed items: oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil,
oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils and
liquid propane, or all pesticides designated as "prohibited,"
“restricted,” or "specially restricted":
(a) Describe in detail the proposed use and the storage facilities
for the subject materials.
(b) Describe in detail all proposed methods and processes
designed to prevent water pollution, air pollution, fumes or
dust.
(c) Set forth fire prevention measures proposed.
(d) Describe in detail the proposed methods of storage of the
materials.
§ 131-8 ANDOVER CODE § 131-8
78:378
(e) List and describe in detail the proposed methods of storage of
the materials.
(f) Set forth in detail proposed methods for complying with the
New Jersey Pesticide Control Act of 1971, N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et
seq., as amended, N.J.A.C. 7:26-6.13 and 7:26-6.14 and also
N.J.A.C. 7:30-1.5 through 7:30-1.7.
(g) Set forth in detail proposed methods for compliance with
Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972, 53 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.
(h) Set forth in detail the proposed methods of compliance with
regulations relating to hazardous substances as defined by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency at 40 F.R. 59961,
December 30, 1975, proposed pursuant to Section
311(B)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
1972, 53 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
(i) Describe in detail all other methods of protection of public
health, safety and welfare of the persons in property of
residence on adjacent properties, the neighborhood, and in the
community.
(25) Recycling. All site plans shall be prepared to include an area for the
storage and pickup of recyclable materials. All site plans for the
construction of 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing
and any commercial or industrial development proposal for the
utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land shall include
separate specific facilities for the separation, collection and pickup
of recyclable materials on or within the site. The provisions of
Chapter 144, Solid Waste, Article I, Recycling, of this Code shall be
complied with.
(26) Model homes.
(a) If the developer intends to utilize a unit as a model within a site
plan during the period necessary for the sale of new units
within the development, the following shall be shown on the
preliminary site plan:
[1] Location of model unit including lot dimensions;
[2] Setbacks of the unit from the lot line;
[3] Dimensions and setbacks of parking area;
[4] Proposed construction specifications for parking area;
[5] Lighting;
[6] Landscaping;
[7] Parking space dimensions and off-street parking capacity.
§ 131-8 LICENSING § 131-8
78:379
(b) There shall be only one model unit within each development.
(c) Each model unit shall have an off-street parking area providing
parking for a minimum of six automobiles.
(d) The base course of the parking area and driveway shall be at
minimum a six-inch gravel subbase type 5 Class A.
(e) Exterior lighting shall be installed adequate in the opinion of
the Township Engineer to illuminate the parking area.
(f) A lawn and landscaping shall be installed.
(g) Any proposed sign shall be included on the plan showing
setbacks and size and construction materials.
(h) In the event the developer decides to install a model unit after
the construction of site plan improvements, a plot plan
showing same, in accordance with these standards, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Construction Official
prior to construction.
(27) Fire suppression facilities as required in § 159-7E of Chapter 159,
Subdivision of Land. [Added 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
D. All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists.
(1) The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utility's distribution supply lines
and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of
its tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utility Commissioners, and the developer shall
provide the Township with four copies of a final plan showing the
installed location of these utilities.
(2) The developer shall submit to the board, prior to the granting of
final approval, a written instrument from each service utility which
shall evidence full compliance or intended full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots which
abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore
been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service
from those overhead lines, but any new service connections from
the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
(3) In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or
an extension of service or other such condition occur as a result of
the development and necessitate the replacement or relocation of
such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be
underground.
§ 131-8 ANDOVER CODE § 131-8
78:380
§ 131-9. Approval by County Planning Board required.
§ 131-10. Submission of soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(4) An installation under this subsection to be performed by a serving
utility shall be exempt from any provisions requiring performance
guaranties and inspection and certification by the Township
Engineer.
E. A written description of the proposed operations of the building or
buildings, including the number of employees or members of
nonresidential buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be worked
and the maximum number of employees on each shift; expected truck
and tractor-trailer traffic; emission of noise, glare, air and water
pollution; safety hazards; and anticipated expansion plans incorporated
in the building design; and a description in detail of all manufacturing,
assembling or fabricating processes or work to be conducted on the
site. Included should be a detailed scientific description thereof and
scientific documentation as to any and all impacts of the proposed use
both on and off site.
F. If applicable to the site plan application as set forth in § 159-30 of this
Code, the applicant shall satisfy the water supply and water quality
requirements as further set forth under Article VII of Chapter 159,
Subdivision of Land. [Added 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
A. All applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the County
Planning Board for its review and recommendations, and, where
applicable, approval where required by state statute or county
requirements.
B. The applicant shall furnish proof of such submission within 10 days of
the submission of his application to the Township reviewing board by
presenting a copy of his site plan with an indication from the county
that it has been filed with them.
C. Any application for site approval shall not be deemed complete in the
absence of proof that it has been filed with the County Planning Board,
if required.
D. If the County Planning Board has failed to grant or deny approval of the
site plan at the time of preliminary approval of applicant's application,
such preliminary approval shall be conditioned on approval of such site
plan by the County Planning Board.
A. No application for site plan approval shall be deemed complete in the
absence of proof that a plan for soil erosion and sedimentation control
has been submitted to the relevant reviewing authority, pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and § 136-4 of Chapter 136,
Soil Erosion, or proof that such a plan is not required for the particular
application.
§ 131-8 LICENSING § 131-10
78:381
B. If the reviewing authority has failed to approve the erosion plan at the
time of preliminary approval, such approval shall be conditioned on
certification of approval of applicant's erosion plan.
§ 131-10 ANDOVER CODE § 131-10
78:382
ARTICLE IV
Environmental Impact Statement
§ 131-11. When required; environmental considerations.
§ 131-12. Criteria for requiring submission.
An environmental impact statement shall be submitted as part of the site
plan review submission requirements if the development proposal satisfies
one or more of the following criteria:
A. In order that the Township may assess the impact of a proposed
development upon the natural environment, particularly with respect to
potable water, pollution of all kinds, flooding and waste disposal, the
application for site plan review shall be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement, when required herein, as prepared by
qualified and licensed professionals, which shall contain information
and analysis covering the items hereinafter set forth. The appropriate
Township body, as part of its plan review procedures, shall take into
consideration the effect of the applicant's proposal upon all aspects of
the environment, including but not limited to sewage disposal, water
quality, water supply, soil erosion, preservation of sites of historic or
architectural significance, preservation of trees and vegetation,
protection of watercourses, protection of air resources and protection
of aquifers, traffic impact and the presence of any nuisance factors. The
appropriate Township body shall not approve any submission
hereunder unless it determines and finds that the proposed
development:
(1) Shall not result in appreciable harmful effects to the natural
environment.
(2) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of natural resources.
(3) Shall not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available to such proposal and for any future
proposals.
B. The appropriate Township body may upon application and for good
cause waive the requirement for an environmental impact statement or
for any of the specific requirements relating thereto as set forth in this
section.
A. Property is identified in the Master Plan, Page 33, "Development
Limitations Map," as characterized by severe limitations and/or
moderately severe limitations.
B. Property contains 50 or more acres.
C. Property contains 50 or more lots to be subdivided.
§ 131-11 LICENSING § 131-12
78:383
§ 131-13. Contents.
The reviewing municipal board may require an environmental impact
statement in accordance with § 131-12 above. The environmental impact
statement, when required, shall contain the following:
D. Property is classified as a planned development.
E. Commercial and industrial developments.
F. Proposed use may have an adverse effect upon any of the categories
listed below or these features of the development may produce an
adverse impact upon the property or surrounding properties:
(1) Description of development and surrounding area.
(2) Sewage disposal effect.
(3) Water supply.
(4) Drainage.
(5) Refuse disposal.
(6) Air impact.
(7) Critical impact areas: streams, wetlands, extreme slopes,
vegetation.
(8) Noise impact.
(9) Construction impact.
(10) Alternate measures.
(11) Marketability.
(12) Traffic impact.
A. Description of development.
(1) A plan and description of the building/development including but
not limited to the following:
(a) Existing contours based on accepted datum.
(b) Contours as constructed.
(c) Existing buildings on site and within 100 feet.
(d) New buildings.
(e) Existing roads.
(f) New roads.
(g) Paved areas and their fraction of total site.
§ 131-12 ANDOVER CODE § 131-13
78:384
(h) Natural streams or natural drainage within or adjacent to the
property or within 100 feet of the property.
(i) The project's relation to surrounding property and utilities.
(j) The method and schedule of constructions including grading
and clearing (in accordance with Sussex County Soil
Conservation District regulations).
(k) Solid waste generation and disposal, including mitigation and
recycling in compliance with New Jersey state law.
(l) Proposed wastewater treatment.
(m) Noise generation or impact and use of buffers.
(n) Smoke or other air pollution generated by heating or business
activities.
(o) Lighting characteristics, including placement of outside
illumination, its coverage and provisions for illumination
control in time and space.
(p) Solar encumbrance: shading and reflections from structure in
relation to adjacent properties.
(2) Inventory of existing environmental conditions which shall include:
(a) Surface and/or ground water quality:
[1] pH;
[2] Chlorides;
[3] Hydrocarbons;
[4] Suspended solids.
(b) Air quality.
(c) Noise characteristics and levels (with respect of NJDEP
standards and N.J.A.C. regulations 7:9, 7:27, 7:29 and
subsequent amendments).
(d) Soils and properties thereof including capabilities and
limitations.
(e) Topography.
(f) Slopes.
(g) Slope stabilities.
(h) Terrain.
(i) On- and off-site sewer systems.
§ 131-13 LICENSING § 131-13
78:385
(j) Vegetation (type, density and location, particularly of all trees).
(k) Architectural design and relation to adjacent structures.
(l) Historical and archaeological sites on property.
(m) Land use aesthetics.
(3) If the Township has prepared an environmental and historical or
archaeological inventory in connection with its Master Plan or for
other purposes, the applicant may rely upon that inventory under
this section, to the extent that the inventory is applicable to the
property in question.
B. Sewage facilities. It shall be shown that sewage can be disposed of
through facilities adequate to preclude water pollution.
(1) The facility shall comply with state and municipal board of health
regulations.
(2) The type or types and volume of sewage effluent shall be specified.
(3) The type and method of treatment for the proposed treatment
facility shall be described.
(4) If disposal is not to be in a stream, detailed data shall be supplied
on underlying geology, plus a current and complete soil analysis,
percolation tests for every five acres, elevation of the water table
for each five acres if within 12 feet of proposed final contour, or
certification that it is not within 12 feet of proposed final contour,
and areas overlying except in aquifers the requirement shall be 15
feet. This determination shall be made by an approved method by a
professional engineer. The following information shall also be
supplied:
(a) Topography.
(b) Location of aquifers.
(c) Depth and capacity of all wells within 500 feet of site.
(d) Any other pertinent data.
(5) If disposal is off-site, the following information shall be supplied:
(a) Plant design capacity.
(b) Monthly average flows for past 12 months.
(c) Enforcement action against plant.
(d) Capacity of plant to treat industrial or commercial wastes, if
applicable.
(e) Receiving water quality standards.
§ 131-13 ANDOVER CODE § 131-13
78:386
(f) Stream quality data from state, federal or private sources.
(g) Stream flow, minimum average seven-consecutive-day flow
with a frequency of occurrence of 10 years.
(h) Plans for sewage treatment facility; local plans.
(i) State regional planning policy, including interim basin plan.
(j) Flows expected from other approved subdivisions which are
dependent upon sewage treatment facilities in question.
(6) The environmental impact statement shall contain a conclusion, by
a qualified professional, as to the impact of the above mentioned
environmental elements.
C. Water supply.
(1) It shall be shown that an adequate potable water supply is available
and that drawing that supply shall not threaten the use of other
land nearby.
(a) The plan shall be in compliance with state and local
regulations.
(b) If supply is from public or private facilities off-site, the
following data shall be supplied:
[1] Amount of diversion granted by the Division of Water
Resources, maximum gallons of water pumped during any
month.
[2] Present diversion, maximum gallons of water pumped
during the past 24 months.
[3] Diversions expected from other approved subdivisions
which are dependent upon the present diversion granted
by the Division of Water Resources.
(c) If supply is from on-site sources, the following information
shall be supplied:
[1] Location and depth of all private and public water supplies
within 500 feet of the realty improvement.
[2] Location, depth and adequacy of proposed private or
public water supplies to serve the proposed realty
improvement.
[3] Geologic description of subsurface conditions including
expected groundwater yields, using published geologic
reports or report by a geologist.
(2) No preliminary approval shall be granted until the Division of
Water Resources has determined that the proposed water supply
§ 131-13 LICENSING § 131-13
78:387
and sewage disposal facilities are adequate when such
determination is requested by an appropriate Township body.
D. Drainage. A demonstration that stormwater runoff from the site is so
controlled that on- and off-site erosion is neither significantly produced
nor worsened and that the potential of adjacent or downstream flooding
is not significantly increased, including the following:
(1) Volume and peak flow rates of stormwater runoff now existing and
that to be generated by new improvements, which shall include
volumes and rates for ten- , twenty-five- and one-hundred-year
storm frequencies having durations producing maximum flow rates
before and after the proposed development. Such data shall apply
to the site in general and reflect the magnitude of change in runoff
and need not cover each and every reach of the entire drainage
system.
(2) Data on landscaping, vegetation, trees and ground cover existing
on the site, compared with that proposed.
(3) Changes of runoff rates and volumes to be caused by changes in
land use and the time of concentration.
(4) Plans for disposition of stormwater, whether by retention on the
site or by means of extant or planned storm sewer interconnection.
(5) Stream encroachments; permit as required by the Division of Water
Resources.
(6) Description of potential flood damages including a summary of
flood stages from state and federal sources.
(7) Submission of a sediment and erosion control plan drawn in
accordance with the guidelines and standards adopted by the
Township.
E. Refuse disposal. There shall be a plan for refuse disposal in compliance
with the state and Township requirements and codes.
F. Air impact. It shall be shown that there are no deleterious effects to air
quality caused by smoke, gases, discernible odors, deleterious chemical
changes, particle matter or changes produced by heat, incineration or
processing of materials. A chart showing before-and-after ambient air
quality shall be submitted.
G. Assessment of environmental impact of project.
(1) Impact of the project on the existing environment as described in
Subsection A(2) above. Plans and narratives shall describe any
area, condition or feature which is environmentally sensitive, or
which would be adversely affected if disturbed during construction.
Critical impact areas include, but are not limited to, stream
corridors, streams, wetlands, estuaries, slopes greater than 15%,
§ 131-13 ANDOVER CODE § 131-13
78:388
highly acid or highly erodible soils, areas of high water table,
mature stands of native vegetation, and aquifer recharge and
discharge areas. Impact of the project on the existing environment
shall be shown, including the following: [Amended 2-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-7; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(a) Soil and geological stability.
(b) Erosion.
(c) Water infiltration.
(d) Streams and drainage.
(e) Vegetation.
(f) Neighbors and neighborhood.
(2) Data submitted to other agencies and authorities, including but not
limited to the NJDEP, Sussex County Health Department and the
Sussex County Soil Conservation District, and a listing of all
permits and licenses and approvals required and the status of each.
(3) Evaluation of environmental impacts during and after construction
including but not limited to:
(a) A list of impact or damages to the environment or natural
resources on or adjacent to the property, and a statement as to
duration of same.
(b) Increase in noise.
(c) Damage to plants and trees.
(d) Displacement or disruption of people, businesses, and
transportation.
(e) Increase in municipal services.
(f) A list and description of measures taken to eliminate or
mitigate adverse effects.
H. Noise impact. It shall be shown that the use shall not create a
deleterious or objectionable noise, either on or off site. A chart shall be
submitted indicating the ambient noise level measured in decibels, on
site and at property boundary lines. The noise generators shall be
identified by type and decibel level.
I. Construction impact. There shall be supplied a plan of construction,
outlining timing and phasing, traffic generated, number of workers, and
any impact relating to noise, air, water or other relevant temporary
changes in the natural environment.
J. Alternative measures. As part of the environmental impact statement
consideration shall be given to reasonable alternatives obviating
§ 131-13 LICENSING § 131-13
78:389
environmental impact problems. List the irretrievable and irreversible
effects of the development upon the environment and discuss
alternatives for amelioration of these effects.
K. Marketability of proposed use. There shall be a description of how the
proposed use of the site relates to the general market of similar uses in
the Township and the region within which the Township is located.
L. Traffic impact. There shall be a description of how the proposed use will
affect the area's traffic volume and pattern. An estimate of the number
of vehicle trips per day emanating from and entering onto the site shall
be supplied along with the details of the method of computation.
M. Fire protection. There shall be a description of the uses proposed at the
site, and a detailed description of any flammable or extra hazardous
materials to be stored on or included in the construction of the site. Any
materials emitting toxic or irritating fumes when burned shall be
described in detail. All materials when burned requiring special
measures or substances to extinguish the fire shall be described in
detail along with the appropriate method of extinguishing said
materials when burned. The height of the proposed structure shall be
considered and the capabilities of the existing Township Fire
Department shall be addressed along with the need for any additional
fire-fighting equipment.
N. Police protection. The application shall address the need for any
additional police protection, traffic direction, or other Township police
services which will be required as a result of the development.
O. Emergency health services. The application shall describe in detail the
need for emergency health services such as ambulances and first aid
squads to serve the development. The need for any increase over the
existing available services shall be outlined in detail and the reasons for
any such increase shall be set forth. If emergency health services will
be utilized on a regular basis, a detailed computation of the frequency
of the services required and the nature of the services required shall be
included along with the method of computation of same.
P. Community impact. If the proposed development will have any other
substantial impact on the community, a detailed description of the
impact and its source, along with methods of dealing with the same,
shall be included.
Q. Townhouse standards. Townhouses shall comply with the standards
contained in Subsection 15-6.150 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township of Andover.
50.Editor's Note: This refers to a subsection of the Zoning Ordinance as it existed prior to its
readoption by Ord. No. 2001-10; no comparable section appears to exist in the current
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 131-13 ANDOVER CODE § 131-13
78:390
R. Protection of freshwater wetlands and streams. In the event that there
are freshwater wetlands or streams on the site, the applicant shall
comply with the provisions of § 159-11L of Chapter 159, Subdivision of
Land, which is declared applicable to site plans and is incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 131-13 LICENSING § 131-13
78:391

ARTICLE V
Site Plan Procedure
§ 131-14. Distribution of site plan.
The secretary of the reviewing board shall distribute the site plan
application for review and report, and approval where required, as follows:
§ 131-15. Preliminary review; time for decision.
A. One copy to the Township Planner.
B. One copy to the Township Engineer.
C. One copy to the Board of Health.
D. One copy for the permanent files of the board's secretary.
E. Three copies to the Site Plan Review Committee.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer a site plan and
such other information which is reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
preliminary major site plan approval, or for minor site plan approval,
have been met. The site plan and any engineering documents to be
submitted shall be required in tentative form for discussion purposes
for preliminary approval or major site plans. If any architectural plans
are required to be submitted for site plan approval, the preliminary
plans and elevations shall be sufficient. If an application is found to be
incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies
therein by the review committee of the board within 45 days of the
submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted. When it has been determined by the review committee that
an application meets all requirements specified in the ordinance and in
the rules and regulations of the board, the review committee shall
immediately certify the application as complete and the application
shall be deemed to be complete as of the day it was so certified for the
purposes of commencement of the time periods for actions by the
board.
B. Upon submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves 10 acres of land or less, and 10 dwelling units or less, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days
of certification of completeness of such application, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Except that if the
application for site plan approval also involves an application for relief
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
the approval within 95 days of the date of certification of a complete
application, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
§ 131-14 LICENSING § 131-15
78:393
§ 131-16. Public hearings; notice; when required.
A public hearing, noticed in accordance with Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, shall be held on all major site plan applications. The Planning
Board may waive the requirement for notice and public hearing for
applications for site plan approval if the Planning Board, or the review
committee of the board, finds that the application conforms to the definition
of minor site plan contained in this chapter.
§ 131-17. Exception from site plan requirements.
The reviewing board, when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or shall exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question. The reviewing board shall state its reasons for granting any such
exceptions.
C. Upon submission of a complete application for a site plan which
involves more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units, or for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of certification of
completeness of such submission, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the site plan.
D. Failure of the reviewing board to reach a decision within the specified
time periods or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the site
plan as submitted.
E. If the reviewing board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application
for development. The reviewing board shall, if the proposed
development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary site plan
approval.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of a developer to
submit a sketch plan to the reviewing board for informal review, and
neither the reviewing board nor the developer shall be bound by any
discussions or statements made during such review; provided that the
right of the developer at any time to submit a complete application for
site plan approval shall not be limited by his submittal of a sketch plan
and the time for the reviewing board's decision shall not begin to run
until the submission of a complete application.
§ 131-15 ANDOVER CODE § 131-18
78:394
§ 131-18. Rights under preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval of a site plan, except as provided in Subsection D of
this section, shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a threeyear
period from the date of the preliminary approval:
A. Modification.
(1) The general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to:
(a) Use requirements.
(b) Layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks,
and lot size.
(c) Yard dimensions and off-tract improvements.
(d) Natural resources to be preserved on the site.
(e) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading.
(f) Screening, landscaping and location of structures.
(g) Exterior lighting, both for safety reasons and streetlighting.
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Township from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as relate to the public health and safety or as
otherwise permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49(a).
B. The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration
date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the
preliminary site plan.
C. The applicant may apply for and the reviewing board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that, if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
D. Site plan of 50 acres or more.
(1) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
reviewing board may grant the rights referred to in Subsections A,
B and C above for such period of time, longer than three years, as
shall be determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
(b) Economic conditions.
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 131-18 LICENSING § 131-18
78:395
§ 131-19. Rights under minor site plan approval.
§ 131-20. Final approval.
(2) Extension; modification.
(a) The applicant may apply for thereafter and the reviewing
board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the reviewing board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
[2] The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval.
[3] Economic conditions.
[4] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(b) If the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
E. Whenever approval for a preliminary site plan is granted subject to
conditions to be met, the conditions shall be met within the time limit
set forth in § 74-9 of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures.
A. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the site
plan by the board, provided that the board may condition such approval
upon terms insuring the provisions of improvements pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 40:55D-39, 40:55D-41, and 40:55D-53.
B. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval.
A. The reviewing board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval
and the conditions of preliminary approval; provided that in the case of
a planned development, if and when permitted, the reviewing body may
permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval
necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control of the
developer since the date of preliminary approval without the developer
being required to submit another application for development for
preliminary approval.
B. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the secretary of the reviewing
§ 131-18 ANDOVER CODE § 131-20
78:396
§ 131-21. Final site plan details.
board, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the reviewing board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval of the application for final
approval as submitted. A certificate of the secretary of the reviewing
board as to failure of the reviewing board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant, and shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other required evidence of approval.
C. A final site plan and supporting drawings and documentation constitute
the complete development of the site plan proposal and become the
basis for the construction of the plan and inspection by the Township.
D. A complete application for final approval shall consist of the following:
(1) A properly completed final site plan approval form.
(2) The required fee.
(3) Eight certified copies of the site plan in final form, including all
information shown on the preliminary plan plus the information
required in § 131-21.
E. The site plan and any engineering or architectural documents required
shall be in final form and accurate for final approval.
F. The developer may at his option submit a final site plan in stages to
include only a portion of the original preliminary site plan. Approval of
the final site plan for a section shall not extend the time limit of
preliminary approval for the remaining sections.
G. The appropriate Township body shall insure that any improvements
required for the site plan as a whole, which might have an adverse
effect on an approved section if the remaining sections were not
completed, shall be installed as a condition of approval for any section.
This shall include but not be limited to roads, open space, recreation,
soil and erosion control, landscaping, lighting, and similar
improvements.
A. Final site plan details are primarily a refinement of preliminary details
by providing final engineering and architectural information which
shall be classified as site plan construction details.
B. Whereas preliminary site plan data may have been tentative, the final
data shall be accurate. The following data shall be provided on the final
site plan:
(1) All the data required on the preliminary site plan, with complete
accuracy.
§ 131-20 LICENSING § 131-21
78:397
§ 131-22. Effect of final approval.
§ 131-23. Joint submission.
Nothing in this article precludes a developer from submitting his
preliminary and final site plan as one submission, providing all
requirements of the final site plan shall be adhered to.
(2) If any changes from the preliminary site plan have been made, an
approved preliminary site plan showing those changes marked in
red shall be submitted.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
§ 131-18, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of final approval. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the reviewing
board may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year
but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the
time period of preliminary approval pursuant to § 131-18 for the section
granted final approval.
B. In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or more
or conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the reviewing board
may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this section for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
reviewing board to be reasonable, taking into consideration:
(1) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval.
(2) Economic conditions.
(3) The comprehensiveness of the development.
C. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the reviewing board may
thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional
period of time as shall be determined by the reviewing board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration:
(1) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval.
(2) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed.
(3) Economic conditions.
(4) The comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 131-21 ANDOVER CODE § 131-24
78:398
§ 131-24. Deviation from final site plan.
The developer shall undertake construction in compliance with the
approved final site plan. He shall not deviate from that plan without prior
approval of the appropriate Township body, which may require such
additional fees as may be necessary.
§ 131-24 LICENSING § 131-24
78:399

ARTICLE VI
Performance Guarantees
§ 131-25. Guarantees required.
As a condition of preliminary or final site plan approval, the reviewing board
may require and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by
this chapter for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of
on-tract improvements:
§ 131-26. Extension of performance guarantees.
A. Performance guarantee.
(1) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the Township
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including
streets; grading; pavement; gutters; curbs; sidewalks;
streetlighting; shade trees; surveyor's monuments, as shown on the
final map and required by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq., and 40:55D-53; water mains; culverts; storm sewers; sanitary
sewers or other means of sewage disposal; drainage structures;
erosion control and sedimentation control devices; public
improvements of open space; and other on-site improvements and
landscaping, provided that no more than 10% of the total
performance guarantee shall be in cash, and the balance shall be in
the form of a bond from a bonding company approved by the
Township Committee.
(2) The Township Engineer shall itemize the improvements which he
recommends to be bonded for by the applicant. The reviewing
board shall then establish the improvements to be bonded and
forward a list of same to the applicant. The applicant shall then
forward an estimate of the cost of such items including detailed
calculations of the same to the board and the Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer shall then review these estimates and
forward his recommendations to the reviewing board who shall
establish the amount of performance guarantee and maintenance
guarantee required. The applicant shall forward his estimate of the
cost of the improvements and calculation, within 30 days of a
request therefor from the reviewing board.
B. The furnishing of a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the
Township Committee for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies
or public utilities automatically shall own the utilities to be installed or
the improvements are covered by performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required for such
utilities or improvements.
§ 131-25 LICENSING § 131-26
78:401
§ 131-27. Reduction of performance guarantees.
§ 131-28. Completion of improvements; inspection; liability of
obligor.
A. Whenever it is required as a condition to subdivision or site plan
approval that a performance guarantee must be furnished in favor of
the municipality in an amount not exceeding 120% of the estimated cost
of any required improvements within a stated time, the time allowed for
installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee
has been provided may be extended by the Township Committee by
resolution.
B. As a condition of or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may
be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as
determined as of the time of passage of the resolution.
A. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the Township Committee in writing of such
completion or substantial completion as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53d, and, after inspection and report of the Municipal Engineer,
the Township Committee may approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements.
B. Where partial approval is granted, the bond of the obligor may be
reduced provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to insure completion of all
improvements. Notice shall be given to the obligor as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53e.
A. When all the required improvements have been completed, the obligor
shall notify the Township Committee in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, of the completion of such
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
B. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Township
Committee, indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of
the improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If
partial approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected
shall be set forth.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvement.
§ 131-26 ANDOVER CODE § 131-28
78:402
§ 131-29. Notice of reviewing board action.
§ 131-30. Review and inspection fees; reimbursement to Township.
D. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the reviewing
board may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
E. The subdivider or his agent, employee or contractor shall notify the
secretary of the reviewing municipal board, as well as the Township
Engineer and Clerk, when the work is ready for any required inspection
specified herein or required to be performed by the Construction
Official or the appropriate subcode official. This notice shall be given at
least 48 hours prior to the start of the construction and at least 48 hours
prior to the time the inspection is desired. Inspection shall be
performed within three business days of the time for which it was
requested. The work shall not proceed in a manner which shall preclude
the inspection until it has been made. No underground installation shall
be covered until inspected and approved.
A. The Township Committee shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements, on the basis of the report of the Township
Engineer, and shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the
contents of such report and action of the reviewing board with relation
thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements.
B. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved.
C. Failure of the Township Committee to send or provide such notification
to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of
the improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to such performance guarantee.
A. The applicant shall reimburse the Township directly for all reasonable
review and inspection fees of the Municipal Engineer, board attorney,
planning consultant and other Township personnel, for any such review
of applications for development and inspections of improvements.
B. In addition, the applicant shall make an initial deposit with the
Township Clerk, as set forth in § 74-57 of Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, to be applied to the cost of these fees. The board shall have
the right to require additional deposits to be paid by the applicant, from
time to time, in order to insure that review and inspection fees are
adequately provided.
§ 131-28 LICENSING § 131-30
78:403
§ 131-31. Off-tract improvements.
Off-tract improvements may be assessed as a condition of approval in
accordance with the provisions of the land subdivision chapter and within
this section.
C. Should the balance of said fees not be paid, building permits and/or
certificates of occupancy may be withheld by the applicable Township
official. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the
applicant.
§ 131-30 ANDOVER CODE § 131-31
78:404
ARTICLE VII
Schedule of Fees
§ 131-32. Application fees.
Fees for preliminary and final site plan are set forth in § 74-57 of Chapter
74, Land Use Procedures.
§ 131-33. Determination of application fee.
For purposes of determining the amount of application fee, if only a portion
of the property is to be developed and the property can be further
subdivided under the requirements of Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land,
and Chapter 190, Zoning, the lot area shall be considered to be an area
which can be subdivided under the requirements of such ordinances
wherein all proposed buildings and improvements would meet all required
setback and yard requirements. When a site plan for a new building or
structure or addition thereto does not involve off-street parking, traffic
circulation or drainage facilities, the amount of the application fee as it
pertains to lot area shall apply only to the ground floor area of the building
or structure.
§ 131-32 LICENSING § 131-33
78:405

ARTICLE VIII
Certification and Filing
§ 131-34. Filing of final site plan.
The secretary of the Township agency approving a final site plan shall
certify three full sets, on each page, with an appropriate stamp showing
date approved, file number, chairman's signature and secretary's signature.
One set shall be given to the applicant, one to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for his use and one set shall be retained in the official files of the
Township agency.
§ 131-34 LICENSING § 131-34
78:407

ARTICLE IX
Compliance and Interpretation
§ 131-35. Site plan conformance; violations and penalties.
§ 131-36. Construction.
This chapter shall be construed in para materia with Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter 190, Zoning, of
the Township, which chapters together constitute the land use regulations
of this Township, and shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
thereof.
A. Failure to comply with any of the conditions of site plan approval
subsequent to the receipt of a building permit, zoning permit or
certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, shall be grounds for the
revocation of any building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be. A written notice of revocation by
certified mail by the Zoning Officer or Building Inspector, as the case
may be, shall specify the conditions of site plan approval which have
been violated and such revocation shall effectively terminate the
validity of any building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy theretofore issued.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to such penalties as provided by Chapter 1, Article
II, General Penalty, of this Code.
§ 131-35 LICENSING § 131-36
78:409

ARTICLE X
Design Standards
§ 131-37. Parking and loading areas.
All nonresidential and multifamily parking and loading areas shall meet the
following requirements:
A. All parking and loading areas shall be paved in accordance with the site
plan standards contained in Article IV, Design Standards, of Chapter
155, Streets and Sidewalks, of this Code.
B. All parking and loading areas shall be graded and equipped with
adequate drainage facilities as approved by the Township Engineer.
C. All parking and loading spaces shall be appropriately marked with
painted lines and each parking space shall be at least 10 feet by 20 feet.
D. All parking areas shall provide for adequate ingress and egress and safe
and convenient traffic circulation. Access drives and aisles shall be of
sufficient width to permit safe access to parking spaces and safe traffic
movement.
E. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces premises situate in any residential zone, by vision-proof
fence, wall, hedge or natural landscaping of not less than six feet in
height, maintained in good condition.
F. Off-street parking as required for any use shall be provided on the same
lot with such use. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
VII of Chapter 190, Zoning, of this Code.
G. Off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles and no commercial repair work or service work
of any kind shall be conducted on the parking lot nor shall such lots be
used for parking of disabled, dismantled, inoperable or unregistered
vehicles.
H. One loading zone at least 15 feet by 40 feet, or as required for
reasonable safety and convenient access, shall be provided for all
commercial and industrial uses and so designated on the site plan. Such
area shall be marked appropriately at the site and shall be used solely
for the parking of commercial vehicles during loading and unloading.
I. Parking areas shall have a maximum grade of 8%, and shall be enclosed
by concrete curbing, Belgian block curbing, at least six inches above
the paved surface and located at least five feet from any property line or
nearest structural wall of any building, and at least 10 feet from any
abutting street right-of-way. In the commercial or industrial zone
proper access and circulation between adjoining parking areas shall be
provided, and the two lots shall be divided by buffer zones
appropriately landscaped with trees, grass and/or shrubs.
§ 131-37 LICENSING § 131-37
78:411
§ 131-38. Lighting.
Any lighting in connection with off-street parking areas shall be so arranged
and shielded as to reflect the light down and away from adjoining streets
or properties and shall be adequate to provide safety and security and in
accordance with the following standards:
J. All parking areas shall be designed with service aisles to meet the
following standards:
(1) Cross aisle, one-way, fourteen-foot width.
(2) Cross aisle, two-way, twenty-five-foot width.
(3) Parallel parking, twelve-foot aisle width.
(4) Forty-five-degree angle parking, fourteen-foot aisle width.
(5) Sixty-degree angle parking, eighteen-foot aisle width.
(6) Ninety-degree angle parking, twenty-five-foot aisle width.
(7) The turning radius shall be at least 15 feet.
(8) In addition there shall be a minimum distance of six feet between
parallel parking spaces when found necessary to provide
convenient access.
K. All off-street parking areas shall be subject to the approval of the
appropriate Township body to insure their adequacy, relation to traffic
safety, landscaping and protection of adjacent properties. Concrete
sidewalks connecting the parking areas to the building entrances shall
be provided and shall be constructed in accordance with the
Department of Transportation standards.
L. Maximum area of impervious surface and curbing. Off-street parking
lots and loading areas, together with their access aisles, driveways and
fire lanes and other paved or impervious areas on the lot, exclusive of
the buildings, shall not occupy more than 30% of the lot area or in
accordance with the standards as set forth in Table 5, "Schedule of
General Zoning Regulations for Andover Township," or Article VI,
"Conditional Uses," in Chapter 190, "Zoning." [Amended 4-26-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-05]
M. Buffering of uses within the I Industrial and GI General Industrial Zone
districts. A minimum buffer area of 100 feet in width shall be provided
and maintained on property located within the I Industrial and General
Industrial Zone districts along any common property line with a
residential zone district or residential use. [Amended 4-26-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05]
A. All existing or proposed exterior lighting, freestanding and/or on
building, for size, nature of construction, lumens, heights, area and
§ 131-37 ANDOVER CODE § 131-38
78:412
§ 131-39. Landscaping.
All portions of property not used for off-street parking shall be attractively
landscaped with grass lawns, trees, and shrubs as approved by the
appropriate Township body.
§ 131-40. Street and driveway construction.
direction of lumination, footcandles produced, as well as time controls
proposed for outdoor lighting and display, shall be indicated.
B. The height of light poles shall be limited to the maximum height of
structures permitted in the particular zoning district where they are
located, or 25 feet, whichever is less.
C. The light itself shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
illumination to 150º.
Recommended for Average Maintained Horizontal Illumination
Commercial Intermediate Residential
Area Classification Footcandle Lux Footcandle Lux Footcandle Lux
Vehicular roadways
Freeway* 0.6 6 0.6 6 0.6 6
Major and
expressway*
2.0 22 1.4 15 1.0 11
Collector 1.2 13 0.9 10 0.6 6
Local 0.9 10 0.6 6 0.4 4
Alleys 0.6 6 0.4 4 0.2 2
Pedestrian walkways
Sidewalks 0.9 10 0.6 6 0.2 2
Pedestrian ways 2.0 22 1.0 11 0.5 2
*NOTE: Both mainline and ramps.
For other critical areas, the recommended footcandles shall be as follows:
At intersections, 2.0.
Parking areas, 1.0.
Maximum at property lines, 1.0.
Residential areas, 0.6 (average), 0.1 (minimum).
Plant entrances, 2.0.
A. Standards for the grading, improvement and construction of streets or
driveways and for any required walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights,
fire hydrants and water, drainage, sewage facilities and other
improvements found necessary shall be as provided in Chapter 155,
§ 131-38 LICENSING § 131-40
78:413
§ 131-41. Required off-tract improvements.
Off-tract improvements and/or impact fees may be required as a condition
of approval of the development by the reviewing municipal board in
accordance with § 74-45 of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures.
§ 131-42. Floodway areas.
No development shall take place in a delineated floodway area, and shall be
permitted in a delineated flood fringe area only where it is determined by
the Township Engineer that the first-floor elevation shall be above the flood
level, and that construction and landfilling shall not significantly increase
flooding in other areas.
Streets and Sidewalks, of this Code or as approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. Where certain utilities to be installed are under other governmental
authority or jurisdictions, the standards shall be provided by those
jurisdictions and shall be adhered to by the developer. A letter
approving the proposed installations and a statement as to who shall
carry out the construction shall be required.
C. All utility access shall be underground.
§ 131-40 ANDOVER CODE § 131-42
78:414
Chapter 136
SOIL EROSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil removal — See Ch. 140.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
§ 136-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Andover Township Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Chapter.”
§ 136-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to control soil erosion and sediment
damages and related environmental damage by requiring adequate
provisions for surface water retention and drainage and for the protection
of exposed soil surfaces in order to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the community.
§ 136-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
APPLICANT — A person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of the timing
of their installation, which shall effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with standards for
soil erosion and sediment control in New Jersey as promulgated by the State
Soil Conservation Committee.
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan which provides for use of land
within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits, according to
chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water resources.
§ 131-42 LICENSING § 136-3
78:415
LAND — Any ground, soil, or earth including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed
to the danger of erosion.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain
rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A governmental subdivision of this
state, which encompasses this Township, organized in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
STRIPPING — Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface including clearing and grubbing
operations.
WETLANDS — A marsh swampland, saturated with water, including, but not
limited to, all areas composed of soils having a seasonal high-water table at
the surface.
§ 136-4. Permit required.
A. No land area shall be disturbed by any person, partnership or
corporation, within the Township unless the applicant has submitted to
the Township Engineer a plan to provide for soil erosion and sediment
control for such land area in accordance with the Standards for Erosion
and Sediment Control promulgated by the New Jersey Soil
Conservation Committee and this section and such plan has been
approved; and unless a valid soil erosion and sediment control permit
has been issued by the Township Engineer. All public facility projects
shall be submitted to the Sussex Soil Conservation District for review,
certification and enforcement. [Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-34]
B. The purpose of this section is to make clear the fact that soil erosion
sediment control approval must be obtained from the Township
§ 136-3 ANDOVER CODE § 136-4
78:416
§ 136-5. Application information.
The applicant shall submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control
plan for each noncontiguous site. This plan shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer. Such plan shall contain:
Engineer for all soil removal, mining and quarrying operations, the
placement of fill, and all other land disturbances when permitted except
for those disturbances exempted hereafter.
C. Applications for permit shall be obtained from the Planning and Zoning
secretary.
A. A map of the site, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, minimum,
showing existing contour lines, at two-foot intervals.
B. The location and description of existing natural and man-made features
on and surrounding the site, including general topography and soil
characteristics and a copy of the Soil Conservation District Soil Survey
where available.
C. The location and description of proposed changes to the site.
D. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which shall meet or
exceed Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control promulgated
by the State Soil Conservation Committee. Standards shall be on file at
the offices of the local Soil Conservation District and the Township
Clerk.
E. A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the project
including anticipated starting and completion dates.
F. All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for approval.
The applicant may consult with the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District in the selection of appropriate erosion and sediment control
measures and the development of the plan.
G. Any computations and documents which may be required by the
Township Engineer to demonstrate that adequate soil erosion measures
are employed to assure against the hazards of soil erosion and
sedimentation.
H. An application form completely filled in. This form of application is
annexed to this chapter as an appendix.51
I. The application fee.
J. An escrow fee for inspections of the site and review of the project.
51.Editor's Note: The application form referred to herein may be found on file in the office of
the Township Clerk.
§ 136-4 LICENSING § 136-6
78:417
§ 136-6. Factors considered in approving permits.
§ 136-7. Issuance of permit.
A. In considering and reviewing the application for land disturbance
permit, the Township Engineer shall be guided by and take into
consideration the public health, safety, and general welfare and the
general purposes of land use control. In particular, consideration shall
be given to the following factors:
(1) Proposed stripping of vegetation.
(2) Effects of proposed tree removal.
(3) Surface water drainage.
(4) Extent of disturbed area and the duration of exposure of subsoil.
(5) Soil fertility.
(6) Contours, both existing and proposed.
(7) Whether proposed land disturbance is necessary and incidental to
the development of the property.
(8) Erosion of soil by water and wind, and the soil's susceptibility to the
production of sedimentation.
(9) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(10) Land values and uses.
(11) Effect on water resources, such as streams and wetlands.
B. The Township Engineer shall not approve such a plan unless it is in
conformance with the Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control
adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee. The Township
Engineer may seek the assistance of the Sussex County Soil
Conservation District in the review of such plans. The Township
Engineer may refer the plan to the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District for its review.
C. In the event that the Township Engineer concludes, after considering
and reviewing the application, that the resultant effect of the land
disturbance would be excessive erosion of the soil and/or subsoil by
water or wind, or the sedimentation of streams, ponds, lakes, and/or
wetlands, located on or off the site, or that other adverse impact may
occur, then the permit may be denied.
A. A permit shall be issued after approval of the application in accordance
with § 136-6 and after the performance guarantee requirements, as set
forth in § 136-11, have been satisfied.
§ 136-6 ANDOVER CODE § 136-7
78:418
§ 136-8. Principles applicable to soil erosion and sediment control
plan.
Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land disturbance
and shall be in operation during all stages of the disturbance activity. The
following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment control
plan:
B. Such review and approval shall be made within a period of 30 days of
submission of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement in
writing between the Township and the applicant, this period is
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the Township to make a
decision within such period or extension thereof shall constitute
certification.
C. The applicant shall be provided with written notice of such decision by
the Township Engineer. A copy of such decision including name of
applicant, site location by street address and block and lot number, and
proposed land use shall be sent to the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District. The Township shall also make available such other information
as may be required by the District.
D. The Township Engineer shall be advised in writing at least 48 hours
prior to any land disturbance or construction activity. [Amended
10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
A. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which shall minimize soil erosion.
B. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
C. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits.
D. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measure shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
E. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after
development of disturbance. Such provisions shall be in addition to all
existing requirements.
F. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site, wherever
possible, to facilitate groundwater recharge.
G. Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
H. Diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures shall be
installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
§ 136-7 LICENSING § 136-9
78:419
§ 136-9. Maintenance of control measures; issuance of certificate
indicating completion.
All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed under
this chapter shall be adequately maintained for one year after completion
of the approved plan, or until such measures are permanently stabilized as
determined by the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall give
the applicant, upon request, a certificate indicating the date on which the
measures called for in the approved plans were completed.
§ 136-10. Exemptions.
The following activities are specifically exempted from this chapter:
§ 136-11. Fees. [Amended 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14;
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
A. Land disturbances associated with one- or two-family dwellings, if such
disturbance involves less than 5,000 square feet of land area.
B. Land used for gardening primarily for home consumption.
C. Land used for agricultural purposes, when operated in accordance with
a farm conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation
District.
D. Land disturbances involving less than 5,000 square feet of land area.
[Added 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
A. Application and inspection fees.
(1) Upon applying for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of the initial
review of the soil erosion and sediment control application, as well
as for any renewal or resubmission thereof, in the amount set forth
in the fee schedule as follows:
Fees
Type of Permit Application
Escrow
Review/
Inspection
Renewal and
Resubmission
Single-family home $100 $1,000 $100
Minor subdivision $200 $1,500 $100
Minor site plan $250 $2,000 $150
Major subdivision $250 $300 per lot,
minimum
$3,000
$150
Major site plan $250 $3,000, plus
$100 per acre
$150
§ 136-9 ANDOVER CODE § 136-11
78:420
§ 136-12. Performance guarantee required.
Fees
Type of Permit Application
Escrow
Review/
Inspection
Renewal and
Resubmission
Soil removal $500 $2,000, plus
$100 per acre
$250
Land disturbance
without
construction of
improvements
$500 $2,000, plus
$100 per acre
$250
(2) This is the initial minimum deposit required. Any charges over the
initial deposit required for additional reviews for revisions or
incomplete applications or inspections shall be paid by additional
deposits, to be paid monthly, due the first of each month.
(3) The provisions of §§ 74-56H, I and J and 74-58 of Chapter 74, Land
Use Procedures, shall apply.
B. Upon the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay an escrow review
fee as set forth in the schedule to cover the cost of inspections and
review of the project by the Township Engineer during the year. In the
event that this amount is utilized and additional inspections are
required, the applicant shall post an additional escrow review fee as set
forth in the above schedule with the Planning Board secretary to cover
additional inspections. The provisions of §§ 74-56D through J and 74-58
shall apply with respect to the method of administration of inspection
fees and the posting of additional inspection fees.
C. Inspection shall be provided for during construction, and the applicant
shall be required to have the certified plans on site during construction.
D. Applicants need to comply with the NJDPES Stormwater Phase II,
NJ0088323 requirements for proposed land disturbances one acre or
larger. The Stormwater Phase II program is administered by the local
soil conservation district and upon municipal approval; all eligible
activities should be directed to the district for further action.
[Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
E. When a conditional report of compliance (ROC) is issued, during the
nongrowing season, a performance deposit of $3,000 per acre of
disturbed soil ($3,000 minimum for a single-family site) will be required
and will be placed in an escrow account. An administration fee of $100
will be charged and retained by the Township of Andover.
A. Before any work is done for which a permit is required, the applicant
shall file and maintain a bond, letter of credit or other performance
guarantee in a form and with surety approved by the Planning Board
§ 136-11 LICENSING § 136-12
78:421
§ 136-13. Maintenance guarantee.
The Township Committee, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer,
may also require a maintenance guarantee for a period not to exceed two
years after final approval of the soil erosion and sediment control measures,
in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement or of the
permanent installation.
§ 136-14. Revocation of permit and other relief.
§ 136-15. Enforcement official.
Attorney or Zoning Board Attorney in an amount deemed sufficient
by the Township Committee, on recommendation of the Township
Engineer, that shall be sufficient to insure the faithful performance of
the work to be undertaken pursuant to the conditions of the permit and
the terms thereof.
B. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be equal to 120% of the
estimated cost of the soil erosion and sediment control improvements of
which 10% of the total amount shall be in cash or certified check. This
performance guarantee shall be administered pursuant to the
provisions of § 74-55 of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures.
A. After reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard before the
Township Committee, the permit of any person may be revoked or
suspended for such period as the Township may determine, for any
violation of the terms hereof, or the terms and conditions of any
approved plan and permit granted hereunder.
B. The Township may issue a stop construction order if a project is not
being executed in accordance with a certified plan. A certificate of
occupancy for a project shall not be issued unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of a certified plan for permanent
measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation. A formal report of
such compliance shall be filed with the municipal agent authorized to
issue certificates of occupancy.
C. Notwithstanding the above, the Township Committee may cause a stop
order to be issued by the enforcement official or designee prior to
hearing if, in its opinion, such an order should be issued to stop or
mitigate irrevocable damage. The Township Committee may also seek
appropriate injunctive relief prior to any hearing before it if this remedy
is deemed appropriate because of the urgency of the situation.
A. The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township
Engineer, who shall also inspect or require adequate inspections of the
work.
B. If the Township Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's erosion and sediment control plan, he may refuse to approve
§ 136-12 ANDOVER CODE § 136-15
78:422
§ 136-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 136-17. Jurisdiction.
further work and may require necessary erosion and sediment control
measures to be promptly installed and may seek other penalties as
provided in this chapter.
A. If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to
comply with the provisions of a certified plan, the Township may
institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to
prohibit and prevent such violation or violations, and such Court may
proceed in a summary manner.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail
to comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $3,000 to be collected in a
summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.52 The Superior Court, County Court, County District
Court and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the penalty
enforcement law.
C. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
A. In the event the proposed area to be disturbed is located partially in
Andover Township and partially in another municipality only the Sussex
County Soil Conservation District certification is required so that the
Sussex County Soil Conservation District has jurisdiction over the soil
erosion and sediment control application, no land shall be disturbed
until: [Amended 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-34]
(1) A soil erosion and sediment control plan in conformance with state
standards has been approved by the Sussex County Soil
Conservation District and a copy of the written approval filed with
the Andover Township Engineer.
(2) Performance guarantees have been posted in favor of Andover
Township in conformance with § 136-12 of this chapter.
(3) A soil erosion and sediment control permit has been issued by the
Andover Township Engineer.
B. The Township Engineer shall have 30 days, after receipt of written
notice of approval by the Sussex County Soil Conservation District and
the posting of a performance guarantee by the applicant, within which
to issue a soil erosion and sediment control permit.
52.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1999, c. 274. See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 136-15 LICENSING § 136-18
78:423
§ 136-18. Prerequisites to issuance of certificate of occupancy and
release of performance guarantee.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and prior to the release
of any performance guarantee posted for improvements, a letter from the
Township Engineer, certifying the compliance of the soil erosion and
sediment control measures on the site with the soil erosion and sediment
control permit, shall be presented to the Construction Official in the case of
the certificate of occupancy and the Township Committee in the case of the
release of the performance guarantee.
§ 136-19. Expiration of permit.
A permit is valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance of
permit.
§ 136-20. Renewal of permit. [Added 5-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-14]
If a permit expires prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance
per § 136-9, an application for permit renewal must be filed along with a
renewal fee as set forth in § 136-11.
§ 136-21. Resubmission. [Added 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
If the project for which a permit has been issued is found to be constructed
in a manner inconsistent with the approved plan, revised plans shall be
prepared by the applicant’s engineer and resubmitted for review by the
Township Engineer, along with a resubmission fee as set forth in § 136-11.
The Township Engineer or Construction Official, at his or her sole
discretion, may require the applicant to resubmit such revised plans to
the Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as deemed
appropriate.
§ 136-22. Posting of bond. [Added 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14]
A. If the project is to be completed at a time of the year wherein
established growth is not possible prior to application for a certificate
of occupancy, an applicant shall post a bond in the principal sum of
$3,000, plus pay an administrative fee of $100, providing for full and
complete performance.
B. The $3,000 bond shall be returned to the applicant after growth is
established and a certificate of compliance from the Township Engineer
is received by the Construction Official. Such bond will be with such
sureties and in such form as is satisfactory to the Andover Township
Committee.
§ 136-18 ANDOVER CODE § 136-22
78:424
Chapter 140
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
§ 140-1. Findings.
§ 140-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Andover Township Soil
and Rock Removal Chapter.”
§ 140-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED PLAN — A plan for soil and rock removal approved by the
Planning Board as a conditional use and by the Township Committee
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or, in the case of nonconforming
uses, by the Planning Board and Township Committee pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
ARABLE SOIL — Soil that when dry contains not less than 4% by weight of
organic matter and the balance of which is mineral matter.
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials
to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in
establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to perform work under this chapter.
ROCK — Any consolidated material of any size on or below the ground
surface to include ledge rock, cliffs, and any other natural formation.
A. The Township Committee finds and determines that the unregulated
and uncontrolled excavation and removal and relocation of soil on a
large scale, or for sale or use other than on an individual tax lot, has or
may result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and
general welfare, substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of
the Township to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
B. The Township finds and determines that the removal of rocks, boulders,
and the destruction of rock ledges and rock formations is a direct threat
to the environment.
§ 136-22 LICENSING § 140-3
78:425
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic matter of any origin.
TOPSOIL — The arable soil within eight inches of the surface.
§ 140-4. Permit required.
A. No person or entity shall disturb or remove any rock, soil, sand, gravel
or other natural rock or stone for sale or use, or otherwise remove,
store or stockpile the same for sale or use on any given tax lot, unless a
soil and rock removal permit has been first obtained, as herein set
forth.
B. However, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the removal of
soil, sand, gravel or other natural deposit, stone or rock if:
(1) The amount of said removal is 50 cubic yards or less; or
(2) The removal is associated with and incidental to the excavation
required for the construction of a single-family dwelling and
associated lawns, driveways, accessory buildings, patios, retaining
walls, on a single lot in accordance with the building permits issued
by the Construction Official and if said removal is 50 cubic yards or
less; or
(3) The removal is associated with the excavation required for the
construction of an in-ground or aboveground swimming pool; or
(4) The removal is associated with the excavation required for the
construction or reconstruction of individual sewage disposal
systems in accordance with permits issued by the Board of Health;
or
(5) The removal is limited to a disturbed area of not more than five
acres and is associated with, and incidental to, the construction of
an approved site plan, if the material removed is utilized as fill
material on the subject property, or the amount removed from the
site does not exceed twice the volume of the material displaced by
the building foundation or foundations; or
(6) The removal is associated with and necessary for the
reconstruction and/or construction of roads, drainage systems,
sanitary sewers, flood control measures, or other improvements,
approved on the subdivision plat by reviewing municipal body, or
undertaken by any governmental agency; or
(7) The removal is associated with and incidental to the regrading of
the yard on an existing developed single lot for the purposes of
making or installing drainage improvements, driveways or other
necessary improvements, and the removal is less than 50 cubic
yards.
(8) The removal is solely that of a peat harvesting operation, after
classification of same by the Township Planning Board.
§ 140-3 ANDOVER CODE § 140-4
78:426
§ 140-5. Application requirements.
Three copies of an application to the appropriate Township body for a
conditional use permit, shall be accompanied by:
C. No application for a soil and rock permit shall be made, pursuant to this
chapter, unless a conditional use permit has been obtained from the
Planning Board. The Township Committee shall be the issuing authority
for the soil and rock removal permit.
A. Eight certified and sealed copies of the map prepared by a licensed
professional engineer and licensed land surveyor.
B. An aerial photograph of the site.
C. Proposed contour lines at two-foot intervals after removal of the soil.
D. All existing structures on the subject premises and within 200 feet
thereof.
E. All existing roads and drainage on the subject premises and within 200
feet of the property.
F. Location of topsoil storage areas.
G. Methods of controlling silting of downstream properties.
H. The elevation of the seasonal high-water table, if it is within eight feet
of the proposed contour, or certification by the applicant's duly licensed
professional engineer that the seasonal high-water table is not within
eight feet of the proposed contour.
(1) The determination of the elevation of the seasonal high-water table
shall be made by one of the following methods:
(a) Test pits with a backhoe.
(b) Probes or soundings.
(c) Geophysical tools.
(d) Rotary drilling.
(e) Continuous flight auger drilling.
(2) A three-hundred-foot grid pattern shall be used in determining the
seasonal high-water table with a minimum of four locations for a
five-acre tract. The applicant shall notify the Township Engineer at
least seven days in advance of conducting the tests to determine
the water table, and the Township Engineer, or his representative,
shall be present and witness the tests when conducted. The
certification of the applicant's engineer shall read as follows: "I
hereby certify that the seasonal high-water table is (or is not)
within eight feet of the proposed final contour as shown on this
§ 140-4 LICENSING § 140-5
78:427
§ 140-6. Factors considered in approving permits.
map." The engineer's certification shall also include the names and
addresses of the persons witnessing the tests utilized to determine
the seasonal high-water table, the dates that the tests were taken
and the test methods utilized. A log of the materials found in the
test holes or pits also shall be included on the plan.
I. The map submitted by applicant showing proposed contours shall
divide the property from which the soil is to be removed into five-acre
sections. The applicant shall indicate on the map the numerical
sequence in which the sections are to be worked. Not more than one
section shall be worked at any one time pursuant to § 140-10K herein.
J. All existing trees, 2 1/2 inches in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet from
the ground level, and the plan for replacing the same number of trees
with trees having a diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured 4 1/2 feet from
the top of root level.
K. The application shall also indicate the total number of cubic yards to be
removed and the length of time within which the proposed operation
shall be completed, which shall normally not be for longer than five
years. Where a total project is not capable of being completed within
five years, it shall be broken down into two sections, one of which shall
be completed within five years and the other within such further period
not exceeding five years as the appropriate Township body may
determine.
L. All of the requirements of the Township ordinances governing site plan
review shall apply to soil and rock removal applications, and a site plan
application shall be filed with the soil removal application, and all of the
requirements of the site plan including the fee provisions shall be
complied with.
M. If the Planning Board determines that additional information is
required to decide the application, outside of the requirements for a
complete application, the Board shall have the power to require such
additional information not specified in the chapter, or any revisions in
the accompanying documents, which are reasonably necessary in order
to make the ultimate decision on the issue of approval of the
application.
A. In considering and reviewing the application and arriving at its
decision, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board shall be
guided by and take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare and the general purposes of land use control, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Surface water drainage.
§ 140-5 ANDOVER CODE § 140-6
78:428
§ 140-7. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued after approval of the application by the Township
Committee. It shall show the total number of yards of soil or rock authorized
to be removed, as calculated by the Township Engineer, based upon the
contour maps submitted, and also the duration or terms of the permit
based upon the applicant's estimate of the time necessary to completed the
proposed operations, as provided for in § 140-6.
§ 140-8. Method and regulation of operation.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Public health and safety.
(6) Land values and uses.
(7) Contours both existing and proposed.
(8) Existing contours and topographic character of the land prior to
the removal of any soil or rock and the proposed contours which
shall result subsequent to the removal of soil or rock in accordance
with the soil removal application.
(9) Whether the proposed removal of soil or rock is necessary and
incidental to the development of the property for its intended use
or whether the proposed removal constitutes primarily a
commercial activity.
(10) Effects of tree removal.
(11) Effects on water resources such as streams and wetlands.
B. In the event that, after considering and reviewing the application, the
resultant effect would be a creation of a lake, pond, hole, pit or similar
type of depression and further that the nature of the operation would be
a wet-mining operation then, and in that event, in addition to the abovereferred-
to factors and these factors alone, such may be sufficient basis
for the denial for the permit.
C. The applicant shall obtain a valid land disturbance permit, issued in
accordance with Chapter 136, Soil Erosion, before a soil or rock
removal permit may be issued.
A. If a permit is issued for the removal of earth, rock, and soil as provided
herein, the owner, or person in charge shall so conduct the operations
that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and in such
manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris,
and graded to conform with the contour lines and grades as required
and shown on the approved plan.
§ 140-6 LICENSING § 140-8
78:429
§ 140-9. Arable soil.
§ 140-10. Regulations.
The following regulations shall be observed:
B. No soil or rock shall be removed nor shall any operation be conducted
so as to violate any of the regulations contained in this chapter.
A. Arable soil within eight inches of the surface shall not be removed from
the licensed owner's premises, but promptly, on completion of
operations, the arable soil so retained shall be respread on the surface
as uniformly as possible to a minimum depth of six inches, and seeded
with winter rye or other suitable planting and mulched, fertilized and
tacked.
B. If the soil within eight inches of the top is not arable soil, arable soil to a
minimum depth of six inches shall be spread thereon promptly when the
operation is completed in each area. Provisions shall be made for
adequate drainage after the topsoil is replaced.
C. No topsoil shall be removed from the Township.
A. Deposits prohibited on adjoining property or public roads. Soil removed
shall not be deposited, or in any way thrown or placed, upon adjoining
property or public roads. Any soil or material resulting from any
operation, accumulating on any adjoining property or public road, shall
be removed therefrom immediately, upon notice by the Township
Engineer to the permittee.
B. Access road. The petitioner shall construct a coarse gravel access road
into the removal site to insure that trucks leaving the site will not track
material onto the public road. Such access road shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the Township Engineer.
C. Operations near streams or wetlands. All operations shall be conducted
in strict accordance with the regulations of the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act, N.J.A.C. 7:7A and Flood Hazard Area Control Act,
N.J.A.C. 7:13. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain a letter of
interpretation and/or any necessary permits from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection confirming the presence or
absence of wetlands or wetlands transition areas and/or any necessary
permits prior to an application for a permit to disturb or remove rock or
soil.
D. Nuisances or hazards. The operation shall be conducted so as not to
constitute a nuisance to adjoining owners or the Township, and in no
event shall the operation create any extra hazardous or unsafe
condition, with regards to any person or persons.
E. Clearance of area. Upon completion of an operation or of excavation
from an area delineated on the approved plan, the area shall be
§ 140-8 ANDOVER CODE § 140-10
78:430
properly cleared of debris, graded to conform to the contours and
grades, and trees planted, in accordance with the approved plan. A final
map shall be submitted containing and complying with all requirements
as set forth in this section. This work shall be included as part of the
bond required under § 140-12.
F. Requirement of approved plan. Soil or rock shall not be removed,
except in accordance with the approved plan, which plan may, upon
application, be amended from time to time by the reviewing board.
G. Water table and grade level restrictions. No soil or rock shall be
removed which is within eight feet of the water table, unless approved
by the reviewing board, and no soil or rock shall be removed which is
below the grade established and shown on the approved map.
H. Garbage; pollution; safety hazards. No trash, garbage, junk or debris
shall be stored in any permit area, and no safety hazards shall be
permitted, either during or after the completion of operations. There
shall be no burning of combustible debris resulting from the soil
operation.
I. Inspection. The applicant shall permit the inspection of the operation,
at any reasonable time, by officers of the Township designated to
perform such inspections.
J. Progress report. Each permittee shall annually furnish a progress
report to the Township Engineer, the first of which shall be submitted
nine months after issuance of the permit, which shall consist of a sketch
map at a scale of one inch to 100 feet showing contours every two feet,
retained arable soil, equipment, the areas where soil was removed, the
location of water supply, and disposal facilities, and drainage facilities
prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer. All
topography shall be made by aerial photographic methods and a
photograph submitted with the original application and each progress
report.
K. Soil removal limited to five-acre sections. In order to minimize the
possibility of mud slides or drainage of silt, and for safety purposes, the
area of operations for excavation shall be limited to one five-acre
section as shown on applicant's soil or rock removal map, at any one
time. The applicant shall fence and keep locked the five-acre section
currently the subject of soil removal operations. The applicant shall not
commence soil or rock removal upon a succeeding five-acre section
without the replacement of topsoil and reseeding and replanting of the
previous five-acre section. The applicant shall notify the Township
Engineer before commencing soil removal operations on each new fiveacre
section. Each succeeding five-acre section shall be fenced and
locked before soil removal operations are commenced thereon.
L. Respreading and reseeding of arable soil. Upon the completion of work
in any specific area, all respreading of arable soil and reseeding as
required by this section and § 140-9 of this chapter shall be completed
§ 140-10 LICENSING § 140-10
78:431
§ 140-11. Application and inspection fees. [Amended 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-11]
within 60 days thereafter; except that, if the completion of work in an
area occurs during the winter months when it would not be practical to
respread the topsoil and reseed it, the work shall be completed within
the additional time as maybe specified by the Township Engineer.
M. Exception from regulations. In any action taken by the reviewing board
with regard to this section of the Township ordinances, the board shall
give primary consideration to the rules, regulations and standards
herein set forth, in order to promote the general welfare of the entire
community. If, however, the applicant can clearly demonstrate, because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, that literal enforcement of
one or more of these regulations is impractical or will exact undue
hardship, the Planning Board may grant exceptions from the
requirements of such sections as may be reasonable within the general
intent of this chapter. The Township body shall state its reasons for
granting any such exceptions in resolution form.
N. Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays, and 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on
Saturdays. There shall be no operation of any kind or character on
Sundays or legal Township holidays.
O. Working face of excavation. While working an area, the working face of
the excavation shall not exceed 85º from the horizontal, nor shall an
angle of 85º have a vertical height exceeding 30 feet. Any face not
currently being worked on shall not exceed 30º from the horizontal. A
suitable fence shall be erected on three sides of the working face of the
excavation in order to prevent persons from approaching such working
face from the existing grade level. Where an excavated area adjoins a
road, no excavation shall be made below the level of the road for a
distance of 100 feet back from the center line of the road except in
instances where, on the low side of the road, the removal of material
would not substantially alter the general terrain characteristics. Where
an excavated area is within 50 feet from any building, the finished
grade thereof shall not exceed 10% or be less than 2%. Care should be
taken so that there shall be no diversion of surface water either during
the operation or after the project is complete.
A. Upon application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
the applicant shall pay a filing fee in the amount of $500.
B. In addition, at time of filing the application, to cover review by the
Township Engineer, planning consultant and other Township personnel
and site inspections, a deposit for review fees in the amount of $3,000
shall be deposited with the Township Clerk, by the applicant. Any
unused portion shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 140-10 ANDOVER CODE § 140-11
78:432
§ 140-12. Bond required.
Before any work is done for which a permit is required, and during the
period covered by the permit, the applicant shall file and maintain a bond
in form and with surety approved by the Township Attorney in an amount
deemed sufficient by the Township Committee on a recommendation of
the Township Engineer, that shall be sufficient to insure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the conditions of the
permit and the terms thereof.
§ 140-13. Release from bond.
C. The board shall have the right to required additional deposits to be paid
by the applicant, from time to time, in order to insure that review and
inspection fees are adequately provided for.
D. Upon issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay another deposit in
the sum of $2,000 to cover reasonable inspection fees to municipal
personnel, including but not limited to the Township Engineer, for any
inspections and field checks of the operation, and for inspections of
improvements. Thereafter, the permittee shall reimburse the Township
promptly for the cost of all periodic inspection fees as well as any
extraordinary costs or expenses necessitated as a result of unforeseen
difficulties or exigencies, or necessitated by or resulting from any
violation of any provision of this chapter. Should the applicant fail to
reimburse the Township for the aforesaid fees, within 14 days of a
request by the Township to do so, the permit may be suspended or
revoked for such a period of time as the Township Committee may
determine.
A. When all required performance has been completed, the obligor shall
notify the Township Committee, in writing, by certified or registered
mail, of the completion thereof and shall send a copy thereof to the
Township Engineer.
B. The Township Committee shall authorize the Township Engineer to
inspect the site to determine that all requirements of the approved plan
have been complied with.
C. The Township Engineer shall thereupon file a report in writing with the
Township Committee which shall be detailed and shall indicate either
approval, partial approval or rejection.
D. If the work covered by the bond or performance guarantee, or any
portion thereof, shall not be approved, or shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer, the report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection. Where the rejection indicates partial
approval of the improvements or works, it shall indicate the costs of the
work for which approval is rejected.
§ 140-11 LICENSING § 140-13
78:433
§ 140-14. Revocation of permit.
After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Township
Committee, the permit of any person may be revoked or suspended for such
period as the Township Committee may determine, for any violation of the
terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any approved plan and permit
granted hereunder.
§ 140-15. Traffic survey.
§ 140-16. Off-tract improvements.
The Planning Board, in cases where it determines that off-tract
improvements are necessitated or required because of the proposed soil
and rock removal operation, shall have the authority to require the
applicant to construct off-tract improvements in accordance with the
provisions of § 159-15 et seq. of this Code.
§ 140-17. Jurisdiction.
The Township of Andover, pursuant to the within chapter and pursuant to
the Code of the Township of Andover hereby retains jurisdiction over all
soil and rock removal, mining and quarrying operations, including but not
limited to the soil erosion and sediment control aspects. The purpose of
this section is to make clear the fact that said jurisdiction has not been
transferred to the Sussex County Soil Conservation District.
E. The Township Committee shall accept or reject the work, grant partial
approval, or withhold approval, on the basis of the report and shall
notify the obligor in writing by certified or registered mail of the
contents of the report and the action of the Township Committee with
relation thereto, not later than 90 days after receipt of notice from the
obligor of the completion of the work. Where partial approval is
granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to his
performance guarantee bond except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure the work not yet approved.
A. The Planning Board shall have the authority to require the applicant to
conduct engineering studies and a traffic survey on the roads in the
vicinity of the proposed soil and rock removal operation in order to
determine if such roads are of sufficient strength to support the truck
traffic to be emanating from the operation.
B. The traffic survey, if required, shall be made with counters and the
average daily traffic shall be determined, all costs to be borne by the
applicant.
§ 140-13 ANDOVER CODE § 140-17
78:434
Chapter 144
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 26.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Removal of waste from parks — See Ch. 103,
§ 103-3H.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 206.
§ 140-17 LICENSING § 140-17
78:435

ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 8-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-3153]
§ 144-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Sussex County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
As defined by the Sussex County Solid Waste Management Plan -
Residential Generators:
Class Material Definition
01 Aluminum cans Food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum
03 Computer printout/
white ledger
All computer paper, all high-grade
white paper (including letterhead,
typing paper, copier paper, onionskin,
tissue and note pad)
06 Corrugated Containers, brown grocery bags, and
similar paper items, usually used to
transport supplies, equipment, parts
or other merchandise
07 Glass containers AU glass containers used for
packaging food or beverages
10 Leaves and brush
leaves
Brush and other yard trimmings,
including grass clippings, from
institutions, commercial or industrial
sources
11 Magazine and junk
mail magazine stock
White and colored paper and
envelopes, telephone directories and
books
13 Mixed office paper Items listed in computer printout/
white ledger category when mixed
with envelopes, manila binders and
color paper; material is generated by
commercial/institutional sources
A.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Recycling, adopted by Ord. No.
88-3 (Ch. XIX of the 1973 Code), as amended.
§ 144-1 LICENSING § 144-1
78:437
Class Material Definition
14 Newspaper All paper marketed as newsprint or
newspaper and containing at least
70% newsprint or newspaper
(American Paper Institute grades Nos.
6, 7 and 8-news)
15 Plastic containers Containers, such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE No. 1) soda
bottles, high-density polyethylene
(HDPE No. 2) milk, and water or
detergent bottles
17 Steel cans Rigid containers made exclusively or
primarily of steel, tin-plated steel, and
composite steel and aluminum cans
used to store food, beverages, paint
and a variety of other household and
consumer products
18 Stumps, logs and
tree parts
Unfinished wood from land-clearing
projects, storm damage or pruning
activities
19 Textiles Textiles larger than 15 inches by 15
inches (e.g., clean clothing, drapes,
curtains, sheets, towels, cloth, belt,
shoes, handbags. and small stuffed
animals)
20 Tires Rubber-based scrip automotive and
truck tires
22 Used motor oil A petroleum base or synthetic oil the
use of which includes, but is not
limited to, lubrication of internal
combustion engines, which through
use, storage or handling has become
unsuitable in its original purpose due
to the presence of impurities or loss of
original properties
As defined by the Sussex County Solid Waste Management Plan -
Nonresidential Generators, Commercial and Institutional Sectors.
Class Material Definition
01 Aluminum cans Food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum
02 Antifreeze An automotive engine coolant
consisting of a mixture of ethylene
glycol and water or propylene glycol
and water
B.
§ 144-1 ANDOVER CODE § 144-1
78:438
Class Material Definition
03 Computer printout/
white ledger
All computer paper, all high-grade
white paper (including letterhead,
typing paper, copier paper, onionskin,
tissue and note pad)
04 Concrete, asphalt
and masonry/paving
material
Asphalt, concrete, brick, cinder block,
"patio blocks," and other masonry and
paving materials
05 Consumer batteries Any type of button, coin, cylindrical,
rectangular or other shaped, enclosed
device or sealed container which is
utilized as an energy source for
commercial, industrial, medical,
institutional, or household use (does
not include lead-acid batteries from
vehicles)
06 Corrugated Containers, brown grocery bags, and
similar paper items, usually used to
transport supplies, equipment, parts
or other merchandise
07 Glass containers AU glass containers used for
packaging food or beverages
08 Heavy iron All structural steel or ferrous metal,
cast-iron components
09 Lead-acid batteries Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and
equipment, which shall be stored in a
manner that protects them from the
elements to avoid corrosion and
leakage
10 Leaves and brush
leaves
Brush and other yard trimmings,
including grass clippings, from
institutions, commercial or industrial
sources
11 Magazine and junk
mail magazine stock
White and colored paper and
envelopes, telephone directories and
books
12 Mercury containing
devices
Including fluorescent and compact
tubes, high-intensity discharge (HID)
and neon lamps, electrical switches,
thermostats, thermometers and any
batteries containing mercury
§ 144-1 LICENSING § 144-1
78:439
Class Material Definition
13 Mixed office paper Items listed in computer printout/
white ledger category when mixed
with envelopes, manila binders and
color paper; material is generated by
commercial/institutional sources
14 Newspaper All paper marketed as newsprint or
newspaper and containing at least
70% newsprint or newspaper
(American Paper Institute grades Nos.
6, 7 and 8-news)
15 Plastic containers Containers, such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE No. 1) soda
bottles, high-density polyethylene
(HDPE No. 2) milk, and water or
detergent bottles
16 Scrap autos Crushed or shredded automobile or
truck bodies, excluding auto shredder
residue or "fluff"
17 Steel cans Rigid containers made exclusively or
primarily of steel, tin-plated steel, and
composite steel and aluminum cans
used to store food, beverages, paint
and a variety of other household and
consumer products
18 Stumps, logs and
tree parts
Unfinished wood from land clearing
projects, storm damage or pruning
activities
19 Textiles Textiles larger than 15 inches by 15
inches (e.g., clean clothing, drapes,
curtains, sheets, towels, cloth, belt,
shoes, handbags. and small stuffed
animals)
20 Tires Rubber-based scrip automotive and
truck tires
21 Used consumer
electronics
Any appliance used in a business that
includes circuitry; includes
components and subassemblies of the
electrode products; examples include
computers and peripherals, printers,
copiers, VCRs, televisions, cell phones
and fax machines, etc.
§ 144-1 ANDOVER CODE § 144-1
78:440
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall include hotels, motels, or other
guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,"
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55: 13A-1 et seq.);
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things; enforce the provisions of this article, and any rules and
regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Andover Township.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
Class Material Definition
22 Used motor oil A petroleum base or synthetic oil the
use of which includes, but is not
limited to, lubrication of internal
combustion engines, which through
use, storage or handling has become
unsuitable in its original purpose due
to the presence of impurities or loss of
original properties
23 White goods and
light iron
All large appliances, such as washers,
dryers, refrigerators, etc., as well as
products made from sheet iron, such
as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks,
recycled or reconditioned steel drums,
and other nonstructural ferrous scrap
24 Wood scrap Unfinished lumber from construction
or demolition projects, including
pallets; unfinished shall mean
nonchemically treated (not pressure
treated, impregnated with
preservatives, insecticides, fungicides,
creosote, or other chemicals, and not
painted, resin-coated or otherwise
surface treated, and not laminated or
bonded; and not similarly altered from
its natural condition)
25 Nonferrous and
aluminum scrap
All noncontainer aluminum, stainless
steel, copper, zinc, brass, and other
metals which generally do not rust
§ 144-1 LICENSING § 144-1
78:441
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 144-2. Source separation requirements.
§ 144-3. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Township of Andover, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises. Designated recyclable materials generated by the owners,
tenants, or occupants of residential premises shall be placed separately
at the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be
hereinafter established by the regulations promulgated by the
Township of Andover. Designated recyclable materials generated by the
owners, tenants, or occupants of nonresidential premises shall be
separated from all other solid waste and placed in separate waste
receptacles in a manner and on such days and times as provided by the
regulations promulgated by the Township or by the contract between
the generator and contracted hauling agent.
A. All containers (bagged recyclables not excepted) containing recyclable
materials shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the
sidewalk, or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street
as not to constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily
accessible to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians.
The owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean
and in safe-handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be
disposed of shall be placed as noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of
the day immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than
6:00 a.m. of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall
be removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
§ 144-1 ANDOVER CODE § 144-4
78:442
§ 144-4. Recyclables shall become Township property.
From the time of curbside placement during scheduled recycling pickup
and/or bulky waste events, if permitted, all designated materials shall be
and will become the property of the Township of Andover. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Township of
Andover to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
such recyclables or materials. Each such collection in violation hereof from
one or more properties shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 144-5. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
article. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the State of New Jersey and the Sussex County Solid Waste
Plan. Violations and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or
management, in those instances where the violator is not easily identifiable.
The management shall issue notification and collection rules to new tenants
when they arrive and every six months during their occupancy.
§ 144-6. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this article.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or its designee, unless the municipality provides for the
collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoors litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the amount
of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
§ 144-4 LICENSING § 144-7
78:443
§ 144-7. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional, or industrial properties (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c).
§ 144-8. Prohibition of collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of Andover
Township, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multifamily dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the municipal recycling coordinator
and/or municipal engineer.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township, the
owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional, or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source-separated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the municipal engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this article, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 144-7 ANDOVER CODE § 144-9
78:444
§ 144-9. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Recycling Coordinator or designee
assigned by the Township of Andover and the Sussex County Department
of Health are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the
provisions of this article. An inspection may consist of sorting through
containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the
presence of any recyclable material.
§ 144-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this article or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, based on
the penalty schedule listed below.
(1) First violation: minimum penalty $100.
(2) Second violation: minimum penalty $500.
(3) Third and/or subsequent violations: minimum penalty $750.
B. Each day for which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered
a separate offense.
C. Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same
ordinance, and who was fined for the previous violation, may be
sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated
offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of the article.
§ 144-9 LICENSING § 144-10
78:445
Chapter 148
STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Individual sewage systems — See Ch. 219.
Wastewater collection franchise — See Ch.
A237:1.
§ 144-10 ANDOVER CODE § 144-10
78:446
ARTICLE I
Illicit Connection
[Adopted 10-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 148-1. Purpose.
An article to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Andover, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 148-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Andover unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Andover or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
§ 148-1 LICENSING § 148-2
78:447
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water that, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 148-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Andover any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
If the illicit connection is located (and the connection is within Andover
Township), the responsible party will be cited for being in violation of this
Illicit Connection Ordinance.
§ 148-4. Enforcement.
Responsible party will be given 30 days to cease the nonstormwater
discharge. The responsible party may apply for a NJPDES permit for the
discharge, but the discharge shall be ceased until a valid NJPDES permit
has been issued by the state. If the responsible party fails to eliminate
the discharge, the Township shall take the necessary steps, including court
action. In such cases the NJDEP shall be notified by written
correspondence. This article shall be enforced by the Municipal Stormwater
Coordinator of the Township of Andover.
§ 148-5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 148-2 ANDOVER CODE § 148-5
78:448
ARTICLE II
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 10-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
§ 148-6. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Township of Andover, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 148-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Andover or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 148-8. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Township of Andover
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 148-9. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 148-6 LICENSING § 148-9
78:449
§ 148-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
municipal officials of the Township of Andover.
§ 148-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities including the washing of fire-fighting
vehicles.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 148-9 ANDOVER CODE § 148-11
78:450
ARTICLE III
Retrofitting of Private Storm Drain Inlets
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18]
§ 148-12. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Andover so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 148-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Andover or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 148-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 148-12 LICENSING § 148-14
78:451
§ 148-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 148-14 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 148-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 148-14 ANDOVER CODE § 148-15
78:452
§ 148-16. Enforcement.
The Construction and Zoning Officer of the Township of Andover shall
enforce this article.
§ 148-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and one and one-half
inches wide (This option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 148-15 LICENSING § 148-17
78:453

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-17]
§ 148-18. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Andover and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 148-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Andover or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 148-20. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 148-18 LICENSING § 148-20
78:455
§ 148-21. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 148-22. Enforcement.
The Construction and Zoning Officer of the Township of Andover shall
enforce this article.
§ 148-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Andover.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 148-20 ANDOVER CODE § 148-23
78:456
Chapter 150
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Housing and property maintenance — See Ch.
67.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 150-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 13:D-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
stormwater management regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township
Committee of the Township of Andover, State of New Jersey, has adopted
the following Stormwater Management Ordinance.
§ 150-2. Findings of fact.
§ 150-3. Scope and purpose.
A. Uncontrolled stormwater from development may result in areas of the
Township of Andover which may be subject to periodic inundation. This
may result in the loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. A stormwater management plan shall also include such structural
measures and practice as may be necessary to manage stormwater
quality and quantity.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
§ 148-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-3
150:457
§ 150-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 150-4.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Andover.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 150-3 ANDOVER CODE § 150-4
150:458
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 150-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-4
150:459
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Andover, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
§ 150-4 ANDOVER CODE § 150-4
150:460
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 150-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-4
150:461
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as “hydrophytic vegetation.”
§ 150-5. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 150-6. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
Stormwater management requirements for major development are as
follows:
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 150-6. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules. Alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge,
stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major development
projects as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 150-12.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
§ 150-4 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:462
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-6
150:463
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
§ 150-6 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:464
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[3] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[4] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-6
150:465
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[c] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[d] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[e] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection G(1); or
[f] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 150-9, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
§ 150-6 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:466
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 150-7, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, which is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery and
fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-6
150:467
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 150-7, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(2) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and [3] above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(3) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 150-4 shall be submitted to the
§ 150-6 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:468
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for
sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-6
150:469
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 150-8, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 150-8. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 150-8C
Sand filter 80%
§ 150-6 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:470
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converges on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 150-8.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-6
150:471
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
§ 150-6 ANDOVER CODE § 150-6
150:472
§ 150-7. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
§ 150-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-7
150:473
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the
land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, which may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff
rates and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
§ 150-7 ANDOVER CODE § 150-8
150:474
§ 150-8. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 150-10D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 150-10.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 150-6 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 150-6 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
§ 150-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-9
150:475
§ 150-9. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 150-10. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
§ 150-9 ANDOVER CODE § 150-10
150:476
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
be removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
§ 150-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-10
150:477
§ 150-11. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this chapter.
§ 150-10 ANDOVER CODE § 150-11
150:478
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the Andover Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Adjustment, or the Township Engineer. That municipal board or
official shall consult the Municipal/Planning/Zoning Board engineer to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 150-5
through 150-8 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
§ 150-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-11
150:479
§ 150-12. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations:
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 150-6 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 150-12.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal/planning board/zoning board
engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in
Subsection C(1) through (6) when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 150-3C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
§ 150-11 ANDOVER CODE § 150-12
150:480
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
§ 150-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-12
150:481
§ 150-13. Performance or maintenance guarantee.
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
B. Where continued maintenance of a detention basin is to be the
responsibility of the Township, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) The applicant shall maintain the basin during the construction
phase of the project.
(2) As a condition of preliminary approval and prior to acceptance of
the basin by the Township, the applicant shall enter into an escrow
agreement with the Township, which agreement shall include a
statement that the escrow contribution is made in consideration of
the Township assuming all future maintenance of the basin. The
form of agreement shall be provided by the Township. The
agreement, upon execution, shall be recorded by the applicant in
the office of the Sussex County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter
file a copy of the recorded agreement with the Township Planning
Department.
§ 150-12 ANDOVER CODE § 150-13
150:482
(3) The amount of escrow contribution shall be based upon the area of
the detention basin on an acreage basis, which shall include the
plan area at the top of the bank plus an additional 25 feet at the top
of the bank encircling the basin. The amount of the escrow
contribution shall be calculated according to the following formula:
$10,000 per acre of area of basin for repairs and major
maintenance. The total of the above shall be multiplied by a factor
of 1.1 to cover the cost of the first year's maintenance. The
minimum contribution, regardless of the size of the basin, shall be
$35,000.
(4) Upon certification by the Township Engineer that the project is
complete and the guarantee bond for the project may be released,
acceptance of the basin by the Township shall be specifically stated
in the resolution authorizing the bond release. The Township shall
retain from the cash portion of the bond a sum equal to the escrow
contribution calculation by the Township Engineer in accordance
with the formula in Subsection B(3) above. In the event the cash
portion of the bond is less than the escrow contribution, the
developer shall post the deficit in cash prior to the release of the
bond. Any interim bond reductions authorized by the Township
shall not be construed to mean that all or any part of the detention
basin has been accepted by the Township, nor shall any such
interim reduction reduce the cash portion of the bond to an amount
less than the escrow contribution.
(5) The escrow contribution does not include maintenance of the lot or
open space area in which the detention basin is located.
C. Resource evaluation.
(1) Where the Township finds during construction or prior to Township
acceptance is necessary to protect environmental resources, the
developer shall furnish a resource evaluation report to include but
not (be) limited to data on water quality, quantity, thermal
characteristics, soil and vegetation.
(2) Review procedure.
(a) Data submitted by independent professional.
(b) Evaluation by Township.
(c) Mitigation by applicant.
D. Planning and design standards for maintenance and repair.
(1) The goal for the planning and design of a stormwater management
facility is for its operation with the least practical amount of
maintenance. To accomplish this, the facility shall be developed to
eliminate avoidable maintenance tasks, minimize the long-term
amount of regular maintenance tasks, and reduce the potential for
§ 150-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-13
150:483
extensive, difficult, and costly remedial or emergency maintenance
efforts.
(2) Strong, durable, and noncorrodible materials, components, and
fasteners shall be used to reduce required maintenance efforts.
These include, but are not limited to, lightweight noncorrodible
metals such as aluminum for trash racks, orifice plates, and access
hatches; hardy, disease-resistant grasses for bottoms and side
slopes as prescribed by Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Standards administered by the Sussex County Soil Conservation
District; reinforced concrete for outlet structures and inlet
headwalls; and gabions for channel and outlet linings.
(3) Detention facilities shall be designed to minimize propagation of
insects, particularly mosquitoes.
(4) Detention facilities should be designed in a harmonious and
attractive manner.
(5) Detention facility outlets shall be designed to function without
manual, electric or mechanical controls.
E. Continued maintenance, repair and safety.
(1) Projects subject to review in this chapter shall comply with the
following requirements:
(a) Responsibility for continued maintenance, repair and safety.
[1] The requirements of this section do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to
and accepted by the municipality or another governmental
agency. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of
stormwater management facilities, including periodic
removal and disposal of accumulated particulate material
and debris, shall remain with the property owner, unless
assumed by a governmental agency, with permanent
arrangements that it shall pass to any successor or owner.
If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding
arrangements shall be made to pass the basic
responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements
shall designate for each project the property owner,
governmental agency, or other legally established entity to
be permanently responsible for inspection and
maintenance, hereinafter in this section referred to as the
"responsible person."
[2] Prior to granting approval or as a condition of final
subdivision or site plan approval to any project subject to
review under this chapter, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the municipality to ensure the operation
and maintenance of the stormwater management facility.
§ 150-13 ANDOVER CODE § 150-13
150:484
In cases where property is subdivided and sold separately,
a homeowners' association or similar permanent entity
shall be established as the responsible person, absent an
agreement by a governmental agency to assume
responsibility. It shall be demonstrated to the municipality
that a proposed new responsible entity has the capability
to complete and finance necessary maintenance. A twoyear
maintenance guarantee shall be posted for all private
stormwater management facilities in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
[3] In the event that the stormwater management facility
becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or if it
is in need of maintenance, the municipality shall so notify
the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that
notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is
approved by the Township Engineer or his designee. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof
to the responsible person.
(b) Continued maintenance and repair procedure.
[1] Preventative maintenance procedures are required to
maintain the intended operation and safe condition of the
stormwater management facility by greatly reducing the
occurrence of problems and malfunctions. To be effective,
preventative maintenance shall be performed on a regular
basis and include such routine procedures as training of
staff, periodic inspections, grass cutting and fertilizing, silt
and debris removal and disposal, upkeep of moving parts,
elimination of mosquito breeding habitats, pond
maintenance, and review of maintenance and inspection
work to identify where the maintenance program could be
more effective.
[2] Corrective maintenance procedures are required to
correct a problem or malfunction at a stormwater
management facility and to restore the facility's intended
operation and safe condition. Based upon the severity of
the problem, corrective maintenance must be performed
on an as-needed or emergency basis and include such
procedures as structural repairs, mosquito extermination,
removal of debris, sediment and trash removal which
threaten discharge capacity, erosion repair, snow and ice
removal, fence repair and restoration of vegetated and
nonvegetated linings.
§ 150-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-14
150:485
§ 150-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to hear and determine the
matter, be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000.
§ 150-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
§ 150-16. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this chapter.
Chapter 155
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 45.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
§ 150-14 ANDOVER CODE § 150-16
150:486
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 13-1 of the 1973 Code, readopted
9-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-25; as amended through Ord. No. 2000-6]
§ 155-1. Permit required.
No person shall break or dig up, or excavate in, any street, highway, alley,
or public place in the Township unless for a lawful purpose and under a
written permit on deposit of security for restoration of the street to its
former condition, including the expenses of inspection.
§ 155-2. Application; deposit and fee. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-11]
§ 155-3. Amount of deposit. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
A. Any person desiring to open the surface of a street, highway, alley or
public place shall make written application to the Construction Official
for a permit. The application shall set forth the place and extent of the
intended opening and purpose, together with specific location of the
section of street or highway involved, estimated time required for the
intended work, and the number of both lineal and square feet of road
surface reasonably estimated to be required to be opened for the
purpose.
B. Except for minor openings, each application shall be accompanied by
the required deposit in an amount fixed by the Township Engineer,
together with a permit fee of $100 and a bond adequate in sureties,
coverage and amount to guarantee the Township against civil liability
during the course of the work and restoration, the bond to be approved
as to form and sufficiency by the Township Attorney, before a permit is
issued.
A. Permission shall not be granted until and unless there is deposited with
the Construction Official a sum sufficient to cover the estimated cost of
restoration and restoration and protection against settlement,
including the expense of inspection, any balance remaining to be
returned to the applicant.
B. Whenever application for a permit is made by any department, bureau
or board of the Township, county or state, or by any electric, telephone,
telegraph, gas, railroad company or other public utility, the
Construction Official may issue a permit without payment of the deposit
but after restoration of the bed and surface he shall collect from the
department, bureau, board or company the cost to the Township of
restoration and inspection.
C. For minor openings the deposit shall be $1,000, plus the permit fee of
$100, and no bond shall be required. To qualify as minor, the opening
§ 155-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-3
150:487
§ 155-4. Refund to permittee or additional amount due.
§ 155-5. Safety and restoration requirements.
shall not exceed 50 feet in length across the roadway, nor five feet in
width or depth.
A. The Construction Official shall prepare a final bill for the permittee,
deducting the deposit and refunding the balance remaining, if any.
B. When no deposit has been taken, or if the deposit fails to discharge the
final bill in full, the Construction Official shall prepare and forward a
bill to the permittee and collect the full amount owing to the Township.
A. All open trenches, ditches, manholes, vaults, excavations, road surface
disturbances or any work in, under or upon any street, highway, alley or
public place which, if left exposed, would be dangerous to persons
using the street shall be properly and adequately fenced, railed or
barricaded until the construction or danger is removed. In addition, the
posting of red flags or other warning signs or devices during the
daytime may be ordered by the Township Engineer.
B. At twilight suitable and sufficient lights shall be lighted and placed
upon or about railings, fences, barricades and other obstructions and
open trenches, ditches, manholes, vaults and excavations in any street,
highway, alley or public place and they shall be kept lighted throughout
each night the obstruction continues.
C. Upon completion of the work the permittee shall immediately and
adequately fill in the opening temporarily and forthwith notify the
Construction Official that the work has been done and the opening
temporarily filled in. The Construction Official shall at once notify the
Township Road Department which, under supervision of the Township
Engineer, shall restore the site to its proper condition as soon as is
practicable, reporting to the Township Clerk the amount of materials,
equipment and labor used in the restoration, together with the cost of
supervision and inspection.
§ 155-3 ANDOVER CODE § 155-5
150:488
ARTICLE II
Street Specifications
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 13-2 of the 1973 Code; readopted
9-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-25]
§ 155-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes one or more streets, avenues, lanes, roads, boulevards,
parkways, viaducts, alleys or highways intended for use by the public.
§ 155-7. Submission of plan; contents.
In the event that a new street is to be constructed within the limits of the
Township, with a view to being accepted for use by the public, the person
(hereinafter referred to as the “developer”) owning the land upon which
the street is to be constructed shall submit to the Township Committee,
before the work is started, a comprehensive plan with metes-and-bounds
descriptions prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 155-8. General regulations.
A. The plan shall show the outline of the entire property to be subdivided,
the location and width of the proposed streets and the location and
width of existing connecting streets.
B. It shall conform in all respects with an act entitled "An Act Concerning
the Approval and Filing of Maps," Chapter 358, Laws of 1953.54
C. A separate map showing plan and profiles of proposed streets, the
tentative location of necessary sanitary and storm sewers, waterlines,
curbs, catch basins, manholes and other utilities shall be submitted.
The horizontal scale of the map shall be one inch to 50 feet, and vertical
scale shall be one inch to five feet. Six copies shall be submitted and
cross sections if required by the Township Committee.
A. The approval of any plan by the Committee shall in no way be
considered acceptance of a street, nor shall such approval obligate the
Township to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over a street.
B. Easements of a width sufficient to allow proper maintenance shall be
provided for the outletting of all drains, pipelines, and the like to
streams, existing storm drains or other legal drainage courses. These
easements shall be granted to the Township by approved legal
procedures.
54.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 155-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-8
150:489
§ 155-9. Construction standards.
C. All construction work shall be done under the supervision of the
Township Committee and the developer shall pay for the cost of
inspection before acceptance.
D. Sanitary sewers, drainage structures, water mains and service lines
that may be required shall be installed prior to construction of roadway
pavements. Trenches which may have been opened for that purpose
shall be backfilled and thoroughly compacted.
E. All materials and appurtenances, unless otherwise specified herein,
shall comply with the requirements set forth in the current
specifications of the State of New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Delivery tickets for all materials used in the construction of roads shall
be turned over to a representative of the Township Committee for
tabulation and inspection. When in the opinion of the Committee there
is any question as to the quality of any material used in the
construction, the material shall be tested by an approved testing
laboratory at the expense of the developer.
F. No street shall be accepted which has a right-of-way of less than 50 feet
in width. No dead-end streets shall be accepted unless said dead-end
street is a cul-de-sac street located within a major subdivision or
planned development approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
G. The design and construction of any street shall conform to the minimum
standards as set forth on the table contained in Article IV of this
chapter.
A. Subgrade in cuts. All topsoil shall be stripped from the proposed
roadbed for the entire width and the subgrade, when completed, shall
conform to the line, grade and cross section shown on approved plans.
After the subgrade has been shaped, it shall be brought to a firm,
unyielding surface by rolling the entire area. All soft, spongy material
shall be removed from the area and replaced by broken stone, gravel or
acceptable earth. All loose rock or boulders shall be removed or broken
off six inches below the surface of the subgrade. All stumps, logs or
other material which may decompose shall be removed. Cuts shall be
the full width of the right-of-way, slopes as shown on typical sections
hereto annexed, with slope rights where necessary.
B. Subgrade in fills. Embankments shall be formed of suitable materials
placed in successive layers of not more than 12 inches in depth for the
full width of the cross section and shall be compacted by distributing
the necessary hauling uniformly over the preceding layer and by rolling
as directed above. No trees, stumps, rubbish or other material which
may decompose shall be permitted in the fill. Fills shall be the full width
of the right-of-way, slopes as shown on typical section with slope right
where necessary.
§ 155-8 ANDOVER CODE § 155-9
150:490
§ 155-10. Surface treatment.
§ 155-11. Driveways.
All driveways from house to street shall be constructed in such manner as
not to interfere with the flow of water in the street or drainage structures
along the public street.
§ 155-12. Affidavit certifying payment of costs.
Before acceptance of any road or street by the Township Committee, an
affidavit shall be made by the developer certifying that all costs incurred in
the construction have been paid.
C. Drainage. Satisfactory provisions shall be made for the removal of
surface drainage from the streets as well as from the abutting property
and in no case shall surface water be permitted to run more than 400
feet along the street before reaching a watercourse or inlet. The size,
location and depth of storm sewers shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
D. Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with design standards
specified in chart attached to this chapter.55
E. Width and depth of pavement. The width and depth of pavement shall
be in accordance with the specifications shown in the chart attached to
this chapter.
A. The entire area of the pavement shall be brought to a smooth parabolic
surface, having a crown of 10 inches. Immediately thereafter the entire
area of the pavement shall be treated with an application of asphaltic oil
Grade MCI, at the rate of 5/10 gallon per square yard, and immediately
covered with three-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch stone or gravel
and rolled with a power roller and opened to traffic. After the first
application has had sufficient time to cure, the entire area of the
pavement shall be treated with an application of asphaltic oil Grade
R.C. 3 or 4, at the rate of 3/10 to 5/10 gallon per yard and immediately
covered with three-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch stone or gravel
and rolled with a power roller and opened to traffic.
B. All material, execution of workmanship and manner of application for
the above shall comply with the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications.
55.Editor's Note: See Article IV of this chapter.
§ 155-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-12
150:491

ARTICLE III
Obstructions
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 13-3 of the 1973 Code; readopted
9-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-25]
§ 155-13. Obstruction of streets.
A. No person shall deposit, throw, spill or dump dirt, ashes or other
material upon any street or highway in the Township.
B. No person shall divert, obstruct or interfere with the normal flowage of
surface waters in any gutter, drain or ditch along any street or highway
of the Township, nor in any way cause the normal flowage of water to be
stopped or diverted from or overflow of the gutters, drains or ditches.
C. Any person constructing or maintaining a driveway, curb, road, right-ofway,
trail, bridle path, conduit or viaduct intersecting with a street or
highway shall construct and maintain the same so that the flow of
surface water shall not cross a public street or highway but shall be
diverted into a gutter, drain or ditch alongside the public street or
highway in order that the water shall run off unimpeded and will not
overflow.
§ 155-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-13
150:493

ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 13-4 of the 1973 Code, readopted
9-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-25; as amended through Ord. No. 2003-1]
§ 155-14. Minimum design standards for road acceptance.
Residential roads proposed for construction and/or dedication in the
Township of Andover shall comply with the requirements of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq. Said roadways shall
utilize Belgian block curbs unless an exception from the same is authorized
by the reviewing board. If the roadway is not proposed for residential use, it
shall comply with the chart on the following page which is hereby included
in this section.56
56.Editor's Note: The Minimum Road Design Standards for Road Acceptance are included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 155-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-14
150:495

ARTICLE V
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted 10-30-1973 as § 6-5 of the 1973 Code]
§ 155-15. Duty to remove.
§ 155-16. Casting of snow or ice onto streets and sidewalks.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any street, it being the
intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing,
casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which accumulates within the
private property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets of the
Township.
§ 155-17. Removal by Township; costs to become lien.
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering on any
street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks, fire hydrants and cisterns of such street or the abutting
right-of-way actually used by the public, or in the event of ice which
may be so frozen as to make removal impractical shall cause the same
to be thoroughly covered with sand or ashes or other appropriate
chemical, within 12 hours of daylight after the same falls or is formed
thereon. [Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
B. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises used by the public or
business invitees shall remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks,
streets, rights-of-way and parking areas used by the public in the
transaction of business thereat, and in the event of ice which may be so
frozen as to make removal impractical shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand or ashes or other appropriate chemical,
within 12 hours of daylight after the same falls or is formed thereon.
A. If such snow or ice is not removed from such sidewalks, fire hydrants
and cisterns or is cast or deposited thereon or placed upon the
sidewalks or the street by the owner, tenant or occupant of any
premises as hereinabove provided, the same shall be removed under
the direction of the Department of Public Works, and the cost of
removal as nearly as can be ascertained shall be certified by the
Department of Public Works to the Financial Officer of the Township.
[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
B. The Township Committee shall examine the certification and if found to
be correct shall use the cost to be charged against the real estate
abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, fire hydrants and cisterns,
and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and a tax in
the same manner as the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon the
premises and shall bear interest and be enforced and collected by the
§ 155-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-17
150:497
same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. [Amended
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
C. The imposition and collection of a fine or other penalty for violation of
any of the provisions of this section shall not constitute any bar to the
right of the Township to collect the cost, as certified, for the removal of
snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 155-17 ANDOVER CODE § 155-17
150:498
ARTICLE VI
Removal of Snow and Ice From Dedicated But Not Accepted Streets
[Adopted 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-15]
§ 155-18. Developer responsibility.
§ 155-19. Removal of snow/ice by Township.
The Township shall not be obligated to provide advance notice to the
developer of the Township's intention to cause snow and/or ice to be
removed if, in the reasonable judgment of the Township Manager, such
snow and/or ice poses a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township who use such streets and roadways.
A. Upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or
structure on any new dedicated street or roadway which is open to the
public or to which the public is invited, in a subdivision or development
which is the subject of an application for development within Andover
Township, and prior to the acceptance of such dedication by the
Township, the developer shall be required to keep and maintain said
streets or roadways free and clear of snow and ice, within six hours of
daylight after the same shall have fallen or be formed thereon, and the
same shall be open to public use and shall permit access to police, firefighting,
and emergency vehicles in accordance herewith.
B. Each developer shall be required to post a separate cash performance
guaranty for snow removal in the amount of $100 per 100 linear feet of
road or $1,500, whichever is greater. In the event of failure of the
developer to satisfactorily provide snow removal as required by
Subsection A above, the Township shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to take the necessary actions and charge the cost of said
snow removal against the cash performance guaranty, and the
developer shall not seek compensation from the Township pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.5. The costs incurred thereby shall be certified to the
governing body by the Public Works Department, which certification
shall be presented to and reviewed by the governing body. Such costs
shall be computed so as to defray and meet the expenses incurred by
the Township, including, but not limited to, the costs of labor, materials
and the costs to repair any and all injury or damage done to the
roadway or occurring to same during such snow and ice removal
operations, or caused thereby. Such costs shall be charged to and paid
by the developer to the Township to replenish the cash performance
guaranty, in the amount so certified, within 10 days of the receipt of a
bill for the same. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by
the Township, the remaining cash performance guaranty balance shall
be returned to the developer.
§ 155-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-20
150:499
§ 155-20. Limitation of liability.
Andover Township shall have no liability or responsibility whatsoever for
any damage that may be done to catch basins, manholes, curbs, gutters,
driveways, or other improvements, or to said streets or roadways, which
damage may occur during said snow and ice removal, and the development
owner shall indemnify and hold the Township harmless in writing with
respect thereto. Andover Township shall have no liability for damages and/
or injuries resulting from its failure to act and/or its delay in acting to
remove snow and/or ice from dedicated but not accepted streets and/
or roadways, and the development owner shall indemnify and hold the
Township harmless in writing from and against all claims and/or
proceedings arising out of such damages and/or injuries.
§ 155-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
Any person who fails to satisfactorily provide snow removal in accordance
with the requirements of § 155-18A above shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The above-stated penalties shall be in addition to the restoration of
the snow removal guaranty as required in § 155-18B above.
§ 155-20 ANDOVER CODE § 155-21
150:500
Chapter 159
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Soil erosion — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 155-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-21
150:501

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 159-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Township of Andover.”
§ 159-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the Township.
It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development,
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
traffic circulation, utilities and services.
§ 159-3. Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Planning Board
and, where permitted by statute, the Zoning Board of Adjustment in
accordance with all applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 159-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
hereinafter set forth:
APPLICANT — The developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified by
this chapter or any other applicable ordinance and the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board and all accompanying documents required by
ordinance for approval of the application for development, including, where
applicable, but not limited to, a site plan or subdivision plat, provided
that the Planning Board or other reviewing municipal agency may require
such additional information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions
in the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval
of the application for development have been met. The application shall
not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon the
meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in the rules and
regulations of the municipal agency and shall be deemed complete as of the
day it is so certified by the review committee of the board for purposes of
the commencement of the time periods for action by the Planning Board or
other municipal agency.
§ 159-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-4
150:503
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The process of subdividing or obtaining site plan review.
It may also refer to the improvement of land and, in proper context, to a
subdivision.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream
of water for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on an
approved preliminary plat after all requirements, conditions, engineering
plans, etc., have been completed and the required improvements installed
or bonds properly posted for their completion. A plat that receives final
approval shall have been prepared by a licensed professional engineer and
a land surveyor in compliance with all the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq. and is the map which shall be filed with the County Clerk in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54 in order to make the approval binding.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with these
regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper County
Recording Officer.
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS — The general terms and conditions
are those as outlined under preliminary plat details, Article III, and the
design standards as outlined under Article V of this chapter.
LARGE LOT SUBDIVISION — A subdivision specifically permitted by
provisions in Chapter 190, Zoning, in which private roads and facilities are
permitted under an approved contractual arrangement for the maintenance
thereof by the lot owners. Such roads and facilities are subject to less
stringent regulations than otherwise required for subdivisions. The lots
shall have a minimum area requirement of six acres.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes and
bounds for purchase or sale, lease, or separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Township which shall have
been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land meeting one or more
of the following conditions:
§ 159-4 ANDOVER CODE § 159-4
150:504
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT — The final map of a minor subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved,
shall be filed with the proper County Recording Officer.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive
with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks and
playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of the
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on contiguous portions of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Water, sewer, drainage and street
improvements not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON SITE — Location on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Location on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
The division of a tract of land into not more than three lots, including
the remainder of the tract being subdivided, wherein all such lots or
parcels shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) The subdivision does not involve a planned development.
(2) The subdivision does not involve any new street or road.
The subdivision does not involve the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(3)
A.
The following is also classified as a minor subdivision: the division
of a parcel of land for the purpose of enlarging an adjoining lot,
notwithstanding that such existing lot, together with the added portion,
still does not meet the requirements of Chapter 190, Zoning, or this
chapter.
B.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, not more than two lots plus a remainder
shall be created by minor subdivision. Subsequent subdivision of the
remaining lot or parcel within two years from the date of the filing of
the subdivision in the County Clerk's office shall be accepted only as a
major subdivision.
C.
§ 159-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-4
150:505
under this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, “owner” shall include
the developer, applicant, agent, engineer or other person authorized to
represent the owner as defined herein.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which shall be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the
Planning Board or other approving body approves a plat. “Performance
guarantee” shall include performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other
similar collateral or surety agreements.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The official action taken on a preliminary plat
by the Planning Board, meeting in regular session, which shall determine
whether or not the map submitted is in proper form and meets the
established standards adopted for design, layout and development of the
subdivision. Such preliminary approval shall confer upon a subdivider all
rights provided for by virtue of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
PRELIMINARY PLOT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board for Planning Board consideration and tentative approval and meeting
requirements of Article III of this chapter.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the establishment
of any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, but shall not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
STREET — Any avenue, street, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or Township roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and shall include the land between street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
CONTROLLED ACCESS REGIONAL HIGHWAYS — Those which are
used by heavy through traffic and which permit no access from abutting
property.
A.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which carry a large volume of traffic
at relatively high speeds. These roads are of regional significance and
B.
§ 159-4 ANDOVER CODE § 159-4
150:506
SUBDIVIDER — An applicant for development.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this
chapter, if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose
of reviewing applications for subdivisions and site plans in accordance with
connect the Township with other points in the county and with the
interstate highway network.
PRIMARY CONNECTOR STREETS — Those which provide linkage
between the Township's residential communities and those roadways
which carry a lower volume of traffic than arterials and at lower speeds.
C.
LOCAL SECONDARY STREETS — Those which function as land service
roadways and function as collector streets for the connector network.
D.
LOCAL MINOR STREETS — These streets act as feeders to connector
and local secondary roads and provide direct access to developed areas.
E.
LOCAL RURAL STREETS — Streets designed to provide vehicular
access to abutting property and to discourage through traffic.
F.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those which are parallel to, or
adjacent to, controlled access highways or major thoroughfares and
which provide access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
G.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
H.
Divisions of land if found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
C.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
D.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the review committee to conform to the requirements of
the municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the
municipality.
E.
§ 159-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-4
150:507
the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the
applications are complete.
§ 159-4 ANDOVER CODE § 159-4
150:508
ARTICLE II
Procedure
§ 159-5. Submission of plat required.
Any owner of land within the Township shall, prior to the subdivision
or resubdivision of land, as defined in this chapter, for any purpose
whatsoever, submit a plat, in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set
forth, to the Township Clerk, at least two weeks prior to the next regular
meeting of the Planning Board for purposes of action by the Planning Board
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 159-6. Minor subdivision plat.
A. Any owner of land wishing to subdivide or resubdivide land within the
Township wherein such subdivision meets, or appears to meet, the
definition as contained in this chapter for minor subdivisions shall file
an original and two copies of a minor subdivision application together
with eight certified copies of the proposed minor subdivision plat. If the
applicant does not intend to file a map in the Sussex County Clerk's
office with respect to the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall also
file a proposed deed of the subdivision containing, at least, the
description of the lot or lots that the applicant proposes to create,
together with a fee of $40.
B. The minor subdivision plat shall be based on tax map information at a
scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet, prepared and certified to
by a licensed civil engineer or licensed surveyor and complying with all
other requirements of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141, N.J.S.A.
40:23-9.9 et seq., if applicable, to enable the entire tract of which the
subdivision is a part to be shown on one sheet which shows or includes
the following information:
(1) A key map showing the following:
(a) The entire tract clearly delineated by crosshatching, shading
or other appropriate means, distinguishing it from adjoining
lands.
(b) The lot or lots being subdivided clearly delineated by
crosshatching, shading or other appropriate means, and
distinguishing them from the remainder of the entire tract
being subdivided.
(c) Adjoining properties.
(d) The tax map lot and block designation of the subject premises
and of adjoining lands.
(e) The street on which the subdivision is located, including state
or county route number and the common road name.
§ 159-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-6
150:509
(f) The scale of the key map portion of the subdivision plat shall
not be less than one inch equals 400 feet.
(g) Reference meridian.
(2) The entire tract from which a portion is to be subdivided and a
North arrow and scale.
(3) The portion sought to be subdivided.
(4) Location of all existing structures and the distances of such
structures from existing property lines and from any new lines
sought to be established.
(5) The location and designation of streams, ponds, brooks, national
wetlands, floodplains, watercourses, and other natural features.
(6) Location and size of all drainage structures.
(7) A metes and bounds designation of the entire tract and the new
lines sought to be established and any plat lines to be eliminated so
indicated.
(8) Area of the entire tract, area and width of the lot at the street line
of the lot sought to be created and the road frontage of the
remainder portion.
(9) Name of street and width of right-of-way on which property fronts.
(10) In legend form, there shall be indicated the names of all abutting
owners and their tax lot and block designations according to the
latest tax rolls of the municipality, name and address of the owner,
subdivider, date of the latest revision, and number of new lots
sought to be created.
(11) Soil classification data as mapped by the Unites States Department
of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service in the Soil Survey of
Sussex County.
(12) Existing and proposed contours at ten-foot vertical intervals for
slopes averaging 25% or greater and at two-foot vertical intervals
for land of lesser slopes to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land and the high and low points. Datum of all
elevations shall be that of the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey. Also, center-line profiles and proposed finished grades for
all new streets to be constructed in conjunction with the
subdivision shall be included. Land classification which clearly
delineates portions of the tracts with the following limitations:
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1; 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-7; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(a) Slopes of 35% or more.
(b) Slopes of 25% or more, but less than 35%.
§ 159-6 ANDOVER CODE § 159-6
150:510
(c) Slopes of 15% or more, but less than 25%.
(d) Soil classification as mapped by the United States Department
of Agricultural Soil Conservation Service in the Soil Survey of
Sussex County, rock outcrop and areas of floodplains and
wetlands.
(13) Location and description of monuments, whether set or to be set.
[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
(14) An electronic copy of the subdivision plan in DWG format or any
other format acceptable to the Township Engineer. [Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
C. Applications for minor subdivision shall be reviewed by the review
committee of the Board for the purpose of determining the
completeness of the application. Said committee shall either determine
that said application is not complete and so notify the developer of the
deficiencies therein or shall certify its completeness within 45 days
from the date that said application was filed with the Board Secretary. If
the review committee fails to take action within said period of 45 days,
any such application shall be deemed to be complete.
D. If approved as a complete application for a minor subdivision by
unanimous action of the Subdivision Committee, a notation to that
effect shall be made on the minor subdivision plat and the Subdivision
Committee shall report its actions at the next meeting of the Planning
Board. The acceptance of such a report by the Planning Board or the
approval of the minor subdivision by the Planning Board, in the event
that the action of the Subdivision Committee was less than unanimous
or in the event that Planning Board approval results without the report
of the Subdivision Committee, shall constitute approval of the
application as a minor subdivision. The Subdivision Committee or the
Planning Board may condition such approval on terms insuring the
provision of improvements pursuant to Sections 29, 29.1, 29.2 and 41 of
the Municipal Land Use Law, c. 291, L. 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
The Planning Board Chairman and the Planning Board Secretary shall
then affix their signatures on the plat upon receipt of the report of the
County Planning Board review or upon the expiration of the time in
which the county may make such a report as hereinafter set forth.
E. If the proposed division of land is exempt from Planning Board action
because it is not a subdivision, as defined herein, a notation that the
subdivision is exempt shall be made by the Planning Board.
F. Upon the applicant's filing an application for a minor subdivision with
the Secretary of the Planning Board, the applicant shall immediately file
a copy of his subdivision application with the County Planning Board in
accordance with its requirements. If, within 30 days after receiving
such plat, the County Planning Board does not respond to the Secretary
of the Township Board, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved
§ 159-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-6
150:511
§ 159-7. Major subdivision plat.
by the County Planning Board. Within 30 days after receiving such plat,
the County Planning Board shall make a report to the Secretary of
the Township Planning Board; any conditions imposed by the County
Planning Board shall be appended to the Township's application.
G. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall forward one copy to each of
the following:
(1) Township Clerk.
(2) Township Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Secretary of the Planning Board.
(6) County Planning Board.
(7) Secretary of the Board of Health.
H. The Secretary shall forward to the Township Engineer and Planning
Board Attorney, for review, all deeds, easements, bonds and guarantees
required as a condition of approval pursuant to § 74-14 of this Code.
I. Either a deed or plat shall be filed with the County Recording Officer in
accordance with the provisions of § 74-9A of Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, of this Code.
J. If a plat is not classified as a minor subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedures applicable to a major subdivision as set
forth in this chapter.
K. If approval is granted subject to conditions to be met, the conditions
shall be met within the time limit set forth in § 74-9 of this Code.
A. Any owner of land wishing to subdivide or resubdivide land within the
Township wherein such subdivision meets, or appears to meet, the
definition as contained in this chapter for major subdivisions shall file
an application together with copies of the preliminary plat as
hereinafter set forth.
(1) All applications for preliminary or final approval of major
subdivision shall be reviewed by the review committee of the Board
for the purpose of determining the completeness of the application.
(2) Said committee shall either determine that said application is not
complete and so notify the developer of the deficiencies therein or
shall certify its completeness within 45 days from the date that said
application was filed with the Board Secretary.
§ 159-6 ANDOVER CODE § 159-7
150:512
(3) If the review committee fails to take action within said period of 45
days, any such application shall be deemed to be complete.
(4) The Planning Board may, at any time, designate any official or
group of officials of the municipality to review and certify the
completeness of applications for development in lieu of the
Subdivision Committee.
B. Prior to submission of an application for preliminary major subdivision
approval, the developer may submit to the Planning Board a concept
plan and such site data as may be available. The submission of a
concept plan will not be considered as a formal application but rather
will serve as a basis for discussion so that the Planning Board may
provide informal guidance to the developer in the preparation of his
application for preliminary approval. Neither the developer nor the
Planning Board shall be bound by the review of any concept plan. The
developer shall pay the concept plan application fee and escrow deposit
in accordance with § 74-57 of this Code. [Amended 5-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-12]
C. Submission of plans for preliminary major subdivision approval shall
contain the information set forth in Checklist No. 357 and the
information set forth in the following Subsection E regarding fire
protection facilities. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
D. In the case of major subdivisions containing 25 or more acres, 25 or
more lots to be subdivided, or when the property is identified in the
Master Plan, page 33, Developmental Limitations Map, as
characterized by severe limitations and/or moderately severe
limitations, an environmental impact statement in a form described in
§ 131-13 of this Code is required for a complete application.
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, when
reviewing major subdivisions other than those described in the
preceding sentence, shall have the option of requiring an
environmental impact statement in the following instances:
(a) Where in the judgment of the Planning Board such an
environmental impact statement is required in order to make
an informed judgment on the application; or
(b) Where it appears that the proposed development may have an
adverse impact upon the water supply, drainage, refuse
disposal, air quality, noise considerations, traffic, fire
protection, police protection, emergency health services or
impact upon the community.
(2) In the event that the Planning Board requires an environmental
statement under Subsection D(1)(a) and (b) above, the
environmental impact statement shall be required as additional
57.Editor's Note: Checklist No. 3 is included at the end of Ch. 74, Land Use Procedures.
§ 159-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-7
150:513
information required in order to decide the application and not for
a complete application.
E. Fire protection facilities. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure
that adequate fire protection facilities are provided within residential
developments. In the ML, PCD, PRC, SR and MFR Zones, a public
potable and fire suppression water system shall be provided in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvements Standards (RSIS),
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq. In all other zones, a fire suppression water
system shall be provided in all preliminary major subdivisions and all
preliminary site plans in accordance with the following standards:
[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
(1) Where public or private central water supply is available and has
been approved by the Township of Andover, fire hydrants shall be
installed to provide a source of water for fire fighting. Where public
or private central water supply is not available, for subdivisions in
the residential zone districts, underground water storage tanks
shall be located and installed so that no tank is farther than 1,000
feet from another tank or any principal structure. This
measurement will be taken along the finished road surface. At least
one tank shall be installed for each 1,000 linear feet of street length
or fraction thereof. Each tank shall be located within the public
right-of-way or an easement acceptable to the Township of Andover.
For site plans, underground water tanks shall be located and
installed in the adjacent road right-of-way or within an easement
acceptable to be dedicated to the Township. All tanks must have
paved access within seven linear feet of their suction point. A
permanent sign, approved by the Andover Township Engineer, shall
be installed at every tank location to show the existence and
capacity of such tank. In addition, "No Stopping or Standing" zones
shall be delineated at each tank location for a distance of 75 feet in
each direction from such tank on both sides of the street. Such
delineation shall be appropriately identified by signs meeting New
Jersey Department of Transportation design standards.
(2) The minimum capacity of every underground storage tank within
residential zone districts with homes of 4,000 square feet or less
shall be 10,000 gallons. Homes over 4,000 square feet will require
larger size tanks to be installed. Tank capacities for nonresidential
developments shall be based on the degree of hazard of the
proposed structures to be protected but shall not be less than
10,000 gallons. The locations of all fire protection systems shall be
approved by the Andover Township Fire Department. Unless an
equivalent alternate fire protection system is authorized by the
Planning Board and approved by the Andover Township Fire
Department, underground water storage tanks will be provided
and shall be constructed and installed as follows: all underground
water storage tanks shall be (minimum) single-walled fiberglass
construction. The top of the tank must be at least 42 inches
§ 159-7 ANDOVER CODE § 159-7
150:514
(minimum) below finished grade and tank must be set in pea
gravel, 12 inches (minimum) on top, bottom and sides, and shall
have the following features:
(a) One flange with six-inch draw tube.
(b) One eight-inch flange.
(c) One four-inch flange
(d) Six-inch Dry Hydrant NST Female Connection. Each aluminum
connection must have internal conical strainer, snap ring,
yellow dust cap. PVC pipe must pass through all adapters into
tank.
(e) Eight-inch cistern vent with sight glass assembly.
(f) Four-inch fill connection with two two-and-one-half-inch NST
Female Connections with dust caps.
(3) The tank shall be set in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommended standards.
(4) This water supply is intended solely for minimal "first attack"
storage.
(5) In all cases where a fire protection system is required, no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a dwelling or principal
structure upon any lot within the subdivision or site plan until, to
the extent necessary to afford fire protection to such dwelling or
principal structure, such system is installed and its operability
tested and approved by the Andover Township Engineer.
(6) The type of cistern detail shall be obtained from Andover Township.
(7) The hydrants, tank size and design and location shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township Engineer and the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(8) Any subdivisions with preliminary approval prior to February 2003
shall be exempt from these requirements.
F. Recreation and open space requirements for all residential
developments. [Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-14]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to insure that adequate
open space and recreational facilities are provided for all
residential developments. In lieu of providing the facilities on site,
the open space and recreation may be provided in centralized
locations within the Township in order to provide recreational
opportunities to residents of the Township for any residential
development receiving preliminary major subdivision approval, to
ensure that the dollar equivalent value of providing such facilities
within the subdivision shall be contributed to the Township of
§ 159-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-7
150:515
§ 159-8. Submission of plat and application; major subdivision
preliminary approval.
Andover for its Recreation and Open Space Fund in order to
provide such open space and facilities in the Township for use of
the residents of the Township of Andover.
(2) Applicability. The provision of this section shall apply to all new
residential developments receiving preliminary major subdivision
approval.
(3) Contribution requirement formula. Each residential development
to which these provisions are applicable by virtue of Subsection
F(2), above, shall be required to provide the dollar equivalent not to
exceed $1,000 per lot or residential dwelling unit including the
dollar equivalent value of any recreational improvements,
maintenance, repairs and replacements for such purposes. The
contribution may be in kind if acceptable to the Township of
Andover as determined in a developer's agreement between the
applicant and the Township Committee.
(4) Administration standards and guidelines.
(a) The developer may, at its option, make a proposal to the
Planning Board, offering either to acquire other lands within
the municipality and improve same with active recreational
facilities or, in lieu thereof, to donate to the Township of
Andover, for such purposes, funds in an amount calculated
pursuant to Subsection F(3), above, said funds to be placed in
an escrow account for that purpose, which amount shall be
determined by considering the fair market value of the land
required to be dedicated to such use, together with the cost of
improvements required and/or proposed thereon together with
the projected costs of operation and maintenance of the land
and those improvements.
(b) In reviewing a proposal by a developer pursuant to the
provisions thereof, the Planning Board shall consult with the
Andover Township Committee, which shall make, within 35
days of the date of referral to it by the Planning Board, a
report, including recommendations thereon, which
recommendations may include alternative proposals to that
submitted by the applicant for development and may include
any other related matter deemed by the Andover Township
Committee to be relevant to the proposal being reported upon.
A. At least eight certified black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat map
together with three completed application forms for preliminary
approval shall be submitted to the Township Clerk 30 days prior to the
Planning Board meeting at which consideration is desired.
§ 159-7 ANDOVER CODE § 159-8
150:516
(1) At the time of filing, fees and escrow deposits in accordance with
§ 74-57. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
(2) The Township Clerk shall immediately notify the Secretary of the
Planning Board upon receipt of an application for preliminary
approval. The application shall be filed in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of this Code. If
the applicant is not the record owner of the title to the property
being subdivided, he shall file a written consent, signed by the
owner, consenting to the making of the application with the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Planning
Board shall forward one copy thereof to the Township Clerk.
(3) The developer shall simultaneously file three copies of the
application and consent with the County Planning Board. The
County Planning Board shall have 30 days to review and respond.
In the absence of a response within 30 days, the County Planning
Board shall be deemed to have approved the plat.
B. The applicant shall notify all persons entitled to notice of the hearing on
the application in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 74, Land
Use Procedures, of this Code and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. If the Planning
Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout of the
improvements proposed by the developer that have already been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and
proceeded upon as in the case of the original application for
development, including the giving of notice in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
C. Copies to be filed.
(1) Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary
of the Planning Board, prior to the hearing, to the following
persons:
(a) Township Engineer.
(b) Secretary of the Board of Health.
(c) Township planning consultant, if any.
(d) Such other township, county or state officials as directed by
the Planning Board.
(2) If the preliminary plat lies within 200 feet of another municipal
boundary, a copy of the plat shall be sent by the Planning Board
Secretary to the secretary of the planning board of the adjoining
community. A written statement shall be requested from the
adjoining community indicating whether the proposed subdivision
of the Township of Andover is in reasonable harmony with its plans
for development. The secretary of the planning board of the
adjoining community should be informed of the date of the public
§ 159-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-8
150:517
hearing, and any communications received prior to that date shall
be considered in relation to the approval or disapproval of the plat.
(3) Upon the applicant's filing an application for a major subdivision
with the Secretary of the Planning Board, the applicant shall
immediately file a copy of his subdivision application and plat with
the County Planning Board and make application to the County
Planning Board for approval, in accordance with its requirements.
D. After the public hearing, the Planning Board shall take formal action
either by approving or disapproving the preliminary plat within the time
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48, that is, for a subdivision of 10 or fewer
lots the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
45 days of the date of the submission, and, in the case of a subdivision
of more than 10 lots, it shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise the Planning Board
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the
subdivision. If the plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall
be given to the subdivider.
E. Approval of any application shall be conditioned on certification by the
Andover Township Building Inspector of a plan for soil erosion and
sediment control pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 136, Soil
Erosion, of the Code of the Township of Andover.
F. If the Planning Board acts favorable on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman of the Planning Board shall affix his signature to the plat with
a notation that it has received tentative approval and return it to the
subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements.
G. A copy of the action taken by the Planning Board shall be forwarded to
the Township Clerk.
H. Preliminary approval shall, except as hereinafter set forth, confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of each approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs, and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Township from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
§ 159-8 ANDOVER CODE § 159-8
150:518
§ 159-9. Installation of improvements prior to final approval;
bonding.
(3) That the applicant may apply for, and the Planning Board may
grant, extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that, if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
(4) In the case of a subdivision for an area of 50 acres or more the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection H(1),
(2) and (3) above for such period of time, longer than three years,
as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
(a) The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board
may thereafter grant an extension of preliminary approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration:
[1] The number of dwelling units and nonresidential units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval.
[2] The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval.
[3] Economic conditions.
[4] The comprehensiveness of the development.
(b) If the design standards have been revised, such revised
standards shall govern.
I. The Secretary shall forward to the Township Engineer and Planning
Board Attorney, for review, all deeds, easements, bonds and guarantees
required as a condition of approval pursuant to § 74-14 of this Code. If
approval is granted subject to conditions to be met, the conditions shall
be met within the time limit set forth in § 74-9 of this Code.
A. Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider shall
have installed all required improvements as specified in Article IV of
this chapter under the supervision and inspection of the Township
Engineer, except that the Planning Board may accept a performance
guarantee approved by the Planning Board Attorney in an amount equal
to 120% of the estimated cost of the improvement, of which 10% of the
total amount shall be in cash or a certified check for the later
installation of the following improvements only:
§ 159-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-9
150:519
§ 159-10. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
(1) The final surface course of the street pavement.
(2) Sidewalks.
(3) Monuments.
(4) Street signs.
(5) Shade trees.
(6) The installation of underground utilities, when required, shall not
be a condition of final subdivision approval but shall be installed in
accordance with § 159-13A(8). No bonding shall be required for
this improvement.
(7) The installation of fire protection facilities as required for
preliminary approval as set forth in § 159-7E above. [Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
B. The amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced or released
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
C. The Planning Board may require the applicant to post a performance
bond as a condition of preliminary approval of a major subdivision when
the Board finds that the imposition of the same is required to promote
or protect the general health, safety and/or welfare of the neighborhood
and/or the community. The reviewing municipal board may require the
applicant to post a performance bond as a condition of preliminary
approval or final approval of a subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38c.
D. In inspecting road improvements, the Township Engineer shall apply
the construction standards of the New Jersey State Department of
Transportation and shall utilize test procedures, including but not
limited to the coring of pavement, in accordance therewith.
A. Submission to Secretary of the Planning Board. The final plat and asbuilt
drawings shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board for final approval within the time specified in § 159-8H of this
chapter and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, of the Andover Township Code.
B. Number of certified copies. The original tracing, one translucent
tracing, two cloth prints, eight blue- or black-on-white prints and three
copies of the completed application shall be submitted to the Secretary.
C. Fees and deposits with application. This application shall be
accompanied by fees and escrow deposits in accordance with § 74-57.
[Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
D. Distribution of copies.
§ 159-9 ANDOVER CODE § 159-10
150:520
(1) Copies of the final plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of the
Planning Board to the following:
(a) Subdivision Committee.
(b) Township Engineer.
(c) Such other officials or agencies as directed by the Planning
Board.
(2) Upon the applicant's filing of an application for final approval of
major subdivision with the Secretary of the Planning Board, the
applicant shall immediately file a copy of his subdivision application
and plat with the County Planning Board and make application to
the County Planning Board for approval, in accordance with its
requirements.
E. Letters required prior to the final approval. Prior to final approval, the
Planning Board shall have received the following:
(1) A letter containing a list of all items to be covered by a performance
guarantee, cash or certified check, the quantities of each item, the
cost of each of them and the total amount of all items.
(2) A letter from the Township Engineer stating that the required
improvements have been installed to his satisfaction and in
accordance with applicable Township specifications and that the
performance guarantee is adequate to cover the cost of remaining
improvements.
(3) A letter from the applicant's engineer stating that the final plat
conforms to the preliminary plat as submitted and approved.
(4) A letter from the appropriate electrical and telephone utility
companies and cable television stating that arrangements have
been made for underground distribution and service. Such letter
shall further certify that if underground distribution and service
lines are required, monies for such utilities shall have been
deposited with the public utility by the subdivider sufficient to
cover the cost of the same.
F. Time limitation.
(1) Final approval. Final approval shall be granted or denied within the
time specified in § 74-9 of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of this
Code. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate from the
Secretary of the Board as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant. It shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval
herein required and shall be so accepted by the County Recording
Officer for purposes of filing the final subdivision plat.
§ 159-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-10
150:521
(2) Review or approval by the County Planning Board. Whenever
review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board
is required, the Township Planning Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the
County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.
(3) Time limit for meeting conditions. If approval is granted subject to
conditions to be met, the conditions shall be met within the time
limit set forth in § 74-9 of this Code.
G. Distribution of copies. After final approval the original shall be
submitted for the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board. After signing, one translucent tracing and one cloth
print or their equivalent shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk along
with eight prints for distribution as follows:
(1) Municipal Clerk.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) The Board of Education of the local district.
(4) Building Inspector.
(5) Tax Assessor.
(6) County Planning Board.
(7) Official issuing certificates for approved lots.
(8) Planning Board file.
H. Filing. Within 95 days of final approval, the final plat shall be filed by
the subdivider with the County Recording Officer in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54. For good and sufficient reasons,
the Planning Board may extend the time for filing for an additional
period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
I. Prerequisite for filing with County Recording Officer. No plat shall be
offered for filing to the County Recording Officer unless it has been duly
approved by the Township Planning Board and signed by the Chairman,
the Secretary and the Township Engineer.
J. Waiver of map filing requirement; filing by deed.
(1) Where an application has been acted upon by the Planning Board
as a major subdivision, because the subdivision in question cannot
meet the definition of "minor subdivision" as herein defined, but
otherwise appears to be a minor subdivision which shall be acted
upon by the Planning Board as a major subdivision for this
technical definition reason and for no other, the Planning Board
may:
§ 159-10 ANDOVER CODE § 159-10
150:522
(a) Waive the requirement that the applicant submit maps
prepared for filing as required in Subsection B of this section.
(b) Permit the applicant to make this filing with the County Clerk
by deed.
(2) Should the applicant request that the Planning Board waive the
requirement for the filing of maps, then the applicant shall file a
proposed deed of the subdivision as required in § 74-6A of this
chapter.
K. Waiver of fees. The applicable Township body, when reviewing major
subdivisions, shall have the right, when simultaneous application is
made for preliminary and final approval, to waive all or part of the fee
charged for final approval in cases where the charging of the full fee
would be unreasonable and unwarranted. The Board, when considering
a waiver of fees, shall take into account the scope of the review
required and the expenditures by the Township in connection
therewith. The reviewing body shall set forth its reasons for any waiver
of fees as part of a resolution passed in connection with the application.
§ 159-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-10
150:523

ARTICLE III
Plat Details
§ 159-11. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall be
designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor or professional
qualified civil engineer. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the
provisions of Article IV and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
A. A key map showing the following. The scale of the key map portion of
the subdivision plat shall be not less than one inch equals 400 feet.
(1) The entire tract clearly delineated by crosshatching, shading or
other appropriate means, distinguishing it from adjoining lands.
(2) The lot or lots being subdivided clearly delineated by
crosshatching, shading or other appropriate means, distinguishing
them from the remainder of the entire tract being subdivided.
(3) Adjoining properties.
(4) The tax map lot and block designation of the subject premises and
of adjoining lands.
(5) The street on which the subdivision is located, including state or
county route number and the common road name.
(6) Reference meridian.
(7) All zone boundaries within 500 feet of the property. [Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
B. A title block containing the following information shall be inserted on
the plat:
(1) Tract name.
(2) Tax map sheet.
(3) Block and lot number.
(4) Date.
(5) Reference meridian.
(6) Graphic scale.
(7) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(8) Name and address of the subdivider.
(9) Name and address of person who prepared the map.
§ 159-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-11
150:525
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest 10th of one acre; zone
data box showing comparative statement of zoning provisions.
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
D. Name and address of property owners within 200 feet, municipal
boundaries within 200 feet of development and names of adjoining
municipalities. [Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
E. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points, and centerline
profiles showing proposed finished grade for all proposed new
streets.
(1) Existing and proposed contours at ten-foot vertical intervals for
slopes averaging 25% or greater and at two-foot vertical intervals
for land of lesser slopes to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land and the high and low points. Datum of all
elevations shall be that of the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey. Also, center-line profiles and proposed finished grades for
all new streets to be constructed in conjunction with the
subdivision shall be included. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-7; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(2) Cross sections and road sections for all new streets. The cross
sections shall clearly indicate the type and width of pavement,
location of curb and sidewalks, if any, tree planting strips,
maximum slope of embankments, swales and berms, all drainage
structures and cross drains. Cross sections of the proposed roads
and existing grade shall be provided at a minimum of fifty-foot
intervals along the entire length of road. Cross sections shall be
drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals five feet for the
horizontal and vertical planes. Each cross section shall give the
quantity of cuts and fills in square feet, stripping in cut and fill in
linear feet and topsoiling in linear feet.
(a) An earthwork summary, in cubic yards, shall be provided on
the last sheet of the cross sections showing the following:
Type of Earthwork Dimension to be Shown
Excavation unclassified from
cross sections
Cubic yards
Excavation unclassified from
plans
Cubic yards
Excavation unclassified from
ditches and drives
Cubic yards
Excavation unclassified Cubic yards
Wet excavation Cubic yards
Unsuitable excavation Cubic yards
Fill needed from cross sections Cubic yards
§ 159-11 ANDOVER CODE § 159-11
150:526
Type of Earthwork Dimension to be Shown
Fill needed from plans Cubic yards
Fill needed to refill wet
excavation areas
Cubic yards
Fill needed to refill unsuitable
areas
Cubic yards
Total embankment needed Cubic yards
Excavation available for
embankment
Cubic yards
Borrow excavation Cubic yards
(b) A center-line profile of all proposed roads shall be provided and
should include the existing grade, proposed drainage
structures, percent of proposed grade, vertical curve data,
including elevation of PVI, PVC, PVT, and length of curve. The
profile shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equals five feet in the vertical plane and one inch equals 50 feet
in the horizontal plane. Return calculations and grades at
intersections and cul-de-sac turnarounds shall be provided.
Profiles of ditches shall be submitted along with cross sections
of ditches every 50 feet showing cuts and fills, stripping in the
cut, stripping in the fill and topsoil quantities.
(3) Land classification information. Land classification which clearly
delineates portions of the tract with the following limitations:
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2001-1; 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-7; 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-7]
(a) Slopes of 35% or more.
(b) Slopes of 25% or more, but less than 35%.
(c) Slopes of 15% or more, but less than 25%.
(d) Soil classification data as mapped by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service in the
Soil Survey of Sussex County, rock outcrop and areas of
floodplain and wetlands.
(4) The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by plans,
profiles, construction details, invert elevations and drainage
calculations, including a map showing the subdrainage areas and
calculated flow rates at each inlet and applicable stream
encroachment data conforming to Department of Environmental
Protection standards. Storm frequency period shall be for a fiftyyear
storm or as required by the Township Engineer. Construction
details shall be provided for inlets, manholes, headwalls, flared end
sections, standard curb, depressed curb for driveways and
§ 159-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-11
150:527
depressed curb for handicapped sidewalks, fence, ditches, guide
rail and soil erosion details.
F. The location and designation of national wetlands, floodplains and
watercourses, the location of existing and proposed property lines,
streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts,
drainpipes, and any natural features such as wooded areas and rock
formations. Streets in the subdivision shall be of sufficient width and
suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic
and to provide access for fire-fighting and emergency equipment to
buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient system
consistent with the Official Map and the circulation element of the
Master Plan and so oriented as to permit, within the limits of
practicability and feasibility, the buildings constructed thereon to
maximize solar gain.
G. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas, and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility system. When an individual water supply or sewage disposal
system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved by the
appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public sewage
disposal system is not available the developer shall have percolation
tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat. Any
subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the established
requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations shall not
be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall
first be approved by the appropriate local, county, or state health
agency.
H. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
I. Environmental impact statement if required, pursuant to the provisions
of § 159-7D.
J. Where new lots are to be created by major subdivision which will be
served by individual sewage disposal systems, the subdivider shall
furnish to the Planning Board satisfactory proof of proper sewage
disposal by soil tests. Two subsoil tests known as soil logs shall be
conducted on each new lot to be created. In addition, four percolation
tests (two for each soil log) shall be conducted on each proposed lot.
The soil logs and percolation tests shall be conducted in a location
where the law permits the construction of an individual sewage
disposal system. All tests shall be performed in accordance with the
Standards for Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
The logs shall be performed under the supervision of the enforcement
official of the Township Board of Health and in locations designated by
the enforcement officials for the Township Board of Health or the
Township Engineer and shall be witnessed by one of these Township
officials.
§ 159-11 ANDOVER CODE § 159-11
150:528
K. Approval of the application shall be conditioned upon approval of a plan
in conformance with Chapter 136, Soil Erosion, of the Township Code.
Bond for the same must be submitted and a permit issued prior to the
disturbance of the land.58
L. Freshwater wetlands and streams.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
FRESHWATER WETLAND — As contained in N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1.4.
STREAM BELT —
STREAM BELT BUFFER ZONE — A variable-width buffer zone
defined on the basis of stream base flow. As small streams are more
sensitive to pollutants, erosion and siltation than larger streams,
the larger stream belt buffer zone may be relatively wide for small
streams and narrow for rivers. In the absence of stream base flow
information, the width of the flow buffer may be estimated on the
size of the watershed area and hydrologic characteristics and other
factors.
The watercourse of a defined stream, including banks, bed and
water.
(a)
(b) Lands subject to stream overflow.
(c) Associated wetlands.
(d) Shorelines of lakes and ponds.
(2) Delineation on preliminary plat. The applicant shall delineate on
the preliminary plan the following information:
(a) All freshwater wetlands, including the limitation thereof by
metes and bounds. The delineation shall be certified by a
person qualified to make said delineation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:7A. The method used in determining the limitations
of the wetlands shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:7A. If there
are no freshwater wetlands on the site there shall be a
certification to that effect by a licensed professional engineer
or person qualified to delineate wetlands pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:7A.
(b) All stream belts and stream belt buffers within the property
shall be delineated on the preliminary map by metes and
bounds by a person qualified to make said delineation in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:7A. The method used in
determining the extent of the stream belt and stream belt
buffer zone shall be by an accepted scientific method.
58.Editor's Note: Original § 14-6.1k, Open Space Cluster Subdivision, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1.
§ 159-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-11
150:529
(3) Letter of interpretation as to the existence or absence of wetlands
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. The
applicant shall apply in writing to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to confirm the presence or absence of
freshwater wetlands on the property. A copy of the letter by the
applicant shall be filed with the reviewing municipal board. If the
application will affect wetlands, the applicant shall apply to the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for a state
permit.
(4) Protection of stream belts. The reviewing municipal board shall
only approve an application after the applicant has demonstrated
that the stream belt is adequately protected from siltation,
pollution and/or erosion and that an adequate stream belt buffer
zone has been established on the map. There shall be no fill,
improvements or change of grade within the stream belt buffer
zone unless extraordinary and exceptional circumstances exist, and
then only after adequate protection measures are instituted and no
alternatives exist.
M. Location, grading and drainage of all driveways. [Added 3-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-1]
N. Circulation plan showing location of off-street parking, traffic
improvements such as signals and signs, and pedestrian circulation.
[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
O. Landscaping plan showing proposed trees and landscaping, including
species and size of plant materials, and buffering plan showing berms,
vegetation, and fences, including construction details. [Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
P. Lighting plan showing location, height and construction detail of
outdoor lighting. [Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
Q. Signage, including location of signs and appropriate detail such as size,
height, materials and lighting. [Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1]
R. Recycling. Each major subdivision proposed for the creation of 30 or
more lots to be utilized for the construction of 50 or more units of
single-family residential housing shall include separate specific
facilities for the separation, collection, storage and pickup of recyclable
materials. The provisions of Chapter 144, Article I, Recycling, shall be
complied with.
S. Model home.
(1) If the subdivider intends to utilize a single-family residential
dwelling as a model home within a subdivision during the period
necessary for the sale of new homes within the subdivision, the
following shall be shown on the preliminary major subdivision plat:
§ 159-11 ANDOVER CODE § 159-11
150:530
§ 159-12. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 100 feet and in compliance with all provisions of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953.60 The final plat shall show or be accompanied by
the following:
(a) Location of model home, including lot dimensions.
(b) Setbacks of the home from the lot lines.
(c) Dimensions and setbacks of parking area.
(d) Proposed construction specifications for parking area.
(e) Lighting.
(f) Landscaping.
(g) Parking space dimensions and off-street parking capacity.
(2) There shall be only one model home within each subdivision at one
time.
(3) The model home shall have an off-street parking area providing
parking for a minimum of six automobiles.
(4) The base course of the parking area and driveway shall be at
minimum a six-inch gravel subbase Type 5, Class A.
(5) Exterior lighting shall be installed adequate in the opinion of the
Township Engineer to illuminate the parking area.
(6) A lawn and landscaping shall be installed.
(7) Any proposed sign shall be included on the plan showing setbacks
and size and construction materials.
(8) In the event the subdivider decides to install a model home after
the construction of subdivision improvements, a plot plan showing
the same in accordance with these standards shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Construction Official prior to
construction.59
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
59.Editor's Note: Original § 14-6.1A, Minimum Lot Area for Single-family, Residential
Dwellings in all Zone Districts with the Exception of the R-0.5; R-1.5 and R-2.0 Zone
Districts, which immediately followed this section, was deleted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-1. That ordinance also deleted any references to "environmental constraints
adjustment factors" from the ordinances of the Township.
60.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 159-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-12
150:531
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines with accurate dimensions, and bearings or
deflection angles of all curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
E. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details.
I. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of the
Township, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Plans for water mains showing their exact locations; plans and profiles
of storm and sanitary sewers.
L. An electronic copy of the subdivision plat in DWG format or any other
form acceptable to the Township Engineer. [Amended 3-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-1]
M. Restrictive covenant regarding underground utilities in accordance
with § 159-13A(8).
§ 159-12 ANDOVER CODE § 159-12
150:532
ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 159-13. Improvements required.
A. Prior to granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed
the following improvements, except for those set forth in § 159-9:
(1) Streets, except the wearing course.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.461 and shall be placed in accordance with the statute.
(5) Subdivider shall construct four-foot concrete sidewalks with a
minimum thickness of four inches. Sidewalks over driveway areas
shall be constructed with a minimum thickness of six inches.
(6) Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal. Dry cap sewer lines with
appropriate taps shall be installed in accordance with
specifications of the State Department of Health, and the plans and
specifications shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
Necessary auxiliary facilities shall also be installed by the
subdivider where sewer lines are to be connected to an existing
central sewer system.
(7) Fire suppression facilities as required in § 159-7E. [Amended
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
(8) Utility distribution lines shall be defined herein as lines along the
road in front of the lots. Utility service lines shall be defined as lines
from the road to the building on the lots.
(a) All new utility distribution lines shall be installed underground.
All utility service lines directly connecting to underground
distribution lines shall be installed underground. No building
permit shall be issued until all required new utility distribution
lines are completely installed pursuant to the specifications of
the PUC and are certified to be operable by the utility.
(b) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building
constructed on the lots of the subdivision until underground
service lines as required above are installed and a letter from
the utility verifying that such installation has been properly
completed is delivered to the Township Construction Official.
61.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.4 was repealed by L. 1960, c. 141. See now N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 159-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-13
150:533
§ 159-14. Certificate of occupancy; maintenance guarantee.
(c) All deeds to the subdivided lots shall contain the following
restrictive covenant when required by the Planning Board: "All
utility service lines serving the above-described lands and
premises shall be installed underground. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until such utility service lines are
completely installed pursuant to the requirements of the PUC
and certified to be operable. This requirement was imposed as
a condition of subdivision by the Andover Township Planning
Board upon approval of the subdivision of the within lot. This
restriction shall run with the land." Such deed restriction shall
also appear on the final subdivision plat.
(9) Culverts, inlets and storm sewers shall be installed where
necessary, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, based on
conditions of topography and to adequately take care of the
anticipated runoff from such subdivision.
B. All of the above-listed improvements shall be inspected and approved
by the Township Engineer. The subdivider or his agent, employee or
contractor shall notify the Township Engineer and the Secretary of the
reviewing municipal board when the work is ready for any required
inspection specified herein or required to be performed by the
Construction Official or the appropriate subcode official. This notice
shall be given at least 48 hours prior to the start of the construction and
at least 48 hours prior to the time the inspection is desired. Inspection
shall be performed within three business days of the time for which it
was requested. The work shall not proceed in a manner which shall
preclude the inspection until it has been made. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved.
A. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued on
any construction commenced as a result of receiving final approval until
the Township Engineer shall certify to the Planning Board that all
required improvements have been completed and the maintenance
guarantee hereinbefore requested shall have been posted with the
Township Committee. Upon submission to the Planning Board that the
maintenance guarantee has been posted with the Township Committee
and upon receipt of the certification by the Township Engineer that all
required improvements have been completed, the Planning Board shall
so certify to the Building Inspector that a certificate of occupancy may
be issued upon completion of the structure in accordance with the
requirements of the Township Building Code.62
B. Maintenance guarantees. The subdivision owner shall, in addition to
the performance guarantee required in § 159-9, post with the Township
a maintenance guarantee. Such maintenance guarantee shall be for a
period of two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Building Construction.
§ 159-13 ANDOVER CODE § 159-14
150:534
§ 159-15. Required off-tract improvements.
Off-tract improvements and/or impact fees may be required as a condition
of approval of the development by the reviewing municipal board in
accordance with § 74-45 of Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures.
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement. The Planning
Board shall determine, based on recommendation it shall receive from
the Township Engineer, which of the improvements installed by the
subdivider shall be so guaranteed. The Township shall not require any
of the maintenance guarantees to be in the form of a cash deposit.
However, the subdivision owner shall have the option if he so desires to
make such maintenance guarantee in the form of a cash deposit in lieu
of posting a bond therefor.
§ 159-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-15
150:535

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 159-16. Compliance required
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles
of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof,
unless the Board grants an exception therefrom pursuant to § 159-22 of this
chapter.
§ 159-17. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Township. Where either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivider
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown
on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered
in approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map
exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 195363 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
Township and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the following
design standards.
§ 159-18. Streets.
A. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum
requirements for street acceptance in accordance with an ordinance
titled "Minimum Requirements for Acceptance of Streets by the
Township of Andover," its amendments and supplements thereto.
B. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map.
C. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
D. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been deeded to the Township Committee under
conditions approved by the Planning Board.
E. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street
width requirements of this section shall dedicate additional width along
either one or both sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one side
only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
63.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 159-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-18
150:537
§ 159-19. Blocks.
§ 159-20. Lots.
F. Sight triangles for intersecting streets shall be in accordance with the
requirements as set forth in the Land Development Standards of the
County of Sussex New Jersey.
G. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and in
no case shall be less than 60º. The block corner at intersections shall be
provided with a curb return having a radius of not less than 35 feet.
H. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 75 feet shall be
prohibited.
I. A tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves. The tangent
length required shall be determined based on design speed of the road
in accordance with AASHO Standards. A tangent length of less than 100
feet shall be prohibited.
J. A horizontal curve shall be provided at any point along a street where
the center line deflects. The center-line radius shall conform to the
minimum design standards of Chapter 155, Streets and Sidewalks.
K. Any changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
length to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance as
approved by the Township Engineer and in accordance with AASHO
Standards.
L. No more than one cul-de-sac shall be permitted within a subdivision
without a waiver being granted by the reviewing municipal body. A culde-
sac shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length. All culs-de-sac shall be
constructed with a paved radius of 40 feet and a right-of-way radius of
50 feet. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions shall be made for future
extensions of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to
adjoining properties.
M. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Length of blocks or the distance between street intersections shall not
be less than 600 feet nor more than 1,000 feet in length, and the width
of the blocks shall be equal to the depth of the lots contained therein,
provided the lots meet the minimum requirements of this chapter,
except when the Planning Board may deem special plan provisions
warrant a variation from requirements.
B. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
§ 159-18 ANDOVER CODE § 159-20
150:538
§ 159-21. Public use and service areas.
§ 159-22. Exceptions.
The Township body, when acting upon applications for preliminary or final
subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements of the design standards contained in this article as may
be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of this chapter,
if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of particular conditions
pertaining to the land in question. The Township body shall state its reasons
for granting any such exceptions in the resolution passed in connection with
the application.
A. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
B. Each lot shall front upon an approved street having a right-of-way width
of at least 50 feet.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
D. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
E. The lot size of any new residential lot in the R-1.0 Zone shall be
increased in accordance with the procedure of § 14-6.1A.64
A. In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
or Township departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brook, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
64.Editor's Note: Original § 14-6.1A was deleted by Ord. No. 2003-1.
§ 159-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-22
150:539

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 159-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-16]
If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells or
agrees to sell as owner or agent any land which forms a part of a subdivision
on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to act, such person
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, and each parcel, plot or lot
so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
§ 159-24. Civil action.
In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a civil
action:
§ 159-25. Liens.
In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to
a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors
to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid and also a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
§ 159-26. Time limit.
Any such action shall be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of such land or
within six years if unrecorded.
§ 159-27. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be construed in para materia with Chapter 74, Land
Use Procedures, of this Code which it complements and shall be liberally
construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 159-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-27
150:541

ARTICLE VII
Water Supply and Water Quality Requirements
[Added 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
§ 159-28. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure that:
§ 159-29. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions of terms set forth in Article I, § 159-4, the
following additional definitions shall apply to the enforcement and
implementation of this article and shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED WELL — Any well which is not in use, has been illegally
installed or improperly constructed, has been improperly maintained or
is damaged, has not been maintained in a condition that ensures that
the subsurface or percolation waters of the state are protected from
contamination, has been replaced by another well or connection to a public
supply, is contaminated, is nonproductive, or no longer serves its intended
use pursuant to the state Act.
ABANDONMENT or DECOMMISSIONING OF A WELL — The permanent
closure or sealing of a well in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9D-3 et seq.
ACT, STATE — Refers to the Private Well Testing Act, P.L. 2001, c. 40;
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-26 et seq., which applies to buyers, sellers and lessors of
certain real property as follows:
A. Residential developments of two or more new lots or dwelling units and
all applications for nonresidential uses that will result in total
groundwater withdrawals greater than 800 gallons per day and all
nonexempt agricultural uses shall demonstrate that adequate water
supply is available for the existing and proposed use(s) on site without
adverse impacts on neighboring wells and other resources, including
but not limited to wetlands and streams.
B. Groundwater quality is acceptable for drinking water purposes (or
other intended use in the case of a nonresidential or agricultural
application).
C. The impacts of the proposed withdrawal of the groundwater resource
will not interfere with use of the resource by existing proximate users.
All contracts of sale for any real property in which the potable water
supply is a private well located on the property, or for any other real
property in which the potable water supply is a well that has less than
15 service connections or that does not regularly serve an average
of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year, shall
include a provision requiring the testing of that water supply for certain
parameters as set forth in the Act.
A.
§ 159-28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-29
150:543
ACUTE PARAMETER — A parameter in drinking water that has significant
potential to have serious and adverse effects on human health as a result of
short-term or limited exposure.
ALTER — To enlarge, deepen, replace or in any other way change any
portion of an existing water supply system. The terms alteration and altered
shall be construed accordingly.
APPLICANT — A developer or property owner submitting an application for
development or permit to locate, construct or alter a water supply.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by the Andover Township Land Use
Ordinance65 for approval of a subdivision, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
APPLICATION FOR WELL PERMIT — The application form and all
accompanying documentation required by the NJDEP for approval to locate,
construct or alter a water supply.
AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield economic
quantities of water to wells and springs.
AQUIFER, CONFINED — An aquifer that is overlain by a confining bed
(aquitard). The confining bed has a significantly lower hydraulic
conductivity than the aquifer. Artesian aquifer is a synonym.
AQUIFER, SEMICONFINED — An aquifer overlain by a low-permeability
layer that permits water to slowly migrate through to the aquifer. Also
termed leaky artesian or leaky confined aquifer.
AQUIFER TEST — A three-part test conducted to obtain background,
pumping, and recovery data/information from a pumping well and
observation wells in order to determine aquifer hydraulic characteristics
and assess potential water-level drawdown (well interference) to nearby
wells.
AQUIFER TEST LOCATION — A location(s) most representative of site
geologic conditions where the aquifer test shall be conducted to evaluate
potential impacts to proximate users of the groundwater resource.
The lessor of any real property in which the potable water supply is a
private well for which testing of the water is not required pursuant to
any other state law shall test that water supply for certain parameters
as set forth in the Act. Testing of the water is required at least once
every five years. In addition, within 30 days after receipt of the test
results, a written copy of the results must be provided to each rental
unit and each new lessee.
B.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 74, Land Use Procedures.
§ 159-29 ANDOVER CODE § 159-29
150:544
AQUIFER, UNCONFINED — An aquifer in which there are no confining
beds between the zone of saturation and the ground surface. Water-table
aquifer is a synonym.
AQUITARD — A low-permeability unit that can store groundwater and
also transmit water slowly from one aquifer to another (also see aquifer,
confined).
BOARD — The Andover Township Land Use Board or Board of Adjustment,
whichever land use body has jurisdiction to hear the application for
development.
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — Any laboratory, facility, consulting firm,
government or private agency, business entity or other person that the
NJDEP has authorized pursuant to the Regulations Governing the
Certification of Laboratories and Environmental Measurements, N.J.A.C.
7:18, to perform analysis in accordance with the procedures of a given
analytical method using a particular technique as set forth in a certain
methods reference document, and to report the results from the analysis of
environmental samples in compliance with a NJDEP regulatory program.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A source and
distribution system for potable water subject to the requirements of N.J.S.A.
58:12A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:10-1.1 et seq.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a pumping well in which the
head (water level) in the aquifer has been lowered by pumping action.
CONFINING BED — A body of low hydraulic conductivity material that is
stratigraphically adjacent to one or more aquifers.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter that has an adverse effect on air, water or soil quality.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land which is the subject of an application for a permit to locate,
construct or alter a water supply or the subject of a development application
regulated by this article, and shall include the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DRAWDOWN — The lowering of the water table of an unconfined aquifer or
the potentiometric surface of a semiconfined or confined aquifer caused by
pumping of groundwater from a well or wells. Drawdown is determined by
subtracting the depth to water during pumping from the static water level
determined prior to the start of pumping.
DRINKING WATER QUALITY STANDARD — A standard that applies to a
constituent or contaminant that is required to be tested pursuant to the
New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq., including a
maximum contaminant level, recommended limits, or, in the case of lead, an
action level.
§ 159-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-29
150:545
EXCEEDANCE — The concentration of a constituent or contaminant that is
greater than a maximum contaminant level (MCL), action level, standard or
recommended upper limit for that given constituent or contaminant.
FRACTURE TRACE — The surface representation of a fracture zone as
determined from an analysis of aerial photographs in stereo pair.
GROUNDWATER — Water in the ground that is in the zone of saturation
from which wells, springs and stream baseflow (dry weather streamflow)
are supplied.
HEAD, STATIC — Static head is the height above a standard datum of the
surface of a column of water that can be supported by the static pressure
at a given point. In a groundwater system, it is composed of elevation head
and pressure head.
HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY — The capacity of a geologic formation to
transmit water. It is expressed as the volume of water at the prevailing
density and viscosity that will move in unit time under a unit hydraulic
gradient through a unit area measured at right angle to the direction of flow.
HYDRAULIC GRADIENT — The change in static head per unit of distance
measured in a given direction.
HYDROGEOLOGY — The study of groundwater with particular emphasis
given to its chemistry, mode of migration, and relation to the geologic
environment.
INFILTRATION — The flow of water downward from the land surface into
and through the upper soil layers.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Equipment, including but not limited to pumps,
piping, and sprinkler heads used to distribute water to grasses, landscape
materials, crops, and other vegetation.
LOT or LOT IN QUESTION — Any designated parcel, tract or area of
land, whether established by plat or otherwise permitted by law, to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit, regardless of the nature of the
use contemplated, which is the subject of an application for a permit to
locate, construct or alter a water supply or the subject of an application for
development that is regulated by this article.
MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL (MCL) — The maximum permissible
concentration of a constituent or contaminant in drinking water. Maximum
contaminant levels shall apply to public and nonpublic water systems, in
accordance with the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1
et seq., and implementing rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
OBSERVATION WELL (MONITORING WELL) — A nonpumping well used
to observe the elevation of the water table or the potentiometric surface.
An observation well is generally constructed similar to a pumping well.
Observation wells are also referred to as monitoring wells. Observation
wells are required to measure water-level drawdown during the aquifer
pumping test and also for the calculation of aquifer hydraulic
§ 159-29 ANDOVER CODE § 159-29
150:546
characteristics. The specific requirements for observation wells are
provided in Appendix II, Observation Well Requirements — Well Testing,66
of this chapter.
PARAMETER — A general standard or scope that includes other terms such
as contaminant, constituent, substance, metal, organic/inorganic chemical,
and characteristics that are used to designate an analyte, group of analytes,
attribute, or physical property.
POINT-OF-ENTRY TREATMENT (POET) DEVICE — A water treatment
device applied to the drinking water entering a house or building for the
purpose of reducing contaminants in the drinking water distributed to the
entire house or building. Examples of POET include devices such as calcite
filters and ion exchange (water softeners).
POROSITY — The voids or openings in rock and soil. Porosity may be
expressed quantitatively as the ratio of the volume of openings in a rock or
soil to the total volume of the rock or soil.
POROSITY, EFFECTIVE — The amount of interconnected pore space
available for fluid transmission.
POROSITY, PRIMARY — The porosity that represents the original pore
openings when a rock or sediment was formed.
POROSITY, SECONDARY — The porosity that has been caused by fractures
or weathering in a rock or sediment after it has been formed.
POTABLE WATER — Any water used, or intended to be used, for drinking
and/or culinary purposes which is free from impurities in amounts sufficient
to cause disease or harmful physiological effects, and complies with the
bacteriological and chemical quality standards of the New Jersey Safe
Drinking Water Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PRIVATE WELL — A potable water well that serves or will serve a dwelling
unit or nonresidential or agricultural use and is located on the same real
property as the dwelling unit or nonresidential or agricultural use.
PROPERTY OWNER NOTIFICATION — Nearby wells and springs, Appendix
III67 of this chapter, outlines the notification requirements and procedures
for owners of existing wells and springs within 500 feet of any boundary of
the lot in question.
PUBLIC NOTIFICATION — A general notice of private well test failures sent
by the appropriate local health authority to surrounding and/or neighboring
owners of real property. The notification can include recommendations
to test for the parameters of concern to the owners of surrounding or
neighboring properties served by wells.
PUMPING TEST — A test made by pumping a well for a period of time
and observing the change in water levels (hydraulic head) in pumping and
observation wells in the aquifer.
66.Editor's Note: Appendix II is included at the end of this chapter.
67.Editor's Note: Appendix III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-29
150:547
PUMPING TEST, CONSTANT RATE — A pumping test during which the
discharge rate from the pumping well is maintained at a constant rate for
the duration of the test.
PUMPING TEST, STEP DRAWDOWN — A pumping test that involves
pumping at sequentially increasing rates for fixed time periods.
QUALIFIED HYDROGEOLOGIST — An individual who has received a
minimum of a Bachelor's degree in Geology at an accredited institution or
has completed an equivalent of 30 semester hours of geological education
(including at least two accredited courses in hydrogeology) while obtaining
a Bachelor's or Master's degree in a related field of engineering or science
at an accredited institution. Such a person must also demonstrate eight
years of professional work experience in the practice of applying geologic
and hydrogeologic principals to interpretation of groundwater conditions
and in the running of aquifer tests and the analysis of aquifer test data. The
individual shall provide a resume or curriculum vitae to document education
and experience requirements.
RECHARGE, AQUIFER — The volume of water that infiltrates to an aquifer,
often expressed in million gallons per year per square mile or gallons per
day per acre.
RECHARGE AREA — An area in which there are downward components of
head (water levels) in an aquifer. Infiltration moves downward to deeper
parts of an aquifer in a recharge area.
RECOVERY — The rate at which the water level in a well rises after the
pump has been shut off. Recovery is the inverse of drawdown.
REPORTING LABORATORY — The certified laboratory responsible for
reporting to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection a
complete set of required information related to the analysis of a private well
sample.
SATURATED ZONE — The zone in which the voids in the rock or soil are
filled with water at a pressure greater than atmospheric. The water table is
the top of the saturated zone in an unconfined aquifer.
SECONDARY PARAMETER — A drinking water parameter regulated for
aesthetic purposes rather than health effects under the Safe Drinking Water
Act (hereinafter "SDWA") rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10. Secondary parameters
include pH, iron and manganese.
SPECIFIC CAPACITY (Q/s) — The specific capacity of a well is the rate of
discharge of water from the well divided by the drawdown of water level
within the well. Specific capacity will vary with the duration of pumping.
Specific capacity should be described on the basis of the number of hours
pumping prior to measurement of drawdown. Specific capacity will
generally decrease with increased time of pumping.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth from ground surface to water in a well
prior to the commencement of pumping.
§ 159-29 ANDOVER CODE § 159-29
150:548
STORAGE COEFFICIENT (STORATIVITY) — The volume of water an aquifer
releases or takes into storage per unit surface area of the aquifer per
unit change in head. It equals the product of specific storage and aquifer
thickness. Also known as storativity.
TRACT — See definition of lot or lot in question.
TRANSMISSIVITY — The rate at which water of a prevailing density and
viscosity is transmitted through a unit width of an aquifer under a unit
hydraulic gradient. Transmissivity equals hydraulic conductivity times
aquifer thickness.
UNSATURATED ZONE — The zone between ground surface and the water
table. Pore spaces in the unsaturated zone contain water at pressures less
than atmospheric. Also referred to as "zone of aeration" and "vadose zone."
WATER QUALITY TEST FAILURE — An exceedence of an applicable
drinking water quality standard of a required test parameter under the
Private Well Testing Act. This term includes all applicable maximum
contaminant levels or recommended limits, or an action level for lead
analysis.
WATER TABLE — The surface in an unconfined aquifer or confining bed at
which the pore water pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at
which water stands in wells that penetrate the water body just far enough
to hold standing water.
WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM — A device applied to the drinking water at a
house or building for the purpose of reducing contaminants in the drinking
water distributed in the house or building. Examples: point-of-entry devices
and point-of-use devices.
WELL — A hole or excavation larger than four inches in diameter or a hole
or excavation deeper than 10 feet in depth that is drilled, bored, cored,
driven, jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of removal or
emplacement of, or investigation of, or exploration for, fluids, water, oil, gas,
minerals, soil, or rock.
WELL INTERFERENCE — The result of two or more pumping wells, the
drawdown cones of which intercept. At a given location, the total well
interference is the sum of the drawdown due to each individual pumping
well.
WELL PERMIT — Refers to a written approval issued by the NJDEP,
pursuant to the Well Construction and Maintenance Act Regulations at
N.J.A.C. 7:9D, to a licensed well driller which authorizes a licensed well
driller of the proper class to construct a well or wells in accordance with the
permit.
WELL RECORD — The form provided by the NJDEP that depicts the
construction details of a well, which is completed by the well driller
subsequent to well permit issuance and well installation.
§ 159-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-30
150:549
§ 159-30. Applicability.
The provisions of this article are applicable to:
§ 159-31. Aquifer test and hydrogeologic evaluation.
A. All residential developments of two or more new lots or dwelling units
and all applications for nonresidential uses involving either the creation
of a new water use or a total projected water use or consumption
greater than 800 gallons per day.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any agricultural wells
that do not trigger either a water allocation permit pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:19-2.2 or a water usage certification for agriculture, aquaculture or
horticulture pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:20A-2.
C. Where New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approval is
required for a water allocation permit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:19-2.2 or a
water usage certification for agriculture, aquaculture or horticulture
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:20A-2, the Board's approval shall be contingent
upon receipt of the permit or certification, as applicable, as well as
compliance with this article.
A. The purpose of undertaking an aquifer test and hydrogeologic
evaluation is to:
(1) Determine if sufficient water is available to supply a proposed
residential or commercial development or expansion thereof.
(2) Assess the magnitude of water-level drawdown (well interference)
impacts on existing and future nearby residential, institutional and
commercial wells/springs.
(3) Predict the effect of long-term pumping on water levels in existing
and future wells.
(4) Determine the potability of the proposed well source(s) through
laboratory testing.
B. Where applicable pursuant to § 159-30, the requirements for aquifer
testing and hydrogeologic evaluation are as follows:
(1) The hydrogeologic evaluation shall include the review of available
information, including but not limited to published maps and
reports, stereo pairs of aerial photographs, New Jersey Geological
Survey (NJGS) Reports, and other applicable documents.
(2) An evaluation of the bedrock structure/structural characteristics
shall be conducted which shall include an evaluation of the strike
and dip of the bedding planes, orientation of faults, joints and
fractures, plunges, and trends of folds. Published geological
literature may be used, if appropriate and sufficient. The results of
this evaluation along with the locations of the proposed observation
§ 159-30 ANDOVER CODE § 159-31
150:550
well(s) in relation to the test well(s) shall be submitted with the
aquifer test plan report required below.
(3) In addition, the hydrogeologic evaluation shall include a report of
the recommended design, execution and analysis of the aquifer
test(s). The data collection shall be designed and evaluated by a
qualified hydrogeologist. A geologic and hydrogeologic report
containing appropriate maps, well logs, aquifer test data and
observation well data shall be prepared and submitted.
(4) The aquifer test shall consist of at least one constant-rate pumping
test conducted at a sufficient rate and duration to be able to
determine aquifer characteristics such as transmissivity and
storage coefficient. As part of the aquifer test, observation wells
are to be monitored to determine and evaluate water-level
drawdown in these wells (the cone of depression) and aquifer
parameters, and predict the effect of long-term pumping on water
levels in existing and future wells.
(5) Prior to conducting any aquifer test, a preliminary hydrogeologic
evaluation and the aquifer test plan shall be submitted for review
and approval by the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist of
which the applicant shall reimburse the Township for such services
by way of an escrow account.
C. The procedures for aquifer testing and hydrogeologic evaluation shall
be as follows:
(1) Submit a preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation and aquifer test
plan for review and approval by the municipality's consulting
hydrogeologist, with copies to the Board.
(2) Following the approval of the preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation
and aquifer test plan by the municipality's consulting
hydrogeologist, conduct notification of proximate well/spring
owners and prepare selected wells/springs as observation points,
as necessary. Proof of notification of proximate well/spring owners
shall be provided to the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist
and to the Board Secretary and Attorney.
(3) Perform the three phases of aquifer test, specifically:
(a) Background monitoring.
(b) Pumping test.
(c) Recovery monitoring.
(4) Conduct water quality sampling and analysis for required
parameters on representative wells.
(5) Prepare and submit the preliminary hydrogeologic report for
review by the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist.
§ 159-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-31
150:551
(6) Respond to comments from reviewers, finalize report and submit
final hydrogeologic report to the municipality's consulting
hydrogeologist, with copies to the Board.
D. The requirements for the aquifer test plan and aquifer test shall be as
follows:
(1) Prior to conducting an aquifer test, the applicant shall submit to the
municipality's consulting hydrogeologist the design of such aquifer
test and the qualifications of the persons and firm who will be
performing the test.
(2) The design of the aquifer test shall be developed based on the
required hydrogeologic evaluation, using applicable guidance from
"Guidelines for Preparing Hydrogeologic Reports for Water
Allocation Permit Application with an Appendix on Aquifer Test
Analysis Procedures" NJGS GSR 29 (1992 or most recent edition) or
successor document.
(3) The aquifer test shall be conducted in three phases: the
background phase, the pumping phase, and the recovery phase.
Appendix I, Aquifer Test Procedures,68 of this chapter outlines the
procedures for aquifer test design, data collection and reporting.
(4) If the lot in question is underlain by two or more geologic
formations, then an aquifer test will be required for each portion of
the lot in question underlain by each formation. The test
requirements for each formation will depend on the number of lots
and anticipated water usage per formation.
(5) The aquifer test(s) shall be required to be conducted at the
location(s) most representative of site geologic conditions and also
most effective for evaluating the potential impacts to proximate
users of the groundwater resource. Where it is not possible to meet
both objectives, then a location shall be chosen to optimize the two.
(6) Observation wells shall be required to measure water-level
drawdown during the aquifer pumping test and also for the
calculation of aquifer hydraulic characteristics. The specific
requirements for observation wells are provided in Appendix II,
Observation Well Requirements — Well Testing,69 of this chapter.
(7) Appendix III70 of this chapter outlines the notification requirements
and procedures for notification of owners of existing wells and
springs within 500 feet of the boundaries of the lot in question.
Inadequate notification will require the aquifer test to be repeated
after new notice. A form of notice and access agreement are
included in Appendix IV.71
68.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included at the end of this chapter.
69.Editor's Note: Appendix II is included at the end of this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-31 ANDOVER CODE § 159-31
150:552
(8) In the event that the preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation
indicates that a surface water and/or groundwater divide separates
the lot in question, an aquifer test will be required for each side of
the divide.
E. The requirements for the submission of the hydrogeologic report and
the evaluation of the results of the aquifer test shall be as follows:
(1) A hydrogeologic report must be submitted with each application to
which this article is applicable. This report shall document the
design and implementation of the aquifer test and include the
following data, information and analysis:
(a) An evaluation of the bedrock structure/structural
characteristics, including an evaluation of the strike and dip of
the bedding planes, orientation of faults, joints and fractures,
plunges, and trends of folds.
(b) Calculations of aquifer characteristics such as transmissivity
and storage coefficient, calculations of the cone of depression,
potential impacts to adjacent well owners, and an evaluation of
the long-term sustained yield for the wells.
(c) All water level and precipitation measurements obtained
during the three phases of the aquifer test in electronic format
acceptable to the municipality.
(d) A detailed hydrogeologic description of the aquifers
encountered beneath the lot in question and adjacent
properties.
(e) A detailed evaluation of the water-supply demand for an
average and peak day. This demand should be supported with
information on anticipated population, expected unit density,
size of units, lawn and garden irrigation needs, pool filling
requirements, and other anticipated water uses.
(f) An inventory of all wells within 1,000 feet of the lot in question
appended and placed on a base map of the entire lot. This
inventory must be submitted in electronic format acceptable to
the municipality.
(g) Figures depicting site geology, topography, surface water
bodies, water-level elevations, groundwater flow, and
development plans.
(h) All laboratory water quality sampling data tabulated and
summarized. A copy of the laboratory reports shall be provided
to the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist with one
complete copy to the Board. The laboratory reports can be
71.Editor's Note: Appendix IV is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-31
150:553
submitted to the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist
electronically in PDF format.
(i) A detailed evaluation of potential impacts from subsurface
sewage disposal systems on groundwater quality. A site plan or
survey of the lot in question depicting topography, actual and
planned well locations, septic leach field locations, and
fracture trace locations at a minimum scale of one inch equals
200 feet should be included. For any and all locations where a
fracture or set of fractures intersects one or more wells and/or
septic leach fields, a detailed assessment of treatment
technologies should be included. The treatment technologies
should provide adequate assurances that any and all
groundwater pumped from the wells will satisfy federal and
New Jersey drinking water standards (MCLs) and will not be
degraded by the septic leach field discharges.
(j) The hydrogeologic report shall be prepared and signed by a
qualified hydrogeologist using applicable sections of GSR 29
(New Jersey Geologic Survey, Guidelines for Preparing
Hydrogeologic Reports for Water Allocation Permit
Applications, with an Appendix on Aquifer Test Analysis
Procedures) or successor document as a guide.
(k) The hydrogeologic report shall include the name and license
number of the well driller and pump installer. The report shall
include the names of the persons and firm responsible for
collecting the water-level measurements. In addition, the
report shall include copies of the completed NJDEP well
records. Appendix V72 provides a checklist of all items that
must be addressed in the hydrogeologic report.
(2) The evaluation of the hydrogeologic report and test results shall
include consideration of the following, any or all of which will result
in a requirement that the test be repeated:
(a) Precipitation. A test conducted during a period in which 0.5
inch or more of precipitation are recorded at or near the lot in
question must be repeated or technical documentation
provided that the precipitation event had no impact on water
levels 24 hours before, during, and 24 hours after the test.
(b) Background phase. Antecedent influences (from recent
precipitation events, changes in barometric pressure, outside
pumping influences, etc.) must be determined and, if
necessary, water-level data from the pumping phase and
recovery phase must be corrected. Insufficient data to assess
these influences will require repetition of all three phases of
the aquifer test.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix V is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-31 ANDOVER CODE § 159-31
150:554
(c) Pumping phase.
[1] If the pumping rate does not exceed the average daily
demand by 120% or the peak-day demand cannot be
pumped within a twenty-four-hour period, the aquifer
beneath the lot in question may be deemed insufficient to
meet the anticipated demands, and the applicant shall
review and adjust the proposed demand and/or extent of
development proposed. Some of the alternatives may
include:
[a] Conducting two or more aquifer tests at discrete
locations within the lot in question. The total volume
of water pumped during the two or more aquifer tests
must equal or exceed the proposed twenty-four-hour
peak-day demand. This may be particularly applicable
where large withdrawals are proposed in low yielding
bedrock aquifer systems. Each test must be conducted
individually and at no time should two wells be
pumped simultaneously.
[b] Decreasing the number of proposed lots/dwelling
units or amount of nonresidential development
proposed or otherwise reducing the amount of
groundwater to be withdrawn.
[c] Rearranging the development layout to better fit the
availability of groundwater resources.
[2] If the pumping rate varies by more than 10% of the
average flow rate, the entire test shall be repeated.
[3] If the pump shuts down during the pumping phase, the
entire test must be repeated.
[4] If water levels in the pumping and/or observation wells
exceed the measurement capacity of the devices used for
measuring changes in water levels and measurements are
not recorded with other devices in accordance with the
schedule listed in Appendix I, the test must be repeated.
[5] If the pumping data indicate a change in aquifer
transmissivity as a result of fracture dewatering, all
analyses of the potential radius of influence and impacts to
neighbors, streams, and wetlands must be conducted
using the lower value of aquifer transmissivity. If this
lower aquifer transmissivity indicates that the anticipated
demand cannot be supported by the aquifer beneath the
site, the applicant will need to review and adjust the
proposed demand and/or extent of development as
outlined in Subsection E(2)(c)[1] above.
§ 159-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-31
150:555
(d) Recovery phase.
[1] For purposes of evaluating water-level recovery, the
recovery phase duration will be equal to the pumping
phase duration. For example, if the pumping phase is eight
hours in duration, water levels eight hours after the pump
has been turned off will be compared to the prepumping
static water level to assess recovery magnitude and
degree of recovery.
[2] If water-level recovery is less than 90% of full recovery at
the end of a recovery phase of similar duration as the
pumping phase, the applicant must show through
standard/recognized aquifer test analytical methods and
calculations that the well or wells are capable of full
recovery. If full recovery cannot be shown or groundwater
mining/dewatering has occurred, the applicant will need
to review and adjust the proposed demand and/or extent of
development as outlined in Subsection E(2)(c)[1] above.
(e) Neighboring wells.
[1] If the drawdown is measured or projected to be more than
one foot at any existing adjacent property well or along a
boundary of the lot in question, the applicant's
hydrogeologist must evaluate long-term potential impacts
to adjacent properties based on the actual operating
condition of wells in that zone or along that portion of the
boundary of the lot in question.
[2] If a drawdown of five feet or more (Note: This may be
adjusted at the recommendation of the municipality's
consulting hydrogeologist taking into account existing lot
sizes adjacent to the lot in question and the lot sizes/extent
of development/amount of demand proposed) is noted in
any existing adjacent property well, or is projected at any
boundary of the lot in question, then the aquifer will be
deemed to have insufficient transmissivity and capacity to
support the proposed demand and/or extent of
development. The applicant will be required to review and
adjust the proposed demand and /or extent of development
and well locations to ensure that drawdown will not
exceed five feet at any boundary of the lot in question as
outlined in Subsection E(2)(c)[1] above.
(f) Impacts to streams and wetlands. If drawdown is measured or
projected to induce leakage from streams or wetlands such
that base flow in these streams will be directly reduced or
wetlands partially or entirely dewatered, then the proposed
demand and/or extent of development must be reduced to
prevent adverse impacts to stream flow and wetlands.
§ 159-31 ANDOVER CODE § 159-31
150:556
§ 159-32. Water quality evaluation.
(g) Additional testing. Any test that must be repeated, restarted,
or reconducted at a reduced demand, must satisfy all the
requirements of this article including but not limited to
renotification of all property owners within 500 feet of the lot
in question and resubmission of an aquifer test plan for Board
approval prior to implementation of the test.
(h) Sealing of the observation wells. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:4A, all
observation wells installed as part of the aquifer testing shall
be properly abandoned. A certified and licensed well driller
shall abandon the wells in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:9D-3.1 et seq. The well abandonment forms shall be
completed and submitted to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water Allocation (call
609-984-6831 for forms and information).
A. The purpose of the water quality evaluation is to determine that the
groundwater used to supply a proposed use or development does not
contain more than the maximum contaminant levels established by the
NJDEP for drinking water quality. In the event that one or more
constituents do not meet the applicable MCLs, standard treatment
systems need to be readily available.
B. Determination of water quality shall be in accordance with the
following:
(1) Water quality shall be determined for each pumping well and onsite
observation well as part of this program. Water samples from a
pumping well used for the aquifer pumping test shall be collected
during the pumping phase of that test. Water samples from the onsite
observation wells shall be collected either three days in
advance, or three days after the pumping test has been completed.
The samples must be collected in accordance with the NJDEP Field
Sampling Procedures Manual.
(2) At a minimum, the samples shall be analyzed by an NJDEP certified
laboratory for: hardness, gross alpha particle activity, arsenic, iron,
manganese, copper, lead, nitrate, E coli bacteria, and total and
fecal coliform bacteria as well as any other element determined
under the Private Well Testing Act, as may be amended or
expanded by the Andover Township Board of Health or Sussex
County Health Department. The samples shall also be analyzed for
volatile organic compounds for which the USEPA or NJDEP has
determined maximum contaminant levels using USEPA Method
524.2.
(3) During the pumping test, field measurements of pH, conductivity/
total dissolved solids and temperature shall be made with
calibrated instruments.
§ 159-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 159-32
150:557
§ 159-33. Fees.
The fees to the Township of Andover Land Use Board or Board of
Adjustment shall be covered by the development application fees and
escrow requirements set forth in Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, Article
VI, Fees and Costs. Fees to the Township of Andover Board of Health and
the Sussex County Health Department shall be as required by those entities.
§ 159-34. Other requirements for major subdivisions.
(4) If conditions on the lot in question or the history of the lot in
question indicate the potential historic use of materials containing
heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, or other volatile or semivolatile
organic compounds at or near the lot in question, these
analyses must also be conducted.
(5) Based on past historical operations at the lot in question or at
nearby properties, the Board, in its discretion, may require
additional analyses of the groundwater to assess current and
potential future impacts. The results of the water sample analyses
will be used to assess background (predevelopment) water quality
conditions.
C. Water quality analyses shall be undertaken within 160 days of
submission of an application for development or application for a
permit.
A. If a lot is proposed to connect with a public or community water system,
the applicant shall present proof of permission to connect with that
system.
B. If a lot or lots will utilize individual wells, the aquifer testing and
hydrogeologic analysis and water quality requirements of this article
shall be met, where applicable. Moreover, 25% of the proposed wells
shall have been constructed in accordance with all requirements of the
local and state Health Department as a condition of preliminary
approval of any major subdivision and before submission of a final
major subdivision application. The wells shall be constructed on every
fourth lot following the grant of preliminary approval so that in the
event it is found that adequate water supply cannot be provided to a
particular lot, that lot may be merged at the time of final approval with
an adjoining lot that already has a dependable well. The applicant shall
submit a letter from the Sussex County Health Department stating that
all constructed wells meet county standards.
§ 159-32 ANDOVER CODE § 159-34
150:558
Chapter 163
TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
§ 159-34 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 159-34
163:559

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 163-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within this Township.
OPERATION — Of a taxicab, shall consist of transporting in such taxicab at
least one but not more than nine persons, exclusive of the driver, for hire on
any of the streets in this Township, accepting a passenger to be transported
for hire within this Township or from a point within the Township to a
point outside of the Township limits. The operation of a taxicab as above
described by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner thereof as well as by the person actually driving the same. The
transportation of any person other than the owner or driver in a taxicab as
hereinafter defined shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered with
the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or who appears in such record to
be the conditional vendee or licensee thereof.
RENTERS — Any person who has filed a leasing disclosure statement and
filed the necessary papers to lease a taxicab.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Any person 62 years of age or older.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, local, country, state
or federal highway or other public roadway located within the Township,
whether or not the same is an improved road.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car capable of carrying up to nine
passengers, exclusive of the driver, and which may commonly be referred
to as a "taxi," "cab," "van" or "hack," duly licensed by the Township and
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated and run
over any of the streets within the Township of Andover and which accepts
passengers for transportation from points and places within the Township to
points and places within or without the same Township; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall include autobuses or buses or
designated routes, public deliveries or jitneys or such public conveyances
as are by law exclusively subject to state and/or federal regulation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Andover, Sussex County, New Jersey.
§ 163-2. Classes or licenses.
There are hereby established three classes of taxicab licenses to be known
as "taxicab owner's license," "taxicab driver's license" and taxicab renter's
license."
A. Taxicab owner's license. A taxicab owner's license shall entitle a taxicab
therein described to pick up passengers within the Township and to
§ 163-1 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-2
163:561
§ 163-3. Application for license.
otherwise be lawfully operated anywhere within this Township by a
driver duly licensed hereunder and by the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles until either of said licenses either expire or are surrendered,
suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable.
B. Taxicab driver's license. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this Township any taxicab duly
licensed hereunder and by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles
until either of said licenses either expires or is surrendered, suspended
or revoked and shall not be transferable. There shall be no limit to the
number of taxicab driver's licenses issued.
C. Taxicab renter's license. A taxicab renter's license shall entitle the
person named therein to rent and/or lease and operate one taxicab
within this Township. The taxicab shall be duly licensed by the owner
with the Township and by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles,
until either of the licenses expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked. The taxicab renter's license shall not be transferable.
A. All applications for taxicab owner's licenses shall be written in
duplicate and shall contain the full name and address of the owner, the
serial number, type, color, year and make of the taxicab, the state
registration number, number of doors on said vehicle and number of
persons the vehicle can carry as passengers. All applications shall be
filed with the Township Clerk who shall, prior to the issuance of said
license, receive proof from the applicant that the applicant is at least 21
years of age. If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be
organized and existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey and
must present proof thereof or, if organized and existing under the laws
of another state, be officially able to do business in the State of New
Jersey and must supply the name and address of the New Jersey
registered agent for said corporation.
B. Each applicant for taxicab driver's license or renter's license shall, in
addition to the requirements of any law of the State of New Jersey,
establish to the satisfaction of the Township Council or its designee that
such applicant has been regularly licensed by the Division of Motor
Vehicles of New Jersey and that the applicant is at least 21 years of age.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall submit a certificate
from a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey at the applicant's
expense certifying that the applicant has been examined within the
preceding 30 days and that the applicant has no infirmity of body or
mind, or visual impairment or deficiency which might render the
applicant unfit for the safe operation of taxicab; said physician's
certificate shall be presented at the time of the initial application and at
the time of alternate renewals thereafter; each applicant must furnish
with the application three recent photographs of the applicant being
not less than 1 1/4 inches in height by one inch in length. One
photograph is to be filed with each application, and one is to be
§ 163-2 ANDOVER CODE § 163-3
163:562
§ 163-4. Investigation of applicant.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license, taxicab owner's license or
taxicab renter's license shall be required to pay to the Township, with the
application, whatever sum of money charged by the State of New Jersey to
process a name check for any criminal record. No application for a taxicab
driver's license or taxicab owner's license shall be approved until such time
as the applicant has executed a form of consent and release so as to permit
the Andover Township Police Department to conduct such investigation
as may be required in order to determine that the applicant substantially
complies with the meaning, intent and purpose of this article.
§ 163-5. Temporary permit for taxicab or limousine owner and
driver.
Upon the filing of the required application and the payment of the required
fees, plus an additional charge of $25, an applicant for an owner taxicab/
limousine license and/or taxicab/limousine driver's license shall be entitled
to a temporary permit which shall expire 30 days from the date of issuance.
In the event that a permanent license has not been issued within said thirtyday
period, the temporary permit may be extended for an additional thirtyday
period if, and only if, the same is validated in the office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 163-6. Leasing of taxicabs.
attached to an identification card which is to be displayed in the interior
of the taxicab driven by the applicant. No person shall drive any taxicab
in the Township until the license to drive the same, herein provided
for, is issued to such driver. Any change of residence of the holder of
said license shall be reported to the Township Clerk within five business
days of the date of the change. All applications shall be filed with the
Township Clerk who shall submit said applications, upon the completion
of the investigation, to the Township Council.
A. A taxicab owner may lease or rent a taxicab to another party. Prior to
the renter taking possession of the taxicab, a leasing disclosure
statement, signed by both parties, must be filed, in person, by the
taxicab owner with the Township Clerk, indicating:
(1) The date of execution of the lease.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner and renter and their
respective social security or federal identification numbers.
(3) The owner's Andover Township license number and the license
plate number of the taxicab to be rented.
(4) The term of the lease which shall not exceed one year in duration.
(5) The name and address of the renter's insurance carrier, the policy
number and expiration date thereof, together with a copy of the
§ 163-3 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-6
163:563
§ 163-7. Insurance.
cover sheet of said policy which specifically covers Andover
Township as an additional first party insured and which shall
otherwise contain a hold harmless agreement from the carrier on
behalf of the renter for the benefit of Andover Township.
B. Regardless of the term of the lease, the owner is responsible for
complying with all national, state, county and municipal laws, rules and
regulations governing taxicab owners.
C. If a lease or its renewal is terminated by any reason, the taxicab owner
shall notify the Township Clerk in writing within 48 hours of such
termination.
D. A taxicab owner shall not authorize or permit a renter of the taxicab to
sublease the taxicab to another party. Renters are specifically
prohibited from subleasing the taxicab leased from an owner, and
taxicab renters are required to be an operator of the taxicab which they
lease or rent.
E. With respect to a leased cab, there shall be more than two drivers of
said cab which may either be the owner and one renter or two renters,
in which case the owner shall not be permitted to be a driver of that
cab.
F. A renter may only be a renter to one owner and shall not, therefore, at
any time for any reason, operate any other taxicab other than the one
he/she leases.
A. Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license or taxicab renter's license
shall be accompanied by a policy of insurance, with the premium
prepaid thereon, written by an insurance company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey,
which shall be submitted to the Township Clerk and to the Township
Solicitor for approval as to form and sufficiency. A certificate of
insurance must be submitted to the Township Clerk prior to a license
being approved.
B. Such policy shall be conditioned for payment of a sum required to
satisfy all claims for damage by reason of bodily injury to or the death of
all persons or property damage as follows:
(1) Up to six-passenger vehicle: not less than $500,000 combined
single limit.
C. Such policy shall provide coverage for every driver of each vehicle
listed in the policy, and the acceptance of said policy by the Township of
Andover and the issuance of the license by the Township shall
constitute an agreement by and between the applicant and the
Township that applicant holds and saves harmless the Township from
any and all claims from damages arising out of personal injury and/or
§ 163-6 ANDOVER CODE § 163-7
163:564
§ 163-8. Power of attorney.
No taxicab owner's, renter's or driver's license shall be issued until the
applicant therefor shall have delivered to the Township Clerk, concurrently
with the filing of the application and insurance policy referred to herein,
a power of attorney executed by said applicant wherein and whereby the
applicant shall appoint the Township Clerk for the Township as his or her,
its true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of
any process out of court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the
insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 163-9. Refusal to issue license; suspension or revocation; unused
licenses; car seats.
property damage made by third parties as the result of the issuance of
said license and the operation of a taxicab. In the event that such policy
is canceled for any reason, a notice of such action must be delivered
to the Andover Township Clerk 20 days prior to the effective date of
cancellation by the insurance company providing coverage to the taxi
operator.
A. The Township Council or its designee may, in its discretion, refuse to
issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any
license issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant has
been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly in this state or in any other state or territory, or has been
convicted of a violation under Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Regulations, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or who violates any
provision of this article or has any judgment unsatisfied of record
arising out of an automobile accident or who has made false answers in
the application for such license or any renewal thereof or who has failed
or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxi services or
who has not complied fully with the requirements of this article for such
class of licensure, or if the licensee or applicant has in any degree
contributed to any injury to person or damage to property arising out of
negligent operation of a motor vehicle or as to any taxicab owner's
license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed by reason of
unsafe or unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or health of
the occupants, and others, or if the policy of insurance required herein
has once lapsed or such coverage is not maintained at all times, or a
taxicab, at any time, carries more passengers than the same is
authorized to carry by the terms of this article.
B. Any taxicab owner's or driver's license which remains unused for a
period of at least one year shall automatically revert to the Township
and shall be deemed null and void.
C. No taxicab owner's license or driver's license shall be issued to, or
renewed for, any taxi owner or taxi driver unless and until proof shall
have been given to the Township Clerk that the owner and/or driver has
§ 163-7 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-9
163:565
§ 163-10. Fares; daily records; taxicab meter.
adequately provided for the safety of children under the age of five
years who are passengers in the taxicab or cabs owned and/or operated
by them. In the case of a taxi owner who owns more than one taxi,
such proof shall consist of a written policy and posted notice at the base
of operation and in all taxicabs owned by him, conspicuous to drivers,
setting forth that, prior to the operation of the taxicab, children 18
months of age or younger, who are passengers in a taxicab, shall be
placed in a federally approved child restraint seat, and children over
the age of 18 months, but under the age of five years, must be placed
in a car seat, if riding in the front seat of the taxicab or in a lap and/
or lap and shoulder harness seat belt, if riding in the rear seat of the
taxicab. The owner of more than one taxicab must, at all times, keep
and maintain in his vehicles or at the base of operation a total number
of federally approved car seats equal to 25% of the number of licensed
taxicabs owned by him, which shall at all times be available for use by
drivers of the cabs owned by said taxicab owner. In the case of an owner
of a single taxicab, such proof shall consist of proof that the owner
keeps and maintains a federally approved car seat in the passenger
compartment or trunk of the licensed vehicle at all times, for use in
accordance with this provision.
A. No taxicab shall be operated in the Township unless and until there is
predominantly displayed in the interior thereof, within full view and
access of any passengers therein and on the exterior of the vehicle, a
complete list of fares, charges or tariff rates so displayed which shall be
those to be charged to any passengers so transported, and no other
fares, charges or tariff rates will be utilized. A schedule of said fares,
rates and tariffs, prior to use, shall be filed in an acceptable form with
the Township Clerk. No rate change shall take effect unless and until
the same shall have been filed with the Township Clerk at least 10 days
prior to the proposed effective date of the change.
B. No taxicab shall at any time carry more than five passengers unless
otherwise designated on the taxicab owner's license. Every driver of
such taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of legal fare in
advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid; but no driver of
such vehicle shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly
person or persons upon request anywhere in the Township unless
previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of any such taxicab
shall carry any other person than the first passenger employing him,
without the consent of the first passenger.
C. Every holder of an owner's license shall require the driver of the taxicab
to keep a daily record identified by the cab number of the taxicab used
and the license number of the taxicab driver, which record shall include
the time and place when and where a passenger was accepted as well
as the time and place of discharge. These records shall be kept for at
§ 163-9 ANDOVER CODE § 163-10
163:566
§ 163-11. Taxicab identification.
§ 163-12. Operation.
least one year and shall be open, at all times, for inspection by any duly
authorized law enforcement officer.
D. Senior citizens who are residents of the Township of Andover shall
receive a twenty-percent discount from any posted taxicab fare, and
said reduced rate shall be prominently posted on the interior of the
taxicab.
E. All taxicabs so licensed in Andover Township are required to have
installed therein a standard taxicab meter attached to the odometer.
This meter shall prominently display the fare to the passenger and shall
be calibrated annually under the auspices of the Township prior to the
issuance of any renewal license. The Township shall choose the
appropriate form of calibration, and all taxicab meters shall be sealed
by the Township.
A. There shall be affixed in every taxicab, in such manner that the same
can be conveniently read by any person in the taxicab, a card at least
three inches in height by at least five inches in length, containing the
name of the owner, the license number of the vehicle, the year of
issuance and the number of passengers that can be lawfully transported
in such taxicab. A card shall also contain a photograph of the taxicab
driver with the name of the driver and his license number.
B. Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on the outside of the
taxicab, on both sides thereof, the word "taxi," "cab," hack," "taxicab" or
"van" in letters at least four inches in height as well as the name under
which the owner is operating said vehicle; or, in the alternative, shall
have on top of each taxicab a sign at least 12 inches in width by six
inches in height made of plastic on which there shall be the word "taxi"
and the name of the company in black letters. The sign shall be
illuminated by a white bulb when the taxicab is in service.
C. Every taxicab so licensed shall have a decal or other form of
identification placed on the exterior thereof in a format location and in a
size to be prescribed by the Township which clearly identifies that the
vehicle is duly licensed by Andover Township.
A. Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadways, but shall pull up the right-hand sidewalk as near as possible
or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the
road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way
streets where passengers may be received or discharged on either the
right-or left-hand sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a
sidewalk.
§ 163-10 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-12
163:567
§ 163-13. Taxicab appearance.
The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Township shall
keep the taxicab in good running order so that it makes a presentable
appearance and affords comfortable and safe rides to passengers and
remains free from mechanical defects or other defects which would affect
the safety of the passengers. The owner of each taxicab shall have each
taxicab presented to the Chief of Police or other designated police officer
prior to issuance or renewal of the taxicab owner's license and thereafter
upon the request of the Chief of Police or other police officer so that it may
be inspected to determine whether it complies with the provisions of this
article.
§ 163-14. Passenger transportation; deceptive drivers.
No owner or driver of any taxicab shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person as to time and place
of the arrival or departure of any airplane or other regularly scheduled
mode of transportation or as to the location of any hotel, motel, public
place or private residence within this Township, nor shall any such owner
or driver deceive any person or make false representations to any person or
convey any passenger to any other place or over any street other than that
to which the passenger may have instructed the driver to go. Every owner
and driver shall be responsible to see to it that all passengers are carried in
a safe and responsible manner and by using a reasonable and direct route
from point of origin to point of destination. No taxicab shall, at any time,
carry more passengers than the vehicle is designed or licensed for, but in
no event shall any one taxicab carry more than nine passengers.
§ 163-15. License fees.
B. Every person operating a taxicab, whether an owner and/or driver, who
is transporting a child under five years on roadways, streets or
highways of this Township, shall be responsible for the protection of the
child by properly using a child passenger restraint system that complies
with federal vehicle safety standards. No driver shall operate a taxicab
in which a child five years of age or younger is a passenger unless:
(1) A child 18 months of age or younger is in a car seat regardless of
whether such child is in the front or rear seat;
(2) A child over 18 months of age but less than five years is in a car
seat, if a front seat passenger, or is in a lap belt or lap belt and
shoulder harness, if a rear seat passenger.
A. The annual taxicab owner's license shall be $50 per taxicab. The license
shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 of each
year.
§ 163-12 ANDOVER CODE § 163-15
163:568
§ 163-16. Rules governing taxicab owners and drivers.
§ 163-17. Number of taxicab licenses.
The number of taxicab owner's licenses that may be issued in any one
year shall be limited to one such license per 1,000 Township residents as
estimated in the most recent official state population estimates. Based upon
that estimate, the number of licenses permitted to be issued as of the date of
the adoption of this article shall be 21. There shall be no limit to the number
of taxicab driver's licenses issued.
§ 163-18. Dormant taxicab licenses.
A taxicab owner's license which is not operational for a period of 12
consecutive months shall automatically revert to the Township without
notice or hearing and may thereafter be issued by the Township to any
qualified person.
B. There shall be a transfer fee of $15 for the issuance of taxicab owner's
license for a vehicle replacing that originally licensed. This fee shall be
for the administrative cost involved in processing the vehicle.
C. The annual taxicab driver's license shall be $50 per year. The license
shall be effective for the period from January 1 to December 31 of each
year. All licenses are nontransferable.
D. The annual taxicab renter's license shall be $50 per year. The license
shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 of each
year. All licenses are nontransferable.
A. Every operator of a taxicab immediately after the discharge of a
passenger must search the taxicab for any property lost or left therein,
and any such property found unless sooner delivered to the owner, must
be reported, in writing, by the operator or owner of the taxicab to the
Township Clerk with the particulars and description of the property
within 12 hours after the finding thereof.
B. Official notice will be taken of any misconduct, deceit, fraud, subterfuge
or actions of the driver which are against the best interest of the public,
even though not specifically mentioned in the rules. Any violation of
these rules may result in suspension or revocation of license.
C. Holders of taxicab owner's and/or driver's licenses prior to the effective
date of this subsection shall have 30 days from the effective date hereof
to comply with the requirements set forth herein before any penalty
may be imposed for violations hereof. The license of any taxicab owner
or driver who does not comply with the requirements of this section as
set forth herein shall be subject to the penalties provided for in
§ 163-20. The requirements of this section shall be strictly applied to
any applicant for licensure or renewal of any license after the effective
date and grace period provided for by this section.
§ 163-15 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-19
163:569
§ 163-19. Penalties for unlicensed drivers.
In the event that a taxicab is being operated by a party who does not have
a taxicab driver's license, as defined in this article, both the driver and the
owner of the taxicab shall be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth
in § 163-20 of this article.
§ 163-20. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
license.
Every person or persons, firm or corporation found guilty in a municipal
court of competent jurisdiction of violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 and/or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days and/or required to complete
community service for not less than five days nor more than 30 days and/or
suspension of an owner's and/or driver's license for a period not to exceed
60 days and/or a recommendation of a revocation of an owner's and/or
driver's license to the Municipal Council. Each succeeding day of a violation
shall be constructed as a new violation.
§ 163-21. Compliance with state vehicle laws.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt any person, firm or
corporation owning or operating a taxicab from complying with the laws
relating to the ownership, regulation and operation of automobiles in the
State of New Jersey.
§ 163-19 ANDOVER CODE § 163-21
163:570
ARTICLE II
Autocabs and Limousines
§ 163-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCABS — A limousine.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine within this Township.
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers
for hire to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a premium
fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not conducted on
a regular route and with a seating capacity in no event of more than 14
passengers, not including the driver, provided that such a vehicle shall not
have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers, not including the
driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not
including the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing in this definition
shall be construed to include taxicab, hotel buses or buses regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying passengers for
hire by limousine.
OWNER — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any
court whatsoever.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, boulevard
or other public place.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Andover, Sussex County, New Jersey.
§ 163-23. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses, to be known
as "limousine owner's license" and "limousine driver's license."
A. Limousine owner's license. A limousine owner's license shall entitle the
limousine therein described to be operated anywhere within this
Township by a driver duly licensed hereunder, until such license either
expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be
transferable. There shall be no limit to the number of limousine owner's
licenses issued.
B. Limousine driver's license. A limousine driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this Township any limousine
duly licensed hereunder, until the license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable.
There shall be no limit to the number of limousine driver's licenses
issued.
§ 163-22 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-24
163:571
§ 163-24. License required; inspection of limousine.
§ 163-25. Application requirements.
A. No person shall hire out, keep or use for hire or pay, or to be kept or
used for hire or pay, any limousine within the Township without first
having obtained an owner's license for that purpose, as provided by this
article.
B. No license required by this section shall be issued or renewed unless
the limousine sought to be licensed has been thoroughly and carefully
inspected by the Andover Township Police Department and a certificate
issued that the same is found to be in a safe and comfortable condition
for the transportation of passengers, of good appearance and well
painted.
A. Applicants for a limousine owner's and/or limousine driver's license
shall be required to pay to the Township, with the application, whatever
sum of money charged by the State of New Jersey to process a name
check for any criminal record. No application for limousine owner's
and/or limousine driver's license shall be approved until such time as
the applicant has executed a form of consent and release so as to permit
the Andover Township Police Department to conduct such investigation
as may be required in order to determine that the applicant
substantially complies with the meaning, intent and purpose of this
article.
B. Each applicant for limousine owner's license shall, in addition to the
requirements of any law of the state, establish, to the satisfaction of the
Township Clerk, the following:
(1) Application shall contain the full name and address of the owner,
the serial number, type, color, year and make of the limousine, the
state registration number, number of doors on said vehicle and
number of persons the vehicle can carry as passengers.
(2) All applications shall be filed with the Township Clerk who shall,
prior to the issuance of said license, receive proof from the
applicant that the applicant is at least 21 years of age.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation must be
organized and existing under the laws of the State of New Jersey
and must present proof thereof, or if organized and existing under
the laws of another state, be officially able to do business in the
State of New Jersey and must supply the name and address of the
New Jersey registered agent for said corporation.
(4) Applications for a limousine owner's license shall show proof of
insurance of $1,500,000 as per § 163-28A(1).
§ 163-24 ANDOVER CODE § 163-25
163:572
§ 163-26. Refusal of application for license; suspension or
revocation of license.
The Township Council or its designee may, in its discretion, refuse to
issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any
license issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly in this
state or in any other state or territory, or has been convicted of a violation
under Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey or who violates any provision of this article or has
any judgment unsatisfied of record arising out of an automobile accident
or who has made false answers in the application for such license or any
renewal thereof or who has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt,
safe and adequate limousine services or who has not complied fully with all
requirements of this article for such class of licensure, or if the licensee or
applicant has in any degree contributed to any injury to person or damage
to property arising out of negligent operation of motor vehicle or as to any
limousine owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed
by reason of unsafe or unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or
health of the occupants, and others, or if the policy of insurance required
herein has once lapsed or such coverage is not maintained at all times, or a
(5) No limousine owner's license shall be issued without first being
inspected by the Andover Township Police Department as per
§ 163-24B.
C. Each application for a limousine driver's license shall, in addition to the
requirements of any law of the state, establish, to the satisfaction of the
Township Clerk, that such applicant:
(1) Is currently licensed by the New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicles and maintains a valid New Jersey license.
(2) Is at least 21 years of age.
(3) Is a legal resident of the United States.
(4) Submits a certificate from a licensed physician of the State of New
Jersey, at the applicant's expense, certifying that the applicant has
been examined within the preceding 30 days and that such
applicant has no infirmity of body or mind, or visual impairment or
deficiency, which might render the applicant unfit for the safe
operation of a limousine.
(5) Submits to a traffic violations check for the preceding five years to
be conducted by the Township and that he or she has sufficient
knowledge of the Township's traffic regulations.
(6) Submits two recent photographs, being not less than 1 1/4 inches
in height by one inch in length, of the applicant, with the
application.
§ 163-25 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-26
163:573
limousine, at any time, carries more passengers than the same is authorized
to carry by the terms of this article.
§ 163-27. Power of attorney.
The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver to the Division of
Motor Vehicles, concurrently with the filing of a certificate of insurance
pursuant to § 163-28A(1), a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the
owner shall appoint the Director of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a
court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of
the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 163-28. Insurance; operation of limousines.
A. Insurance requirements.
(1) No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in
this Township until the owner of the limousine shall have filed with
the Township Clerk, in which the owner has his/her principal place
of business within this Township, a certificate of insurance, by a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this state, in the sum of $1.5 million against loss by reason
of the liability imposed by law upon every limousine for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered by a person as result of
an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or
use of the limousine upon any public street.
(2) The operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy remains in full force and effect as to the full and collectible
amount of $1.5 million. Limousine owners, or anyone on its behalf,
shall not undertake to cancel or have canceled any such policy
without giving the Township Clerk 10 days' notice of the intention
to do so. No such policy shall be filed by the Township Clerk unless
such policy shall contain a provision to the effect that the Township
Clerk shall be afforded at least 10 days' notice of the intention of
the insurance company which issued such policy to cancel same.
(3) The insurance policy shall provide for a payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine upon any public street or
any fault in respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
B. Every person operating a limousine, whether an owner and/or driver,
who is transporting a child under five years on roadways, streets or
highways of this Township, shall be responsible for the protection of the
child by properly using a child passenger restraint system that complies
with federal vehicle safety standards. No driver shall operate a
limousine in which a child five years of age or younger is a passenger
unless:
§ 163-26 ANDOVER CODE § 163-28
163:574
§ 163-29. License fees; term of license.
(1) A child 18 months of age or younger is in a car seat regardless of
whether such child is in the front or rear seat;
(2) A child over 18 months of age but less than five years is in a car
seat, if a front seat passenger, or is in a lap belt or lap belt and
shoulder harness, if a rear seat passenger.
C. Issuance of license of operation; drivers to be licensed.
(1) The Township Clerk, upon the filing of the required application and
certificate of insurance, shall issue a license, in duplicate, showing
that the owner of the limousine service has complied with the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
(2) The license shall state the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy and a description and
the registration number of each limousine service insured
thereunder. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of
Motor Vehicles before any such vehicle is registered as a limousine
service.
(3) A limousine shall not be operated by anyone for service within the
Township unless the driver thereof has been issued a valid
limousine driver's license.
D. Availability of license for inspection; minimum equipment standards.
(1) The original license shall be retained within the limousine and shall
be available for inspection by any police officer of the state.
(2) No limousine shall operate on the highways of this state unless it
has a license issued and the limousine is equipped, in accordance
with minimum standards established by the Director of the Division
of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, with:
(a) A two-way communications system, which, at a minimum, shall
provide for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a
distance of not less than 100 miles and which requirement may
be satisfied by a mobile telephone.
(b) A removable first-aid kit and an operable fire extinguisher,
which shall be placed in an accessible place within the vehicle.
(c) Sideboards attached to the permanent body construction of the
vehicle if the height of the vehicle floor is 10 inches or more
above ground level.
A. The fee for each limousine owner's license will be $50 per vehicle. The
license shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 of
each year.
§ 163-28 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-29
163:575
§ 163-30. Limousine appearance.
No lettering, emblem or advertising may be placed on a licensed limousine.
§ 163-31. Limousine identification.
Subject to regulations to be promulgated by the Township Clerk, a
limousine license sticker shall be placed on the left rear bumper of every
licensed limousine.
§ 163-32. Solicitation prohibited.
Limousine drivers shall not knowingly solicit business in a manner similar
to that of a taxicab or attempt to solicit business by knowingly misleading a
prospective passenger.
§ 163-33. Compliance with state laws.
Nothing in this article shall exempt any person owning or operating a
limousine from complying with the laws relating to the ownership,
regulation and operation of limousines in the State of New Jersey.
§ 163-34. Violations and penalties.
A person who shall own and operate a limousine in any street in this state
in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
B. The fee for each limousine driver's license will be $50 per year. The
license shall be effective for a period from January 1 to December 31 of
each year.
A. For operating a limousine without a license issued by a municipality,
operating a limousine without authority to operate a limousine in
interstate service granted by the Federal Highway Administration, or
the Interstate Commerce Commission, knowingly permitting a driver to
operate a limousine without a validly issued driver's license or a validly
issued commercial driver's license, if required, failure to have filed an
insurance policy, operating a limousine in which the number of
passengers exceeds the maximum: a fine of $2,500 for the first offense
and a fine of $5,000 for the second or subsequent offense.
B. For operating a limousine without the special registration plates
required or operating a limousine without the limousine being properly
inspected: a fine of $1,250 for the first offense and a fine of $2,500 for
the second or subsequent offense.
C. For operating a limousine without the attached sideboards, if required,
failure to retain within the limousine appropriate proof of insurance or
failure to execute and deliver to the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles the power of attorney required: a fine of $250 for the first
offense and $500 for the second and subsequent offense.
§ 163-29 ANDOVER CODE § 163-34
163:576
§ 163-35. Unlicensed drivers; liability of owner.
In the event that the limousine is being operated by a party who does not
have the license called for in this article, both the driver and the owner
of the limousine shall be subject to the penalty provisions hereinabove set
forth.
D. For failure to be equipped with a two-way communications system, a
removable first-aid kit or an operable fire extinguisher: a fine of $50 for
the first offense and $100 for the second and subsequent offense.
§ 163-34 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 163-35
163:577
Chapter 167
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 175.
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(u) a list of towing contractors to provide towing services for
the Township of Andover on a rotating basis and to establish, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, regulations governing operators engaged in the
removal of motor vehicles.
§ 167-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABANDONED — Any automobile which is parked without the current year's
registration or license plates, as required by law, for a period of more than
48 hours or is positioned so as to constitute an obstruction of traffic.
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private passenger or
station wagon type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public
or livery conveyance for passengers, nor rented to others with a driver; and
a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van, or a panel
truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by an
individual, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business of
the owner(s).
BASE OF SERVICE — The location where the towing contractor stations its
tow vehicle(s) when not in use.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile at the request or call of authorized personnel or members of
the Police Department as may be required when abandoned as defined in
this chapter or Chapter 175, Vehicles, Abandoned, of the Township Code,
disabled, damaged in accidents, illegally parked, recovered after being
stolen or in cases of emergency, from a highway, street, or other public or
private road, or a parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services
normally incident thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile
from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled
upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Police Department of the Township
or his/her designee.
§ 163-35 ANDOVER CODE § 167-2
163:578
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which an automobile
as defined herein comes in contact with any other object from which the
automobile must be towed or removed for placement in a storage facility.
This includes all situations which are accidental to one person even if
caused by the intentional acts of another.
NONBASIC TOWING SERVICES — All towing services which are not basic
towing services or are not performed on automobiles as defined herein.
STORAGE SERVICES — The maximum allowable amount of storage charges
to be charged per twenty-four-hour period or a fraction thereof. Each new
twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tiltbeds, wheel lifts, or under reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of automobiles as
defined herein.
TOWING CONTRACTOR — A licensed individual or entity placed upon the
rotary list that performs towing services for the Township.
§ 167-3. Rotary list.
§ 167-4. Application and licensure.
A. This chapter hereby establishes a list of towing contractors to provide
basic and nonbasic towing services for the Township of Andover on a
rotating basis. The Police Department will maintain the rotary list and
determine the time period for each rotation. The list of towing
contractors shall be determined by and under the direct supervision of
the Chief of Police.
B. A towing contractor shall be placed on the rotary list in the order in
which its application was approved. Each new towing contractor shall
initially be placed last on the list. No towing contractor may be listed
more than once, and no contractor shall be permitted to lease its tow
vehicles to another tow contractor in order to receive multiple listings.
C. Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day per
week basis. It is required that a tow vehicle be on the site of the event
within 20 minutes of the time of the call from the Police Department. If
a towing contractor is called and for any reason does not or cannot
perform the requested service, the next towing contractor on the list
will be called to perform the towing service.
D. If no towing contractor on the rotating list is able to perform the towing
services when necessary, the Township is entitled to have said service
performed by a towing contractor not named on the rotating list.
E. During adverse weather conditions or other emergency conditions, all
towing contractors on the rotating list shall give priority to requests for
towing services made by the Township over requests made by third
parties.
§ 167-2 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-4
163:579
A. An individual or entity seeking to be placed on the rotary list shall be
required to submit an application and receive the approval of the Police
Department before issuance of a towing contractor's license.
B. All applicants are required to complete a form furnished by the
Township Clerk, providing any and all information prescribed by the
Chief of Police.
C. Each towing contractor must be able to demonstrate to the Township
that he is thoroughly qualified and experienced in the towing and
removal of vehicles of all types, and that he has adequate facilities,
equipment, expertise, licensing and personnel to perform the services
required by these specifications in a manner satisfactory to the Andover
Township Police Department.
D. The Andover Township Police Department will conduct a background
check of the towing contractor, its officers, and employees, prior to
making a determination of placement on the towing list. A high number
of traffic violations and/or motor vehicle accidents in the past 10 years
may make a driver ineligible, subject to the discretion of the Chief of
Police, which must be exercised reasonably. A conviction for a felony
will be considered ample reason to disqualify any contractor unless
waived by the Township upon application and for good cause.
E. A license may be denied, suspended, or revoked upon any of the
following grounds:
(1) Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
(2) A criminal conviction of the towing contractor or a named principal
of the towing contractor.
(3) Failure to respond reliably and promptly to calls for assistance or
any other unsatisfactory performance action which interferes with
the proper operation of the rotating system maintained by the
Police Department.
(4) Failure to utilize safe and adequate equipment as defined herein.
(5) Violations of motor vehicle laws and/or municipal ordinances.
(6) Failure or refusal to tow or remove a motor vehicle when requested
to do so by an appropriate municipal official.
(7) Violations of Chapter 190, Zoning, or any other applicable
ordinances or codes of the Township of Andover pertaining to the
use or condition of the premises used by the licensee in conducting
the towing business.
(8) Violations of the provisions of this chapter or any of its rules,
regulations, and policies promulgated pursuant hereto.
§ 167-4 ANDOVER CODE § 167-4
163:580
§ 167-5. Denial, suspension and revocation of licenses; hearings.
§ 167-6. Enforcement of chapter and rules.
The Police Department in general and the Chief of Police in particular
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as rules and regulations
adopted hereunder.
§ 167-7. Statement of rates.
F. Licenses shall be renewed annually from January 1 to December 31 of
the succeeding year.
A. When application for a license is denied by the Township of Andover,
the applicant may request a hearing on said application by the service
of a notice requesting a hearing. Said notice shall be served on the
Township Clerk and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
governing body, a hearing date shall be set which shall be no less than
seven days or more than 30 days from the date that the governing body
met.
B. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
initiated by the service of a notice of charges proffered against the
licensee. Said notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, either personally or via certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall contain a date, time and place for a hearing to be
held by the governing body of the Township of Andover. Said hearing
shall be scheduled no less than seven days nor more than 30 days after
the notice of the proposed suspension or renovation shall be served
upon the Licensee. The licensee shall have the right to file an answer to
the notice and to appear in person, or be represented by counsel, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
A. The rates applicable to towing services performed hereunder shall be
posted in a conspicuous place, visible to the public at the contractor's
place of business.
B. The contractor shall, at his expense, prepare a printed bill for
distribution to the customer, reflecting the fee to be paid in accordance
with the rates stated on the printed card, unless otherwise approved by
the Police Department. The bill shall also include the information set
forth in Subsection B, as well as a statement to the effect that all
complaints shall be referred to the Police Department.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.54, the owner of any automobile whose
automobile is towed and/or stored other than at the owner's request
may send complaints and/or report disputed fees in writing to the Chief
of Police. The Chief of Police shall arrange for investigation of the
owner's allegations and report the outcome of the investigation to the
owner within 30 days of the Township's receipt of the written
complaint.
§ 167-4 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-7
163:581
§ 167-8. Employees.
§ 167-9. Conduct of contractors and operators.
No person owning or operating a tow vehicle shall:
D. The contractor shall accept from any owner, or his representative,
methods of payment in the form of cash, certified check, money order
and at least one major credit card. The contractor is not obligated to
accept personal checks for payment.
A. The towing contractor shall employ a sufficient number of employees to
comply with the minimum operational requirements.
B. No person shall be employed by the contractor for towing hereunder
unless he has submitted to a background check and has been approved
by the Police Department. Costs of any such background check shall be
borne by the applicant.
C. All drivers of the contractor shall be over the age of 18 years and must
have a valid, current; New Jersey state driver's license and shall be in
good health and of good moral character.
D. In order to keep information current, the contractor is required to
submit a roster of drivers to the Police Department on a monthly basis.
No driver shall perform services hereunder unless previously listed by
the contractor and approved by the Police Department.
E. Complaints of any kind, relative to service, overcharging, theft of parts,
damage to towed vehicles, discourteous treatment, and the like, shall
be referred to the Police Department for investigation.
F. All employees of the contractor shall wear uniform clothing with a name
patch indicating the employee's first name and the name of the
contractor's company.
G. The contractor agrees that the owners or officers of the contractor shall
be responsible, except as otherwise provided by law, for the negligent
acts of their employees while acting hereunder.
A. Stand at any public street, intersection, or any public property, waiting
for employment, without first obtaining the consent of a police officer,
or stand on any private property without first obtaining the consent of
the owner of the property.
B. Seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his tow vehicle
in a short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by otherwise
interfering with the proper and orderly progress of traffic along the
public highways. The contractor shall wait until he receives official
notification from the Police Department of the Township before
commencing operations.
C. Permit or invite loitering in or near the tow vehicle.
§ 167-7 ANDOVER CODE § 167-9
163:582
§ 167-10. Equipment requirements.
D. Solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of another tow vehicle.
E. Solicit, demand, or receive from any person any pay, commission or
emolument whatsoever, except the proper fee for transporting the
disabled vehicle in accordance with the schedule of service rates listed
in those specifications.
F. Pay any gratuity, tip, or emolument to any third person not involved in
the accident or to any police officer, for information as to the location of
the accident, or for soliciting the employment of licensee's services, nor
give any gratuities, fees or other compensation or gifts to any member
of the Police Department or Township employee.
G. Act in an unprofessional manner or be discourteous or disrespectful to
members of the public as well as representatives of the Township of
Andover. While members of the public, especially those whose
automobiles may have been towed or impounded, may at times resort to
strong language, threats and unbecoming behavior toward the
contractor, the contractor is expected to exercise restraint and not to
respond in kind, and thereby reflect unfavorably on the Township and/
or the Police Department.
A. The contractor must provide with his application a detailed listing of
the equipment to be utilized while on the towing list. The listing shall
include the following information: type of vehicle, storage location of
vehicles and whether vehicle is owned or leased. All leased and rented
equipment must be permanently located at the contractor's base of
service at all times during the term of the contract. Each piece of
equipment must meet the minimum standards set forth herein.
Equipment that cannot meet these minimum standards shall not be
used for the towing list. The contractor is solely responsible for the
safety, maintenance, and operation, of each piece of equipment utilized
while on the towing list.
B. The Police Department shall keep a register of the names of all those
owning or operating wreckers accepted on the towing list, together
with the license number, the description of such wreckers and the date
and complete record of inspections made of them by the Police
Department. This register shall be maintained by the contractor. All
operators being used on the tow list shall meet all the licensing
requirements of the Township.
C. Car carriers and light-duty wreckers.
(1) Car carrier. A car carrier shall have commercially manufactured
chassis certified by the manufacturer. The vehicle shall be
equipped with a hydraulically-powered winch. The tilt bed or slide
back shall be hydraulically operated. The vehicle shall also be
§ 167-9 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-10
163:583
§ 167-11. Minimum storage requirements.
Each official tow contractor shall maintain an outside secured storage
facility meeting the following requirements:
equipped with tie-down chains, proper safety lights or amber
rotation emergency flashing lights.
(2) Light-duty wrecker. A light-duty wrecker shall have a commercially
manufactured chassis certified by the manufacturer for light-duty
towing. Each shall be equipped with a commercially manufactured
lifting apparatus with dual rear wheels, safety chains, proper safety
lights, and rear floodlights, amber rotation emergency flashing
lights or amber strobe lights which provide visibility for 360º.
D. The towing contractor shall supply manufacturer's certification of the
lifting capacities of the devices of type of vehicle with application
submission. A certified testing laboratory test result is also acceptable
for rating lift capacity.
E. Tow vehicles shall be equipped with two-way radio for communications
with contractor's office facilities. These communications shall be
available 24 hours a day.
F. Tow vehicles shall be equipped at all times with safety vests for
operators, first aid kits, hand tools, lockout kits, flashlight, broom,
shovel, speedy-dry, work gloves and receipts for services rendered. No
additional charge for use of this equipment is permitted.
G. Tow vehicles shall be kept in a clean and neat appearance so as to be
reasonably accommodating to persons who may come in contact with
such vehicles.
H. Tow vehicles shall have the name, address, and telephone number of
the contractor painted on or permanently attached to both sides of the
tow vehicle in compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws of New
Jersey (Title 39 of the Revised Statutes).
I. All tow vehicles shall be properly permitted by the State of New Jersey
for the use of flashing amber emergency lights. Permits shall be in
compliance with Motor Vehicle and Traffic Laws as referenced above.
A. The storage facility must be capable of storing a minimum of 10
automobiles and one tractor and trailer. There must be at least 800
square feet available to hold vehicles impounded by the Police
Department.
B. The storage facility must be within the limits of the Township or within
a contiguous township so as to facilitate reasonable towing distances.
C. The storage facility must be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence having a
minimum height of six feet with at least one lockable gate for ingress
and egress.
§ 167-10 ANDOVER CODE § 167-11
163:584
§ 167-12. Record book of vehicles towed.
§ 167-13. Policies and procedures.
D. The storage facility must be lighted from dusk until dawn.
E. The storage facility must be in area legally zoned for such use.
F. The storage facility must be available to receive vehicles 24 hours per
day, 365 days per year. It must be open to the public to recover vehicles
stored there on weekdays during normal business hours and for four
hours on Saturdays. The applicant must specify the hours during which
the facility will be open on Saturdays. The tow contractor is not
required to be open to the public on Sundays.
G. The tow contractor must have an employee on duty at all times during
which the storage facility is open to the public.
H. The tow contractor may not charge a release fee in connection with the
release of vehicles to their owners after normal business hours or on
weekends.
I. Each application must be accompanied by proof of ownership or lease
of the storage area.
J. The tow contractor is responsible for ensuring the proper and safe
storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter. The tow
contractor is liable for any damage to such vehicles while in transit or
while stored at the storage facility.
A. The contractor shall record all vehicles towed in a book kept for such
purposes. The details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced or
transported together with full information of the towed vehicle and
name and address of the owner and the charges paid for his services.
Full information of the towed vehicle shall include, but not be limited to,
the vehicle's license number, VIN registration number, make, model,
color and year. The record book herein described shall be kept open for
inspection at all times by a duly authorized representative of the
Township. A monthly towing record containing the information herein
stated above shall be filed with the Andover Township Police
Department and office of the Township Clerk setting forth the details of
all tows by vehicle type, date, time of day, sector, and whether
additional services were required. Each incident shall be reported
using the invoice number used for billing. The form of these reports
shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
B. The contractor shall maintain a record of all personal property in a
towed vehicle that he can observe in sight at the time the vehicle comes
into possession.
C. Authorized representatives of the Township shall have access to any of
the records required to be kept by the contractor.
§ 167-11 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-13
163:585
§ 167-14. Disputes and adjustments.
§ 167-15. Subcontracts and leases.
§ 167-16. Towing and storage fee schedule. [Amended 3-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-09]
The following fees are established as being the usual, customary, and
reasonable rates which shall be charged for towing and storage of
automobiles defined as basic towing service:
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
from time to time written policies and procedures as may be reasonable
and necessary to obtain compliance with the terms of this chapter and
the laws of the laws of the State of New Jersey. All written policies
promulgated by the Chief of Police shall be approved by resolution of
the Township Committee.
B. All regulations, policies and procedures as well as the tower's rate
cards shall be made available for inspection by the public at the
Township Clerk's office during normal business hours.
A. Any disputes over the interpretation of this chapter, including the
reasonableness of any charges assessed, shall be settled amicably, if
possible, through negotiations between the contractor, the Police
Department and the Township Administrator.
B. In cases where the Township has mistakenly directed that a vehicle be
towed or has acted on incorrect information supplied by official
sources, the contractor will be reimbursed by the Township only for the
minimum applicable towing fee as stipulated herein.
A. Tow contractors may not lease or rent equipment without the approval
of the Township. The equipment must comply with the minimum
requirements of these specifications, and the contract to lease or rent
equipment must be at least for the duration of service with the
Township. All leased or rented equipment must be permanently located
at the contractor's base of service at all times while the contractor is on
the tow list. Copies of all leases must be filed with the Township Clerk.
B. The tow contractor may not subcontract his equipment or positions of
the work to other tow contractors.
A. Class 1 and Class 2 vehicles.
(1) Road service.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $95 per hour, no mileage fee.
§ 167-13 ANDOVER CODE § 167-16
163:586
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays):
$125 per hour, no mileage fee.
(2) Impound tows (written Police Department release required).
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $125 per hour and $4 per mile (portal to
portal).
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$150 per hour and $4 per mile (portal to portal).
(3) Disabled tow to duty vendor.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $125 per hour, no mileage fee.
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$150 per hour, no mileage fee.
(4) Accident tows.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $125 per hour and $4 per mile (portal to
portal).
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$150 per hour and $4 per mile (portal to portal).
(5) Winching/cleanup/recovery: $150 per hour.
(6) Storage: $47.50 per day.
(a) There shall be a twelve-hour mandatory DWI hold for which the
daily storage fee shall be waived unless the vehicle is not
picked up after the waiting period.
(b) For disabled vehicles, the storage fee shall be waived when the
vehicle is serviced or repaired by duty vendor.
(c) The storage fee shall also be waived if the vehicle is picked up
the same day it comes in.
(7) Additional charges.
(a) Speedy dry: $35 per container.
(b) No-key charge: $40.
B. Class 3 to Class 8 vehicles.
§ 167-16 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-16
163:587
(1) Road service.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $97.50 per hour, with a two-hour minimum.
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$125 per hour, with a two-hour minimum.
(2) Disabled or impound tows (written Police Department release
required).
(3) Class 3 and Class 4 portal to portal.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $175 per hour.
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$225 per hour.
(4) Class 5 and Class 6 portal to portal.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $250 per hour.
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$300 per hour.
(5) Class 7 and Class 8 portal to portal.
(a) Days (between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday): $350 per hour.
(b) Nights (between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., Monday
through Friday; weekends; or on New Jersey state holidays:
$375 per hour.
(6) Accident recovery rates for Class 3 through Class 8 vehicles,
minimum weights apply.
15,000 lbs.: RV/Motor homes
30,000 lbs.: Bus/straight trucks
60,000 lbs.: Tractor/trailers
(a) Normal recovery on or near roadway: 1% of declared value of
recovered cargo plus:
[1] Contained recovery/winching: $0.42 per pound.
[2] Salvage and debris recovery: $0.54 per pound.
[3] Inclement weather: $0.18 per pound.
§ 167-16 ANDOVER CODE § 167-16
163:588
§ 167-17. Nonbasic towing service.
This chapter is not intended to regulate or set fees for nonbasic towing
services or the towing or storage of trucks and buses. Such service, if
requested, shall be billed at reasonable prevailing rates. The towing
contractor shall submit a list of fees in advance for nonbasic towing to the
Chief of Police, who shall have the sole discretion in determining reasonable
prevailing rates.
§ 167-18. Charge for service.
§ 167-19. Insurance.
[4] Nights/holidays/weekends: $0.18 per pound.
[5] Travel to location: $0.30 per pound.
[6] Wheels higher than roof: $0.12 per pound.
[7] Embankments or inclines: $0.12 per pound.
[8] Back door frame open: $0.12 per pound.
[9] Tractor from under trailer: $0.12 per pound
[10] Major suspension damage: $0.60 per pound.
[11] Handle complete clean up: $0.60 per pound.
[12] 30 M.P.H. Speed Zone: $0.24 per pound.
[13] 50 M.P.H. Speed Zone: $0.36 per pound.
(b) Additional surcharges shall apply to HAZMAT incidents.
A. The towing fees set forth for basic towing service and those billed for
nonbasic towing service are the amounts that the towing contractor will
charge to the vehicle owner or representative. Unless otherwise
provided herein, the Township shall not be responsible for payment of
any towing charges, except for Township-owned vehicles.
B. In the event the Police Department requires a vehicle involved in a
crime or a fatal accident to be held for investigation, the Chief of Police
may, after review of all the circumstances, require waiver of storage
fees, or a portion thereof, incurred up to the date of release.
A. Towing contractors shall be required to purchase, maintain, and
provide during the time of service on the rotary list, proof of insurance
furnished by a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New Jersey, containing the following coverages with
liability limits as set forth below:
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit covering bodily injury
§ 167-16 TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES § 167-19
163:589
§ 167-20. Indemnity.
The contractor will execute an agreement to hold harmless, indemnify
and defend, at the contractor's expense, the Township, its employees and
officials from any and all claims, demands, suits or actions for personal
injury or property damage brought against the Township, its employees and
officials for any activities which arise out of any services performed under
this chapter.
Chapter 171
TREE HARVESTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
§ 171-1. Findings.
and property damage liability including but not limited to personal
injury; product liability (where applicable); independent contractor
and completed operation coverage.
(2) Garage keepers legal liability insurance policy in an amount not
less than $100,000. Said policy must include both comprehensive
and collision, and an endorsement to include "on hook."
(3) Automobile liability insurance policy in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit covering bodily injury and
property damage liability including but not limited to owned,
nonowned, and hired vehicles.
(4) Workers' compensation insurance as required by law, including, but
not limited to statutory New Jersey workers' compensation
benefits, and employers liability of at least $100,000.
(5) Excess/umbrella liability. In the event that garage liability and/or
automobile liability cannot be purchased up to the required
$1,000,000 limit, and excess liability or umbrella liability policy
must be purchased to affect a total liability limit of $1,000,000.
Excess of umbrella liability policies will not be required for garage
and automobile policies that met or exceed the minimum limit of
$1,000,000.
B. The garage liability and automobile liability policies shall name the
Township of Andover as additional insured and certificate holder.
§ 167-19 ANDOVER CODE § 171-1
171:590
§ 171-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FORESTRY — The profession embracing the science, business and art
of creating, conserving and managing forests and forest lands for the
continuing use of their resources.
TREE — A woody plant that has the potential to reach a height of at least
10 feet, has a single stem, and has a definite crown shape.
§ 171-3. Permit required.
Any property owner, or any person or persons, contractor, company or
corporation hired, desiring to cut, remove, or harvest any tree for
commercial purposes shall apply to the duly appointed officer of the
Township of Andover for a permit application and shall include a harvesting
plan, which details the harvesting practices proposed to be employed,
including, but not limited to the following:
A. The Township Committee does hereby decide and find that the
woodlands are an important cultural, ecological, scenic, and economic
resource. Proper management of this resource will insure its
maintenance for all forest benefits, i.e., watershed protection, wildlife
habitat, recreational aspects, and aesthetics.
B. The woodlands must be preserved, protected, enhanced, and
maintained. A forestry program is intended to meet these objectives by
providing opportunities for the continuing uses of the Township's forest
resources which are compatible with the maintenance of the
environment. This can be accomplished by the improvement of the
forests through the application of solid management practices.
A. Location and size of tracts.
B. Owner's name and address.
C. Map of the property showing wetlands, types of vegetation cover, area
to be harvested, receiving waters, location of stream crossings and
alternatives, location of skid trails, location of access roads and landing,
cutting boundaries, and size of filter or buffer strips.
D. Description of area to be harvested, including approximate acreage,
general soil types and erodibility, approximate range of percent of
slope, timber quality and age (forest type, species, age, DBH, height,
volume and reproduction), and understory.
E. Description of timber to be harvested (number of trees, species,
diameter class and volume).
F. Description of timber to be harvested regeneration plans.
§ 171-1 TREE HARVESTING § 171-3
171:591
§ 171-4. Fees.
The cost of this permit shall be $25.
§ 171-5. Exceptions.
Excepted from this chapter shall be:
§ 171-6. Violations and penalties.
G. Description of intermediate management practices to be applied during
or after harvesting.
H. A survey of the property indicating that the trees to be harvested are
within the property boundary lines. This survey condition can be waived
if the Construction Official is satisfied as to the area in which trees are
to be harvested.
A. Any tree located on a parcel of land six acres or less in size on which a
residence has been constructed or to be constructed.
B. Any tree growing on property actually being used as a nursery, garden
center, Christmas tree plantation, or an orchard.
C. Any tree to be cut for personal use by the owner.
D. Any tree growing on a public right-of-way or access easement, public or
private.
E. Any dead, diseased, or other tree that is likely to endanger life or
property.
F. Properties which are being developed under an approved preliminary
or final subdivision or has a building permit.
G. Properties which are under a forestry program.
H. Properties which are undergoing soil and site investigation for
development potential or other use potential or installation of septic
systems.
I. Any trees which are being cut under the supervision of a New Jersey
certified forester.
A. A stop-work order shall be issued by the designated Township official if
noncompliance with the submitted harvesting plan is evident or if there
is nonadherence to the standards in § 171-5. The stop-work order will
remain in effect until the Township has determined that resuming work
will not violate the conditions of the submitted harvesting plan.
B. Should a permit not be secured prior to tree cutting or removal, a fine
shall be levied against the property owner, contractor, company or
§ 171-3 ANDOVER CODE § 171-6
171:592
§ 171-7. Unamended provisions.
All provisions of the aforesaid ordinance not amended herein shall remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 175
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 10.
Towing — See Ch. 167.
Vehicle sales — See Ch. 183.
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE —
corporation in the amount of $50 per tree (over 10 inches in diameter)
for the first offense and $100 per tree for any offense thereafter.
Any inoperable vehicle as defined in this section which is permitted to
remain:
On any privately owned property for more than 30 days. Such
motor vehicle shall prima facie be deemed to be abandoned, unless
the owner produces adequate proof to the Chief of Police or any
member of the Police Department that the owner has taken steps to
effect the repair or removal of the vehicle; provided, however, that
such motor vehicle shall be automatically deemed to be abandoned
if it is permitted to remain on privately owned property for 180 or
more days; or
(1)
On or along any highway or public property, unless the Chief
of Police or any member of the Police Department is notified of
the motor vehicle's presence and location within one hour of the
vehicle becoming inoperable and unless the motor vehicle does not
pose a threat of danger to any person or property as determined
by the Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department.
Regardless of whether notice is given, such motor vehicle shall be
deemed abandoned if it has not been removed within three hours
after it has become inoperable; or
(2)
A.
Any motor vehicle parked on any public street or on any public property
in the Township for a period longer than 48 continuous hours; provided,
however, that a motor vehicle which is parked on a street in front
of the motor vehicle owner's residence shall not be deemed to be an
B.
§ 171-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 175-1
175:593
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle as defined in this section
which is missing one or more tires, one or more wheels, engine, or any
essential parts; or displays extensive body damage or deterioration; or does
not display a current, valid state license plate or inspection sticker; or is
wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled; or is in need of repair,
adjustment, jump-start, towing or aid other than the use of an available
ignition key so as to enable the vehicle to move or be moved.
MOTOR VEHICLE — A device or machine which is propelled or is designed
to be propelled by other than human power and in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
including devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and also
including, but not by way of limitation, an automobile, truck, trailer,
semitrailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, and any vehicle designed for
propulsion on snow and ice.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Township which is not a street
or highway.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 175-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
§ 175-3. Impounding.
abandoned motor vehicle if there is no available off-street parking for
the residence and the vehicle is not an inoperable vehicle as defined in
this section.
A. No person shall place, leave, keep or store, or suffer or permit the
placing, leaving, keeping or storing of any abandoned motor vehicle out
of doors upon any public or private land in the Township or between the
right-of-way lines of any street or public highway.
B. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the placing, keeping or
storage of any abandoned motor vehicle in an enclosed garage, barn or
other building; or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of the
business enterprise; or on public property, provided that the motor
vehicle is owned by the Township.
A. The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated
by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the Township which appears to be present in violation of
this chapter. Such a vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed
or disposed of in accordance with applicable statutes.
B. The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department acting for
him, shall notify the registered and legal owner in writing by personal
service or by certified mail, at the last known address of the owner, of
§ 175-1 ANDOVER CODE § 175-3
175:594
Chapter 183
VEHICLES, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Zoning — See Ch. 190.
§ 183-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A place where
gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for
operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public, including sale of
accessories, greasing, oiling and light motor service on the premises.
FULL-SERVICE AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATIONS or FULL-SERVICE
GASOLINE STATIONS — Those stations offering servicing or automobile
engines on the premises. Gas-only stations which sell only fuel and oil
products and do not provide for engine service, maintenance and repair do
not constitute full-service automotive service stations or gasoline stations
for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 183-2. License required for sale of vehicles.
It shall be permitted to store on the premises of full-service automotive
service stations or full-service gasoline stations two automobiles for sale,
upon the obtaining of a license from the Andover Township Committee in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 183-3. Application requirements and fee.
An application and a plot plan shall be filed with the secretary of the
Township Planning Board containing the following information and
complying with the following requirements:
the removal of the vehicle, the reason for the removal, and the location
of the vehicle.
C. The vehicle shall be retained and impounded until the owner or his
authorized agent pays the cost of such taking and removal, in
accordance with the provisions under Chapter 167, Towing and
Storage. [Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3]
A. Parking stalls marked for all vehicles to be stored on the property. Stalls
are to indicate vehicles to be repaired, vehicles for sale and employee
parking.
§ 175-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 183-3
175:595
§ 183-4. Procedure.
§ 183-5. Renewal.
The license may be renewed annually upon the payment of an annual fee
of $50 and the submission of an application for renewal in accordance with
Chapter 78, Licensing, of the Code of the Township of Andover.
B. All vehicles must be kept at least 20 feet from the right-of-way line on
all roadways.
C. Each car to have only one "For Sale" sign measuring not more than 18
inches by 12 inches.
D. A used car dealer's license must be obtained from the Division of Motor
Vehicles and a copy filed with the Township Clerk prior to the actual
issuance of the license.
E. Site easements shall not be infringed upon by any vehicles stored on
site.
F. Fees shall be paid upon submission of the application in the amount of
$40.
A. Upon receipt of a complete application and the filing fee the Planning
Board secretary shall refer the application to the Review Committee of
the Township Planning Board. Said Review Committee shall review the
application at its next regular meeting and discuss the matter with the
applicant if requested by the applicant. The Review Committee shall
then submit a written recommendation to the Township Committee as
to whether the application should be approved, denied or modified.
B. The Township Committee shall then review the application for the
license along with the recommendation from the Review Committee of
the Planning Board and shall approve, deny or approve as modified the
application for the license within 30 days of receipt of the written
recommendation from the Review Committee of the Planning Board. If
the application for a license is approved by the Township Committee, it
shall direct the Township Clerk to issue the license to the applicant
upon receipt of a copy of the applicant's used car dealer's license from
the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 183-3 ANDOVER CODE § 183-5
175:596
Chapter 190
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 55.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 74.
Site plan review — See Ch. 131.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Tree harvesting — See Ch. 171.
§ 183-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 183-5
175:597

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Andover."
§ 190-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
A. Guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in Andover
Township in a manner which will promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Preserve adequate light, clean air, open space and clean water.
D. Ensure that land development does not conflict with the development
and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the
state as a whole.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons and
neighborhoods and preservation of the environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land.
K. Encourage development which incorporates the best features of design
and relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial,
industrial and recreational development to the particular site.
§ 190-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-2
175:599
L. Encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land.
M. Establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, commercial, industrial, office or other uses within such
lines and fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform.
N. Prohibit uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with the
character of development or the permitted uses within specified zoning
districts.
O. Prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings
or structures that would not comply with the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
P. Protect against fire, explosions, noxious fumes and other hazards in the
interest of the public health, safety, and comfort and the general
welfare.
Q. Conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Township.
R. Meet the housing needs of the future citizens of the Township of
Andover and the region.
§ 190-2 ANDOVER CODE § 190-2
175:600
ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 190-3. Word usage.
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural, and the plural the singular; the word "person" includes a corporation
as well as an individual; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed
or intended to be occupied"; the word "used" shall include the words
"arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or
intended to be used"; the word "abut" shall include the words "directly
across from," "adjacent" and "next to"; and the word "shall" is mandatory
and not optional. The word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"building" includes the word "structure"; and the word "zone" includes the
word "district."
§ 190-4. Definitions.
Certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined for the purpose
hereof as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate use or building, the
purpose of which is customarily incidental to that of the main use or
building and on the same lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer.
AGRICULTURAL USE — An area of land which is actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use which occupies no less than five acres,
exclusive of the land upon which the farmhouse is located and such
additional land as may actually be used in connection with the farmhouse,
as provided in N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3, 54:4-23.4, 54:4-23.5 and 54:4-23.11.
Agricultural uses are defined herein to include peat harvesting operations.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structure parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height, or
by moves from one location or position to another.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any coin-operated machine or device which,
whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the
insertion of a coin and may be operated by the public for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to achieve either a high
or low score, by comparison to the score of other players.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE ENTERPRISE — Premises for the operation of
amusement machines as a primary use.
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC — Dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds (other than poultry)
for noncommercial family use only.
§ 190-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:601
ANIMAL, FARM — Animals other than domestic animals that are kept
and maintained for commercial production and sale and/or family food
production, education or recreation and that are further associated with an
agricultural use as defined in this chapter.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding
and shall be incidental to such hospital use.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Any building, structure or premises in which animals
are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial gain.
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract purchaser or
other person authorized to act for and acting for the landowner submitting
an application under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, issuance of a permit, or appeals.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Township, unless a
different agency is designated by ordinance.
AUCTION MARKET — Any premises on which are held at periodic times
auction sales of merchandise or personal property.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A place where
gasoline, kerosene or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for
operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public, including sale of
accessories, greasing, oiling and light motor service on the premises.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade and having at least 1/2 its height above grade and with a floorto-
ceiling height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
BOARDER — A person who is not related to the head of the household and
who may or may not pay for the privilege of boarding.
BOND — An insurance agreement underwritten by a reputable insurance
company approved by the Township Committee, or cash as determined by
the Township Planning Board, to provide financial surety for the act or
default of an applicant in failing to comply with the standards of this chapter
and the conditions of his approved plan.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — That horizontal ground area which is directly under a
building or buildings.
BUILDING SETBACK — A line established by this chapter within a lot
defining the minimum distance between any structure or portion thereof to
be erected or altered and an adjacent right-of-way, easement, street line,
common open space or property line.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:602
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental
and leasing; commercial research, development, testing; photo finishing;
and personal supply services.[Added 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
CELLAR — A portion of the building partly underground, having 1/2 or more
than 1/2 of its height below the average grade level of the building or with
a floor-to-ceiling height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An establishment providing for the care,
supervision and protection of children.
CLUSTER — Areas to be developed as a single entity according to a plan
containing residential housing, commercial and/or industrial units which
have a common or public open space as an appurtenance.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION — Any facility or property
used primarily for the dispatching, garaging, servicing or maintaining of
any truck registered at a gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds, omnibus,
tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or any vehicle registered in this
state engaged in commerce which is now or hereafter subject to regulation
and licenses by the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Bureau of Motor
Carrier Safety of the Federal Highway Administration or the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles, provided that any such operation shall be limited
to a maximum of 50 truck or trailer-type units and a maximum of 100 trailertype
units. The temporary storage of freight or cargo consistent with and
ancillary to an operation shall be permitted. The storage of any other freight
or cargo is prohibited.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — See “recreation, commercial.”
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any commercial-type vehicle, whether or not
registered as a commercial vehicle, used in connection with a business or
any vehicle containing advertising matter intended to promote the interest
of any business, including tractor trailers, cabs or trailers normally used for
over-the-road use, shipping containers, straight trucks and panel trucks.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMON SEWER — A sewerage system wherein all uses on the property
dispose of sewage into a common facility.
COMMON WATER — A water system wherein all water users on the
property obtain their drinking water from a central well, or wells, or public
water supply system.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:603
seq. providing food, shelter and personal guidance under such supervision
as required to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally
ill persons who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order
to live in the community and shall include, but not be limited to, group
homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. In the case of a community residence
housing mentally ill persons, such residents shall have been approved for
a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such
procedures as are established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health
and Hospitals of the Department of Human Services. As used in this chapter,
"developmentally disabled person" means a person who is developmentally
disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2, and "mentally ill person" means a
person who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,73
but shall not include a person who has been committed after having been
found not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been
found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq. providing food,
shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance and other services
to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence,
including any children of such victims who temporarily require shelter and
assistance in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Any development other than planned
development.
COURT — Any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more
attached building walls.
COVERAGE — That area of a lot which is occupied by a building or
structure, but not including covered walkways, steps, patios or a parking lot
or area or any similar improvements thereto.
CUL-DE-SAC — The end or terminal area of a dead-end street.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
73.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 116. See now N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:604
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building where food or beverages are sold in
a form ready for consumption and where a portion of the consumption of
the same takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the
building but on the building lot.
DWELLING — Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
Hotels, motels, dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, rooming or
boarding houses and other similar group quarters and institutional living
space shall not constitute a dwelling as defined in this chapter.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy exclusively for one family or one household with direct access
from the outside and further provided with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities for one
family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same and
indoor bathroom facilities.
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT or EFFICIENCY GARDEN APARTMENT — A
dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room plus a kitchen
or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
EQUINE ANIMAL — A horse, donkey, mule or pony.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water storage
or transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
light stations, telephone lines, hydrants, tanks and other similar equipment
and accessories herewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or for the public health, safety or general welfare. "Essential
services" shall include firehouses or stations and first aid and emergency
first aid squads. Requirements for underground utilities shall be subject to
the requirements of the Public Utility Commission as well as other Township
ordinances where appropriate.
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY — A long-term care facility or a distinct part of
a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit or a home
for the aged or a governmental medical institution.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption
or up to four unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit and using certain rooms and housekeeping facilities in common.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:605
"Family" shall also include foster children placed with a family in such
dwelling by the Division of Youth and Family Service or a duly incorporated
child-care agency and as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1.
FARM — See “agricultural use.”
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FLEX-SPACE BUILDINGS — Businesses using structures wherein office
space is combined with a warehouse and/or the distribution of a product
or products wherein such warehouse and/or distribution is necessary and
incidental to the main office use. In such case, the warehouse shall not
exceed 90% of the floor area of the building.
FLOOR AREA — The total enclosed floor area of all floors or stories of
a structure used for residential, industrial, office, business or commercial
activities, which, in the case of the latter, includes customer facilities,
showcase facilities and storage and sales facilities.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space used as an accessory to the main
building and in which no occupation, business or service for profit is carried
on but which is used primarily for vehicle storage.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or space other than a private garage which
is used for storage, repair, rental, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or
other motor vehicles, other than an automotive service station as herein
defined.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building occupied or intended for occupancy
as separate living quarters for two or more families, or two or more
households, with direct access either from the outside for each family or
household or through a common hall, and further provided that separate
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided for the exclusive use
of the occupants of each dwelling unit. Generally, each apartment unit is
located on a single floor, but this feature is merely descriptive and not a
mandatory requirement. Additional features of a garden apartment may be
provided in common, such as off-street parking, yards and open space. The
standards for garden apartment shall be substituted for the term "dwelling,
multifamily" or the term "multiple-family dwelling" throughout this chapter.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land laid out to play golf in accordance with
United States Golf Association standards and improved with tees, greens,
fairways and hazards and that may include a clubhouse and shelter and
operated as a commercial enterprise or as a country club. The golf course
may include as accessory uses a pro shop, maintenance facilities, sand,
chipping and green practice areas and a practice range for the golfers
using the eighteen-hole golf course but not a commercial driving range.
The golf course owner shall also own the accessory uses such as a pro
shop, maintenance facilities and chipping and driving practice area and golf
course clubhouse.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:606
GREENHOUSE — A building constructed mainly of glass or other
translucent material in which the temperature and humidity can be
regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants.
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic
exercises, indoor lap pools, running and jogging, exercise equipment, and
ancillary facilities such as lockers, showers, and saunas.[Added 4-25-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-01]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance from the average ground
elevation around the foundation of the building to the highest point of the
roof beams of a flat roof and to the mean height between eaves and ridge
for gabled, hipped or pitched roofs.
HISTORIC SITE OR BUILDING — Any building, structure, area or property
that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this
state, its communities or the nation and has been so designated by one of
the above.
HOME OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION — An occupation for gain or
support conducted solely by members of the family residing in the dwelling
unit, such as dressmaking, baking, millinery, craft workshops or an office
of a member of a recognized profession, such as doctor, lawyer, architect,
engineer, land surveyor, planner or similar profession in character by virtue
of training and experience.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and not for permanent residency and providing additional
services such as restaurants, meeting rooms and recreation facilities. Each
hotel unit shall consist of at least one bedroom, bathroom and closet area.
Cooking facilities within the separate rental units are specifically
prohibited. No hotel or any rental space thereon, other than permanent
concessionaires within a hotel or motel, shall be occupied by the same guest
or guests for a consecutive period exceeding 14 days.
HOUSEHOLD — A family, or not more than four persons, living together as
a single housekeeping unit.
IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE — The square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings and impervious surfaces cover a lot as
measured in a horizontal plane to the limits of the impervious area(s). All
surfaced parking areas and all required parking areas which are permitted
to remain unsurfaced shall be included in the computation of impervious lot
coverage.
INDUSTRIAL — Those type, class or particular establishments which
manufacture, assemble or fabricate products.
INSTITUTIONAL — A use by a public or nonprofit quasi-public body for
educational, religious, charitable or civic purposes.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:607
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY — A facility which provides, on a regular
basis, health-related care and services to individuals who do not require
the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skilled nursing facility
is designated to provide but who, because of their mental or physical
condition, require care and services (above the level of room and board)
which can be made available to them only through institutional facilities
such as these.
JUNKYARD — Any area or structure used primarily for the collection,
storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material
and for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or
vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts thereof.
KIOSK BUSINESS — Business conducted within a freestanding structure,
or within an attached structure having exposure on at least two sides and
containing less than 100 square feet in gross floor area.
LAND — A lot or geographic parcel, including improvements and fixtures
on, above or below the surface.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING — Manufacturing or assembly
plants, those that do not present a fire or explosive potential or emit toxic
matter, noise, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, particulate matter or other
elements which may be discernible and may have a nuisance potential.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area established by a plat or otherwise
permitted by law and which may be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding that area.
LOT AVERAGING — A form of development wherein individual lot areas
and bulk requirements may be reduced, provided that the number of lotaveraged
lots does not exceed the number of lots obtainable using
conventional zoning in conformance with subdivision requirements, land
use ordinances and NJDEP restrictions. [Amended 9-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-19]
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot covered by building area.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured at right angles to the street in the general direction of its
side lot lines.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the lot side lines measured
at the street right-of-way line or at the building setback line when the lot
is located upon a cul-de-sac. A corner lot fronting upon two streets shall
be measured at right angles between one side line and one street rightof-
way line at the other street right-of-way line. It shall meet the lot width
requirements on one street.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:608
MASTER PLAN — A composite of mapped and written proposals
recommending development of the Township of Andover as duly adopted by
the Planning Board.
MEDICAL OFFICES — An office or offices for the practice of general
or specialized medicine and/or therapeutic services by licensed or statecertified
practitioners. [Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — As defined in Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land,
§ 159-4 of this Code.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations
containing six or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct
access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main
lobby of the building and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities. Each motel unit shall consist of a
bedroom, bathroom and closet space. No unit shall have individual cooking
facilities. No motel or any rental space thereon, other than permanent
concessionaires within a hotel or motel, shall be occupied by the same guest
or guests for a consecutive period exceeding 14 days.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record existing at the time of passage
of this chapter which does not have the minimum width or depth or contain
the minimum area for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A building which in its design or
location upon a lot does not conform to the regulations of this chapter for
the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of a building or of land that does not
conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals
who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to
care for themselves.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions therein,
adopted and established from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Act,74 or any prior act authorizing such adoption, which map shall
be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of the
streets, public parks and playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown
thereon.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:609
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same
under this chapter.
PATIO HOME — A single-family attached one-story dwelling unit, located on
a separate lot with open space setbacks on three sides and with a court.
Patio homes that are attached to a similar house on an adjacent lot are
included in this definition.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Any open area used for the temporary storage
of automobiles and other vehicles for the private use of the owners or
occupants of the lot on which the area is located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Any open area, other than a road or other public
way, used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles and
available to the public, whether for a fee or without compensation or as an
accommodation for clients, customers or employees.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space for the parking of one motor vehicle.
PEAT — Organic matter of geological origin, excluding coal, formed from
dead plant remains in water and in the absence of air. It occurs in bogs,
swampland or marsh and contains not less than 70% by dry weight of
decomposed organic matter or, conversely, it has an ash (mineral) content
not exceeding 25% by dry weight.
PEAT HARVESTING OPERATION — An operation that drains a swamp, bog
or marsh, removes the peat that had formed under the water and then
permits the area harvested to reach its natural water table.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PLACE OF WORSHIP —
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land at least 25
acres in area within the Planned Commercial Development District,
developed according to a plan as a single entity, whether owned by one
or more parties, and containing one or more buildings with appurtenant
common areas, and accommodating more than one of the uses within the
Planned Commercial Development District.
A church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other facility that is used for
prayer by persons of similar beliefs.
A.
A special purpose building that is architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting on a regular
basis formal religious services by a religious congregation.
B.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:610
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential cluster, planned commercial development or planned industrial
development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by this chapter to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of 200 or more
contiguous acres to be developed as a single entity according to a plan
containing one or more residential structures and uses incident to
residential use as is permitted pursuant to this chapter.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Andover Township.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The primary or predominant use of a lot or plot.
PROFESSIONAL, BUSINESS, AND ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES — An office
or offices for those professional, scientific and technical services, including,
but not limited to, the practice of law, real estate and appraisal services,
accounting, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, land use
planning, interior design, land surveying, graphic design, computer systems
design and consulting, marketing and sales management services,
administrative management, human resources consulting, environmental
consulting services and advertising and public relations services.[Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
PUBLIC AREA —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township or a Township agency, board of education, state
or county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservation uses.
QUALIFYING MAP — A map required to be submitted by the applicant to
the reviewing municipal board for all cluster subdivisions. The qualifying
map shall depict a conventional subdivision with lots meeting the standard
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites.
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:611
yard requirements of the zone. The total number of lots in a cluster
subdivision shall not exceed the number of standard lots which would
otherwise have been permitted under this chapter, taking into account the
physical features of the property.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Facilities of a recreational nature, such
as a riding academy, bowling alley, golf course or tennis club operated for
profit, open to the public.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — An establishment or other facility for carrying
on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, which may
include engineering and product development.
RIGHT-OF-WAY —
ROADSIDE STAND — An open or covered structure which fronts on a
public street and which is operated for the purpose of direct-to-consumer
commodity sales of products produced by operators, owned or leased, on
the premises.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS —
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee
parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from
customer access, and landscaping and signage provided in accordance with
an approved plan.
The strip of land on which a road, path or public utility is located,
owned by or dedicated to the public, or subject to an easement in a
public agency.
A.
B. Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale, rental or display any of the following: books,
magazines, periodicals or other printed material, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations,
which depict or describe a specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical area; or still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices which show images to one person per
machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are
characterized by the depiction of a specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical area; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with a specified sexual activity; or
A.
A commercial establishment that regularly features live performances
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
a specified sexual activity or which regularly shows films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic representations
that depict or describe a specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical area.
B.
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:612
SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication that
is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention
of others. The flag, badge or insignia of any public, quasi-public, civic,
charitable or religious group shall not be considered a sign. The term "sign"
shall also include advertising structures commonly known as billboards
which direct attention to a business, commodity, service or activity
conducted, sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where
such sign is displayed and which are prohibited by this chapter.
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the outside edge of the frame. Where
there is no frame or edge to the sign, the area shall be defined by a
projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most
closely outlines the sign.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — An off-premises sign which indicates direction to a
permitted use under the provisions of this chapter for special permit signs.
Temporary signs giving direction to activities and events as enumerated
in this chapter and on-premises signs, as regulated herein, directing and
controlling traffic shall also be considered directional signs.
SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign designed to give forth any
artificial light directly, or through any transparent or translucent material,
from a source of light connected with such sign.
SIGN, FACADE AREA FOR — The area of a building wall fronting on a
street, including windows and doors.
SIGN, FLASHING — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign on which
the artificial light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and
color at all times when in use.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — See the definitions of "dwelling, singlefamily,"
"townhouse" and "patio home."
SITE PLAN — A plan of a lot or subdivision on which is shown topography,
location of all buildings, structures, drainage roads, rights-of-way,
boundaries, all essential dimensions and bearings, and any other
information required by Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, or deemed
necessary by the appropriate board in unusual or special cases.
SPECIAL EVENT — A display of persons or materials, which display is not
an adjunct to any business utilizing any rental space within the structure. A
special event does not include sidewalk sales.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — The fondling or other erotic touching
of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female
breast or any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:613
SPORTS FACILITIES — Facilities within an enclosed building with suitable
acoustical construction so as to abate noise beyond the interior of the
building accommodating training and playing of sports such as tennis,
basketball, baseball, softball, volleyball, handball courts, skateboarding,
martial arts instruction and indoor target ranges.[Added 4-25-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-01]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by this chapter
regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat,
electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and
inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge,
screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters
as may be reasonably required by the Township ordinances or required by
applicable federal or state laws.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet above the floor of such story.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to
the public for public use, or a private street approved by official action or
filed on a plat in the Sussex County Clerk's office before the appointment of
a Planning Board in Andover Township.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the highway rights of the
public, either existing or contemplated.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
TOPSOIL — The outer layer of the earth's crust, usually unconsolidated,
which differs from the material beneath it, also usually unconsolidated,
in color, structure, texture, physical constitution, chemical composition,
biological character, probable chemical processes, in reaction and
morphology.
TOWNHOUSE — A building designed for or occupied by no more than one
family or household and attached by a fireproof party wall to other similar
buildings or structures by party walls extending from the foundation to the
roof and providing at least two direct means of access from the outside
and provided with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities and
separate facilities for electric service, heating facilities and gas service.
For the purpose of this chapter, "townhouse" may include a building in fee
simple, condominium or cooperative ownership or any combination thereof.
TRAILER — A wheel-based vehicle that is designed to be transported by
traction and which is used or may be used as a dwelling or for the
transportation or storage of goods, materials, livestock or any object. The
§ 190-4 ANDOVER CODE § 190-4
175:614
regulations in this chapter that apply to trailers shall also apply to the
following vehicles as herein defined below:
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter.
WAREHOUSE — A structure or room for the storage of merchandise or
commodities. In retail sales establishments, the portion of the building used
for storage or warehousing of merchandise or commodities shall not exceed
40% of the area of the building.
YARD —
BOAT TRAILER — A trailer designed for the purpose of transporting a
boat overland.
A.
HORSE TRAILER — A trailer designed for the purpose of transporting
horses or animals overland.
B.
HOUSE TRAILER — A large trailer outfitted as a home meant to be
parked more or less permanently on a location.
C.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
D.
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on
a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses.
E.
TENT TRAILER — A trailer with a built-in or attached tent designed
and equipped to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational and vacation uses.
F.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses, or as an office for business use.
G.
FRONT YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a lot and lying
between the abutting street right-of-way line and the nearest part of the
principal structure on the lot.
A.
REAR YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the existing or
proposed principal structure on the lot.
B.
SIDE YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending from the front yard to the rear yard
of a lot and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of the
principal structure on the lot.
C.
§ 190-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-4
175:615

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 190-5. Effect on other ordinances.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land, or both,
which appear in other ordinances of the Township as established by law and
which are greater than those set forth in this chapter shall take precedence
over those herein. Otherwise the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 190-6. Conformity with regulations; reconstruction.
§ 190-7. Applicability.
No land may be used and no structure may be erected, raised, moved,
extended, enlarged, altered, demolished or used for any purpose other than
that permitted herein for the zone in which it is located, and all construction
shall be in conformity with the regulations provided for the zone in which
such construction is located.
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
structurally altered, added to, enlarged or rebuilt nor shall any land be
used for any purpose other than those included among the uses listed
as permitted uses in each zone by this chapter and meeting the
requirements as set forth by the schedule, nor shall any open space
contiguous to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner except in conformity with the yard, lot area, building location,
percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking space and such other
regulations designated in the schedule and this chapter for the zone in
which such building or space is located. In the event of any such
unlawful encroachment or reduction, the building shall be deemed to be
in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
structurally altered, added to, enlarged, or rebuilt nor should any land
be used for any purpose or in any other manner than as permitted in
this chapter and Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the
Township of Andover and any conditions of any applicable variance, site
plan or subdivision approval by the approving board.
C. Any single-family dwelling which was in existence on the date of the
adoption of this chapter and which is totally destroyed either by fire or
by accident may be reconstructed upon its former location provided
that the exterior dimensions of such dwelling, as reconstructed, are no
greater than the exterior dimensions of the original structure. Such
reconstruction shall not constitute a violation of any of the yard, area,
height or building area requirements of the zone within which such
dwelling is located.
§ 190-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-8
175:617
§ 190-8. Construction permit.
No building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired
or moved until a construction permit has been issued by the Construction
Official.
§ 190-9. Zoning permit.
A. A zoning permit shall be obtained by the owner and/or occupant of real
estate within the Township of Andover in the following instances:
(1) Before changing the use of any building, structure, lot or parcel of
land, or portion thereof, or allowing such change.
(2) Before constructing, erecting, altering or enlarging or permitting
the construction, erection, alteration or enlargement of any
building or structure on a lot.
(3) Before occupying any building, structure, lot or tract of land where
the use has been changed.
B. A zoning permit shall be required for alterations or renovation which
would intensify the use by increasing the units occupied in the building
or by changing the parking, traffic pattern or lighting.
C. No zoning permit shall be required for the alteration of a single-family
dwelling to be used solely for residential purposes. A zoning permit
shall be required for an addition to a single-family residence.
D. The zoning permit shall show that every building or structure, or
premises or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter or in conformity with the
provisions of a variance previously granted according to law and all
other applicable Township and state laws, rules and regulations.
E. All zoning permits shall be used in triplicate, and one copy shall be
posted conspicuously on the premises affected whenever construction
work is being performed thereon. No owner, contractor, workman or
other persons shall perform any building operations of any kind unless
the zoning permit covering such operation has been previously issued.
Furthermore, no building operations of any kind shall be performed
after notification of the revocation of said zoning permit. Every zoning
permit for a residence or residential dwelling unit shall set forth the
maximum occupancy of said residence or dwelling unit for a multiple
housing complex, such as garden apartments or townhouses.
F. A record shall be kept of all zoning permits issued, and the original
applications therefor shall be kept on file in the same manner as
applications for building permits. No owner, tenant or other persons
shall use or occupy any building or structure thereafter erected or
altered, the use of which shall be changed after passage of this chapter,
without first obtaining a zoning permit.
§ 190-8 ANDOVER CODE § 190-9
175:618
§ 190-10. Violations and penalties.
G. A zoning permit, unless revoked, shall continue in effect so long as
there is no change of use of the premises.
H. The Zoning Officer shall act upon all such applications within 15 days
after receipt of a fully filled in application or shall notify the applicant in
writing of his refusal to issue such permit and the reasons therefor.
I. Failure to notify the applicant in case of such refusal within said 15 days
shall entitle the applicant for a zoning permit to file an appeal to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment as in the case of a denial.
J. The Zoning Officer may waive plans on minor alterations not affecting
structural change.
K. Fee schedule for application for zoning permit: [Amended 2-11-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-02]
Application Fee Late Filing Fee
Additions, alterations and accessory structures: residential and farm
Up to $2,500 $25 $35
Up to $5,000 $35 $50
Up to $10,000 $50 $70
Up to $20,000 $75 $100
Over $20,000 $100 $125
New homes $100 $150
Home occupations $75 $125
Commercial alterations: signs, accessory structures, new buildings
Up to $5,000 $50 $75
Up to $10,000 $75 $100
Up to $50,000 $100 $150
Up to $100,000 $150 $175
Over $100,000 $200 $225
L. If it shall appear at any time to the Zoning Officer that the application or
accompanying plans is in any material respect false or misleading or
that the work being done upon the premises is materially different from
that called for in the application previously filed with him or may be in
violation of any provision of this chapter or that the conditions imposed
by either the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment are not being met
within the time or in the manner required by the approving authority,
he may forthwith revoke the zoning permit.
A. Any person violating this chapter and any zoning, site plan, subdivision
or land use ordinances and any conditions of approvals of the Planning
§ 190-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-10
175:619
§ 190-11. One principal structure permitted. [Amended 9-25-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-07]
A lot used for a single-family residence purpose shall contain only one
principal structure. Every principal structure shall be built upon a lot with
frontage upon the public street. Only one principal permitted structure is
allowed in any zone district, with the exception of shopping centers (See
§ 190-44.) and flex-space buildings defined at § 190-4).
§ 190-12. Residential off-street parking standards.
When parking areas or driveways in residential zones are graded towards
the road, they shall be paved or covered with shale, stone or like material
to a minimum depth of two inches.
Board or Zoning Board of the Township of Andover may be subject to
a penalty of $2,000 per day for any such violation, and each and every
day such violation continues shall be a separate and distinct violation,
or may be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
[Amended 9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall be entitled to apply to
the Superior Court for an injunction to prohibit the commencement
and/or continuation of such construction, use or activity undertaken in
violation of this chapter.
A. Provision shall be made for off-street parking spaces in accordance with
Article VII, at least one of which may be in an enclosed garage, for each
single-family detached dwelling. Such off-street parking areas and all
driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications in
Subsection B. Nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones shall
provide the number of parking spaces required by the specific use as
prescribed in Article VII.
B. Residential off-street parking spaces and driveways which slope
towards the street at an average grade of more than 3% within 50 feet
of the street shall be constructed in accordance with the following
specifications, except as provided in Subsection E below:
(1) Base material: minimum four inches of soil aggregate, Type 5,
Class A.
(2) Surface material: FABC-1 two inches thick as per the New Jersey
Department of Transportation Specifications.
C. Driveway grades shall not exceed 15% at any point along its entire
length. In addition, the driveway grade shall not exceed 8% for a
distance of eight feet from the curbline and a vertical curve provided
between said eight-percent grade and any increase in grade. Driveways
shall be no more than 8% within 12 feet of the garage.
§ 190-10 ANDOVER CODE § 190-12
175:620
§ 190-13. Accessory buildings. [Amended 9-25-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-10]
Any accessory building attached to the main building shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main
building. An accessory building shall be located at least 10 feet from the
main building. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
schedule applicable to accessory buildings. Height of unattached accessory
buildings shall be 20 feet maximum. No accessory building shall encroach
upon the front yard setback for the principal structure. Flagpoles are
permitted in all residential zones, subject to a height restriction of 25 feet,
and allowed in the front yard setback area. Flagpoles are also permitted in
commercial industrial zones, subject to a height restriction of 35 feet, and
allowed in the front yard setback area.
§ 190-14. Corner lots and through lots.
Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard requirements for the
respective zone for both intersecting streets. Through lots shall provide the
minimum front yard requirements for the respective zone for both streets
on which they front.
§ 190-15. Yards and open space.
No other space provided about any buildings for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard
or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on
another lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a
building on any other lot.
§ 190-16. Clear sight triangle at intersections.
At the intersection or interception of two or more streets, no hedge, fence,
wall or sign higher than 2 1/2 feet above curb level, nor any obstruction
to vision between the height of 2 1/2 feet to seven feet above the curb
level, other than a post or a tree, shall be permitted within the triangular
area formed by the intersecting street lines and straight line joining the
D. The side slopes of driveways shall be topsoiled, seeded, fertilized and
mulched to prevent erosion. If banks reach or exceed a slope of 2:1,
crownvetch or some other stabilizing material shall be planted or
retaining walls constructed based on the recommendations of the
Township Engineer.
E. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, driveways in excess of 100
feet in length with grades not exceeding 4% may be constructed of
shale, stone or other material of two inches in lieu of the requirements
in Subsection B(1) and (2). All other requirements of Subsections C and
D shall apply. Driveways in excess of 100 feet in length exceeding a
grade of 3% shall be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications as recommended by the Township Engineer.
§ 190-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-16
175:621
street lines at points which are 25 feet distant from the point of intersection
measured along said street line.
§ 190-17. Height limitations.
A. The height limitations shall not apply to chimneys, silos, church spires,
gables, cupolas, standpipes, monuments, cables, scenery lofts or water
tanks and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances
for the zone in which the building is located.
B. The height limitations shall not apply to television antennas, radio
antennas, communications antennas utilized for communications with
emergency services (police departments, fire departments and rescue
squads), and communications antennas utilized by private businesses
for communications with vehicles registered to the business. All such
uses are to be conducted under proper and current FCC license.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B above, the
following regulations govern the uses enumerated in Subsection A and
B above as set forth below:
(1) No structure set forth in Subsection A above shall exceed 50 feet in
height except for concrete and asphalt product and production
facilities within the General Industrial Zone district in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 190-55.2 [Amended 4-26-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-05]
(2) No structure set forth in Subsection B above shall exceed 50 feet in
height in the following residential zone districts: R-0.5, R-1.0,
R-1.5, R-2.0, R-2.5, R-3.5 and the Multifamily Residential (MFR)
Zone District. No structure set forth in Subsection B above shall
exceed 75 feet in height in any other zone district. However,
commercial radio antennae licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (the FCC) may be constructed with a
height of up to 200 feet on any site on which an FCC licensed radio
antenna with a height of 200 feet or greater exists on May 1, 1998.
(3) Each building or structure or combination thereof in excess of the
height regulations shall be set back from the property lines, at
minimum, a distance equal to its height.
(4) When connected to and made part of a principal building, the
structure shall not cover, at any level, more than 10% of the area of
the roof on which it is located.
(5) The height limitations contained in N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq.
related to zone districts in proximity to airports shall be complied
with. The applicant shall prove by certification of a professional
engineer and land surveyor, together with maps and other
technical evidence, to the satisfaction of the reviewing municipal
board or official, that this regulation is complied with.
§ 190-16 ANDOVER CODE § 190-17
175:622
§ 190-18. Dangerous conditions.
No permit shall be granted for a structure or use if the design or
construction of the same involves or is likely to involve exceptional risk of
traffic congestion, public safety or hazard. No lighting of any kind shall be
permitted which interferes with or is likely to involve a risk of traffic safety.
§ 190-19. Commercial and oversize vehicles in residential zones.
(6) The height limitation set forth in Subsection C above shall not apply
to radio antennas licensed pursuant to an amateur radio license
issued by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) which
shall be regulated solely by federal law.
A. Not more than one commercial-type vehicle, not to exceed 13,500
pounds, as per the manufacturer's rated capacity, which must be owned
or used by a resident of the premises, shall be permitted to be parked in
a residential zone, provided it is not parked on the street or right-ofway.
No vehicles, whether commercial or not, larger than 21 feet in
length shall be parked or stored in a residential zone.
B. The following types of vehicles shall be prohibited in all residential
zones at all times regardless of size or weight:
(1) Any vehicle containing or carrying hazardous materials, perishable
foods, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or live animals, except trash and
recycling collection vehicles making pickups and residents with
their pets.
(2) Any vehicle using equipment that emits noise, such as generators,
refrigeration equipment or backup alarms.
(3) Any vehicle which emits odors, such as tar kettles or spray
equipment, except lawn care service company vehicles.
C. The provision of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the
following:
(1) One school bus operated by the resident.
(2) Farm vehicles on property used for agricultural use.
(3) Motor homes as per § 190-20.
(4) Vehicles undergoing emergency repairs, not exceeding 24 hours in
duration.
(5) Service vehicles making deliveries and pickups, such as furniture
delivery vehicles, not exceeding 24 hours in duration.
(6) Moving vans and moving trucks and trailers for the residence at
which they are moving the possessions to or from for a period not
exceeding 48 hours in duration.
§ 190-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-19
175:623
§ 190-20. Motorized homes, mobile homes and travel trailers.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the parking of mobile
homes and travel trailers in any zone is prohibited, except that the
prohibition should not extend to one unoccupied travel trailer or motor
home owned or rented by the property owner and one travel trailer or motor
home occupied by nonpaying guests of the property owner for a period not
longer than two weeks in any calendar year, if parked within the side or rear
yard setback requirements of the zone in which it is parked.
§ 190-21. Outdoor storage. [Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
In the business, commercial and industrial zones, except for concrete and
asphalt product and production facilities within the General Industrial Zone
district in accordance with the standards set forth in § 190-55.2, no article
or material shall be kept or stored, except articles for sale, outside the
confines of a building unless it is so screened by special planting or a
fence, as approved by the Land Use Board, so that it is not visible from
any adjacent residential zone or public street, except such storage is as
normal and incidental thereto. This shall not be construed to prohibit the
storage or display of shrubbery grown on the premises. Outdoor storage as
permitted and regulated in this section is only permitted in the side and
rear yards. Seasonal farm produce grown on the premises is a specifically
permitted outdoor use and may be displayed in the front yard of any lot
without being screened. All outdoor storage of materials, equipment, and
vehicles (including tractor trailers, mason dump trucks, roll-off containers,
shipping containers, etc.) is prohibited unless the principal structure or use
is functional and not vacant for more than three consecutive months.
§ 190-22. Prohibited uses. [Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-05; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09; 6-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-07]
Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by this
chapter is specifically prohibited from that district, and the following uses
and activities are specifically prohibited on all and every property in
Andover Township:
(7) One boat and boat trailer provided they are parked on the side or
rear yard.
A. All billboards of any type plus signboards, advertising signs or devices
not expressly related to the business being conducted on the premises
or otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Carousel, roller coaster, Ferris wheel, train rides, midways, sideshows,
boxing or wrestling exhibitions and the like. Scholastic sports shall be
permitted.
C. Trailer coach or mobile home parks.
§ 190-19 ANDOVER CODE § 190-22
175:624
§ 190-23. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the boundaries as shown on the map,
the following rules shall apply:
§ 190-24. Existing platted lots.
Any lot or plot legally established and existing at the time of passage of this
chapter that fails to comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter
may be used for any use not otherwise prohibited in such district in which
it lies, provided that all the following requirements are complied with:
D. Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly yards.
E. Any use which emits excessive or objectionable amounts of dust, fumes,
noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.
F. The use of any building or premises in such a manner that the health,
safety or welfare of the community may be damaged.
G. Outdoor drive-in theaters.
H. The mining, quarrying or other removal of solid rock, stone or ores and
minerals.
I. Crushers, asphalt and concrete plants except as a conditional use in the
General Industrial Zone district in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 190-55.2.
A. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of the
streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
exist on plats of record on the date of passage of this chapter unless the
boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow the lines, and where they do not scale more than
25 feet distant therefrom, the lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of the boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing thereon.
A. Such lot is in single ownership at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
B. Maximum lot coverage shall be no more than 10% of the lot.
C. The yard, floor area and height requirements as set forth in § 190-34
are complied with for the zone in which the lot is located. Lots greater
than 10,000 square feet and less than 20,000 square feet shall be
§ 190-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-24
175:625
§ 190-25. Preexisting lots.
Any lot legally established and existing on February 15, 1989, that fails to
comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter may be used for any
use not otherwise prohibited in the zone district in which it lies, provided
that the following requirements are complied with:
§ 190-26. Conservation of energy.
Within the limits of practicability and feasibility, buildings shall be oriented
on the lots to maximize solar gain. Also within said limits, buildings and
structures shall use renewable energy sources.
§ 190-27. Expansion of existing nonconforming residential
structure.
An existing residential structure permitted in the zone but which violates
existing yard requirements may be expanded without obtaining a variance,
provided that:
required to meet the yard, floor area and height requirements for the
zone in which they are located as set forth in § 190-34.
D. Any lot containing less than 10,000 square feet may be used for singlefamily
residence if served by a central water system, when a variance is
applied for and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
E. Any lot containing less than 10,000 square feet for which a variance is
approved shall have a maximum lot coverage of no more than 10% of
the lot.
A. The lot is an existing platted lot as defined in § 190-24 above; or
B. The lot:
(1) Contains a minimum of one acre; and
(2) Was created by the Andover Township Planning Board as the result
of an approved subdivision.
C. The yard, floor area and height requirements set forth in § 190-34 are
complied with for the zone in which the lot is located, with the
exception of lot area and lot width.
A. The violation of the setback requirements of this chapter by the existing
structure is not further increased and other yard requirements, not
previously violated, are complied with.
B. Both vertical and horizontal expansion of that portion of the structure
violating the existing setback requirement is permitted, provided the
expansion meets 2/3 of the side yard setback requirements of the zone
and 3/4 of the front yard and rear yard setback requirements of the
zone. The Zoning Officer may, at his discretion, require screening.
§ 190-24 ANDOVER CODE § 190-27
175:626
§ 190-28. Peat harvesting operations.
C. The previous encroachment preexisted the present yard requirements
and complied with the former yard requirements or was granted a
variance therefrom.
D. The number of dwelling units does not exceed the number allowed in
the zone.
E. Excepted from the zoning requirements for building setback are eaves,
fireplaces, chimneys, and stairs, provided they do not extend more than
four feet beyond the principal or accessory structure.
A. The applicant for a peat harvesting operation shall file an application
with the Planning Board for classification of the operation as a peat
harvesting operation.
B. Application requirements:
(1) An aerial photo of the entire property plus 200 feet beyond the
property lines. The scale of the photo should be one inch equals 200
feet.
(2) Scaled property lines of the property shown on the map of a scale
one inch equals 200 feet.
(3) The areas proposed to be worked during the coming year and all
areas already worked and presently being worked, if applicable.
(4) Haul roads.
(5) Areas where lakes have been or will be created.
(6) Areas that will be turned back to the growth of sedge and other
natural plants.
(7) Existing and proposed diking on the property, including the method
of the same.
(8) Such other information as reasonably required by the Planning
Board to classify the operation and make a determination on the
application.
C. Soil erosion and sediment control plan required prior to action on the
application by the Planning Board. A soil erosion and sediment control
plan shall be submitted by the applicant prior to action by the Planning
Board.
D. Action by Planning Board on the application. In the event the Planning
Board classifies the proposed operation as a peat harvesting operation,
it shall direct the Township Zoning Officer to issue a zoning permit to
the applicant for the peat harvesting operation, provided the use is
permitted in the zone. The Planning Board shall act upon the
application by resolution, and the resolution may suggest reasonable
§ 190-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-28
175:627
§ 190-29. Right to farm.
conditions of approval which the Zoning Officer may attach to the
zoning permit.
E. Performance guarantees. A bond or letter of credit shall be posted with
the Township of Andover to cover the cost of repairing and maintaining
dikes and seeding the dikes in the amount of $10,000 initially. The
amount of the guarantee shall be reviewed each year by the Township
Committee upon the advice of Township Engineer and Planning Board
Attorney to determine if the amount and form of the guarantee are
sufficient. The required guarantee may be amended by the Township
Committee, if necessary. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
F. Annual reports. The applicant shall file an annual report with the
Zoning Officer, including the following:
(1) An aerial photo showing the entire property, plus 200 feet beyond
the property line. The scale of the photo shall be one inch equals
200 feet.
(2) A map showing the scale property lines, the area presently being
worked and the area proposed to be worked during the coming
year, haul roads, areas to be converted into lakes and areas to be
returned to the growth of sedge and other natural plants, and
proposed diking.
G. Application and inspection fees. Upon application to the Planning Board
for classification of a peat harvesting operation and to the Zoning
Officer for a zoning permit, the applicant shall pay an application fee to
the Township of Andover to cover the cost of initial review of the
proposed operation in the sum of $500. In addition, the applicant shall
deposit the sum of $2,500 with the Township to cover engineering and
extraordinary legal review fees for the initial application. Upon the
issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of $550 to cover the
periodic field checks by the Engineer during the first year of operation.
Annually thereafter a permittee shall pay an annual fee of $100 and
shall reimburse the Township for the cost of all periodic inspection fees
as well as for any extraordinary costs or expenses, including legal fees,
necessitated as a result of unforeseen difficulties or exigencies or
necessitated by or resulting from any violation of any provision of this
chapter. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
H. Revocation of permit. After reasonable notice of an opportunity to be
heard before the Township Committee, the permit of any person or
entity may be revoked or suspended for such period as the Township
Committee may determine for any violation of the terms hereof or any
terms and conditions of any approved plan and permit granted
hereunder.
§ 190-28 ANDOVER CODE § 190-29
175:628
A. The right to farm land within the Township of Andover is hereby
recognized to exist as a natural right and is also hereby recognized to
exist as a permitted use throughout the Township of Andover on all
parcels defined as a farm in this chapter.
B. The right to farm includes:
(1) The ability to market that particular farm's output, including the
construction of buildings and parking areas for on-site farm
markets and pick-your-own sales.
(2) The ability to replenish soil nutrients as recommended by the New
Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station.
(3) The ability to use federal government approved products according
to label instructions as recommended by the New Jersey
Agricultural Experiment Station, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for the control of pests and diseases
affecting plants and livestock and for the control of weed
infestation.
(4) Clearing of woodlands to expand agricultural production,
vegetative and terrain alterations, the installation of physical
facilities for soil and water conservation and the harvesting of
timber.
(5) The erection of farm structures whose designs are in accordance
with the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station. A private
land grant college design will be exempt from the requirement for
an architect's seal of approval.
(6) The use of irrigation pumps and equipment. A priority water use for
agriculture, second only to human consumption and household
needs, is herein recognized.
(7) On-site handling and disposal of organic wastes and materials in
accordance with acceptable management practices.
(8) Aerial and ground seeding and spraying on farms in accordance
with acceptable management practices.
(9) Producing from the land agricultural products such as vegetables,
greens, hay, fruit, fibers, wood, plants, shrubs, flowers and seeds.
C. The right to farm also includes the use of land for the grazing by
animals.
D. Right to farm in Andover Township does not include intensive hog
farming or extensive animal feedlot operations.
E. Farming activities may be conducted on holidays, Sundays and
weekdays, in the evening and during the day, and the normal noise,
§ 190-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-29
175:629
§ 190-30. Merger of undersized lots.
§ 190-30.1. Resubdivision of residential lots. [Added 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-8]
No residential lot created as part of an approved subdivision shall be further
subdivided for the purpose of creating, on said lot or on a portion thereof,
a street designed to provide access to a proposed development on an
odors, dust and fumes that are caused by said activities are also
specifically permitted when reasonable and necessary for that
particular farming, livestock or fowl production and when conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices.
F. The aforementioned rights are subject to the restrictions and
regulations of state and Township health and sanitary codes. All state
and federal laws and regulations shall govern the right to farm. In the
event of a conflict between this section and any state or federal law or
regulation, the state or federal law or regulations shall control. In the
event any part of this section shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid,
that part shall be deemed severable and the remainder of this section
shall remain valid and in full force and effect.
G. It is herein recommended that all farm and agricultural operators
devise and implement a conservation plan in cooperation with the
Sussex County Soil Conservation District.
A. All adjoining lots in single ownership which do not meet the present
requirements of this chapter shall merge to form one lot unless:
(1) Each lot qualifies as an existing platted lot under § 190-24, Existing
platted lots;
(2) The lots are exempted from the effects of zoning ordinance
amendments under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 or
40:55D-52;
(3) The lots together form an L-shaped lot fronting on two different
streets, which streets are constructed and passable; or
(4) The lots are back to back and front on different streets which are
constructed and passable.
B. All lots which have merged to form one lot shall not be conveyed
separately without subdivision approval being obtained from the
appropriate Township board. No improvements shall be constructed on
a lot not meeting the present requirements of this chapter unless:
(1) The right to construct is protected under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 or 40:55D-52; or
(2) A variance has been obtained from the appropriate Township
board.
§ 190-29 ANDOVER CODE § 190-30.1
175:630
adjoining property or access through one or more adjoining properties to a
proposed development on another property.
§ 190-31. Air Safety Zone Districts.
A. Zone districts for the land around the airports in the Township of
Andover, including the Newton Airport and the Aeroflex Airport, are
required by the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act, N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 16:62-1 et seq., as required by said state laws and
regulations. These regulations are enacted governing land use within
the Air Safety Zone Districts contained in this chapter, § 190-34 et seq.
Said Air Safety Zone Districts are designated as follows: R-0.5/A, R-2.0/
A-1, B/A, BPO/A, BPO/R/A, CR/A-2 and I/A-2.
B. Area and yard requirements. The area and yard requirements for the
Air Safety Zone Districts are contained in the table of zoning
regulations located at the end of this chapter.75
C. Vertical development (height) standards in the Air Safety Zone
Districts.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq., the following vertical
(height) limits are established as maximum height limits for any
vertical development, including any structure, road or tree or other
object of natural growth, in the Air Safety Zone District, except
where this chapter shall establish more stringent height
limitations, in which case the more stringent limitations shall apply.
For purposes of this regulation, a public road shall be considered a
fifteen-foot vertical development and a private road a ten-foot
vertical development.
(2) Vertical development standards are vertical standards measured in
respect to elevations whose datum is the horizontal plane
established by runway elevations. For example, if a point in an
airport hazard area permits at a specific point development up to
"X" feet, that means "X" feet above the runway horizontal plane and
not "X" feet above the natural grade of the land at that point in the
airport hazard area. Airport hazard areas are established by
N.J.A.C. 16:62 and are depicted at the end of this subsection
(Figures 1 to 6).
(3) The vertical standards within the runway subzone of an airport
hazard area are determined first by establishing the elevations at
the runway center lines at the ends of the runway subzone of the
airport hazard area. From those elevations at the runway subzone
ends, a line is run 90º outward from each side of the runway center
line for a distance of 125 feet. Within the area defined by those four
points, no development is allowed above the natural grade of the
soil except for runway and flight safety equipment.
75.Editor's Note: See Table 5, Schedule of General Zoning Regulations for Andover Township.
§ 190-30.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-31
175:631
(a) The vertical standards within the remainder of the runway
subzone of an airport hazard area are determined by
establishing places from the edges of the longitudinal zero foot
development restriction line established in Subsection C(2)
above which slope upward at a rate of seven feet horizontally
to one foot vertically. This upward plane ceases when it
reaches the outer longitudinal borders of the runway subzone
of any airport hazard area at the elevation of 150 feet above its
starting point at the longitudinal zero foot development line.
(b) The methodology used to establish the vertical standards
within the runway subzone of an airport hazard area is further
graphically depicted in Figure 5.
(4) The vertical standards within the runway end subzone of an airport
safety area are determined by first establishing a place with a
rising slope of one foot upward to 20 feet outward from the end of
the runway end subzone. This place is bisected by the extended
runway center line and is 250 feet in total width at its innermost
dimension and widens uniformly along its length of 3,000 feet so as
to have total width of 850 feet at its outermost dimension where it
intersects with the outermost portion of the runway end subzone at
the elevation of 150 feet above its starting point at the zero foot
development line.
D. Permitted uses in the Air Safety Zone Districts. The specific uses
permitted in the aforesaid zone districts are listed in the tables located
at the end of this chapter. However, all residential dwellings which were
in existence on March 20, 1985, located within the following zone
districts are permitted uses: R-0.5/A, R-1.5/A-1, R-1.5/A-2, BPO/R/A, CR/
A-1 and CR/A-2, except in the clear zone.
E. Prohibited uses. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq., the following
uses are prohibited in the Air Safety Zone Districts:
(1) Residential dwelling units except:
(a) As specifically permitted in Subsection D above; and
(b) Residential dwellings specifically permitted in R-0.5/A and
R-1.0/A, CR/A and BPO/R/A Zone Districts.
(2) Planned unit developments and multifamily dwellings.
(3) Hospitals.
(4) Schools.
(5) Aboveground bulk tank storage of compressed flammable or
compressed toxic gases and liquids.
(6) Within the runway and subzones only, the aboveground bulk tank
storage of flammable or toxic gases and liquids.
§ 190-31 ANDOVER CODE § 190-31
175:632
(7) Uses that may attract massing birds, including landfills.
(8) Above-grade major utility transmission lines and/or mains.
F. Zoning Map. Pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of
1983, c. 260, N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq., there
are hereby established two Air Safety Zone Districts on the Zoning Map
of the Township of Andover. The Air Safety Zone Districts consist of a
runway subzone and two runway end zones and a clear zone. The shape
of these zone districts and the subzones is shown on the Zoning Map of
the Township of Andover.
G. Expansion of preexisting structures.
(1) Preexisting residential structures located within the following zone
districts may be expanded on the approval of a building permit by
the Township Construction Official. R-0.5/A, R-1.0/A-1, R-1.0/A-2,
BPO/R/A, CR/A-1 and CR/A-2, except those located within the clear
zone.
(2) A preexisting land use, with the exception of those uses set forth in
Subsection G(1) immediately preceding, and not a permitted use
under Subsection D and in existence at the time of the adoption of
this amendment to this chapter, shall constitute a nonconforming
use.
(a) In the event an application is made to expand that use, the
applicant shall obtain approval from the Andover Township
Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance permitting the same.
In the event said proposed expansion of the nonconforming use
is no greater than 10% of the existing structure or use,
approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment only is required.
However, if the expansion exceeds 10% of the existing
nonconforming use, the applicant shall also, in addition to the
approval of the Andover Township Zoning Board of
Adjustment, obtain the approval of the New Jersey
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to N.J.A.C.
16:62-9.1.
(b) Expansion of a vertical development not in accordance with
Subsection C above, or expansion of structure located within
the clear zone, shall be permitted only after the grant of a
permit from the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 16:62-9.1.
H. Conditional use. Any use which will create a concentration of persons
within the Air Safety Zone of over 2,500 persons shall be a conditional
use and shall meet the following condition: no use within the Air Safety
Zone shall create an unwarranted concentration of persons within the
Air Safety Zones to such an extent that the concentration constitutes an
air hazard or constitutes a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the
persons concentrated within the zone.
§ 190-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-31
175:633
§ 190-31 ANDOVER CODE § 190-31
175:634
§ 190-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-31
175:635
§ 190-31 ANDOVER CODE § 190-31
175:636
§ 190-32. Sexually-oriented businesses.
§ 190-32.1. Growth share. [Added 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6]
Growth share shall apply to all zones as the minimum obligation. Additional
obligation may be assigned under certain circumstances to advance the
purposes of zoning and to promote the public good.
A. Purpose. It is recognized and documented by numerous expert studies
and reports throughout the country that sexually-oriented businesses,
because of their very nature, have serious objectionable characteristics
that result in a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special
regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse
effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of
surrounding neighborhoods.
B. No sexually-oriented uses, as defined in Article II, are permitted within
the boundaries of Andover Township.
§ 190-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.1
175:637
A. Residential subdivisions of two lots/units to eight lots/units or
development on an existing vacant lot shall be required to provide a
cash contribution of $4,375 or 1% of the equalized assessed value,
whichever is greater, to the Housing Trust Fund for each new housing
unit.
B. Residential subdivisions of nine lots/units or more shall be required to
construct one affordable unit for every eight market housing lots/units.
C. Residential subdivisions of 10 to 13 market lots/units shall be required
to comply with Subsection B plus a cash contribution of $4,375 or 1% of
the equalized assessed value, whichever is greater, for each housing lot/
unit of 10 and up to 13, or construct one additional affordable housing
unit in lieu of paying any fees for lots 10 through 13.
D. Residential subdivisions of 14 to 18 market lots shall be required to
comply with Subsection B plus construct one additional affordable
housing unit.
E. Residential subdivisions of 19 market lots or more shall follow the
pattern established in Subsections C and D.
F. Nonresidential development shall provide one affordable housing unit
for every 25 jobs projected in accordance with Appendix E of N.J.A.C.
5:94-1, et seq., titled "UCC Use Groups for Projecting and
Implementing Nonresidential Components of Growth Share."
G. Permitted housing types for affordable units. More than one affordable
unit may be on a building lot. A market unit and an affordable unit may
be on the same lot. Single-family homes with a minimum lot size of 1/2
acre, duplex and triplex structures are permitted. Apartments over
retail and offices are permitted in zones where retail and offices are
permitted.
H. Alternative mechanisms permitted under COAH's regulations shall be
permitted in place of on-site construction of affordable units, including
the purchase of an existing market-rate house at another location in
Andover Township and conversion to an affordable deed-restricted
housing unit conforming to COAH rules; funding a Regional
Contribution Agreement (RCA); participation in gut rehabilitation; and
a contribution to the Housing Trust Fund for the municipal housing
rehabilitation obligation. An applicant shall only be entitled to satisfy its
obligation to construct one affordable housing unit on site for every
eight market units or one affordable unit per every 25 jobs via one or
more of the alternative mechanisms stated within this subsection, if the
applicant demonstrates to the Board that the requirement to construct
one affordable unit for every eight market units or one affordable unit
for every 25 jobs created on site would be a taking without just
compensation and that the reasons established would be consistent
with the Master Plan, zoning ordinances, COAH regulations and court
decisions.
§ 190-32.1 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.1
175:638
§ 190-32.2. Development fees. [Added 4-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-7; amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16]
I. Compliance. Full compliance with the affordable housing requirements
of a project shall be automatic, essential and nonremovable conditions
of approval. The applicant must demonstrate to the Board by way of a
developer's agreement that the affordable housing obligation will be
satisfied prior to obtaining the first building permit, with compliance
being a continuing condition during construction.
J. Lot area and bulk requirements as per the residential zone district in
which the subdivision occurs.
K. Thirty-year deed restriction as required by COAH on the affordable
units.
L. Affordable units: 50% of the units shall be low income and 50%
moderate income.
M. Bedroom mix shall be in accordance with current COAH rules.
N. The affordable housing structures shall be consistent in size (except for
single family) and architectural features with the neighborhood or as
approved by the Planning Board.
O. Septic systems for the affordable housing units on the same lot may
only share the leach field, which must be maintained with an annual
maintenance fee from each unit. Each owner shall maintain other septic
system components.
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
(2) Pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
§ 190-32.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.2
175:639
regulations and in accordance with P.L.2008, c.46, Sections 8 and
32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
(2) Andover Township shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional land use consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within the Andover Township district(s), residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the
§ 190-32.2 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.2
175:640
equalized assessed value for residential development, provided
no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may
be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application. Example: If an
approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2 of the equalized
assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(d) Single-family additions less than 1,000 square feet shall be
exempt from paying a development fee.
(e) One- and two-family owner-occupied residential structures
demolished and replaced as a result of a fire, flood or natural
disaster shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
§ 190-32.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.2
175:641
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the development
fee of 2.5%, unless otherwise exempted below.
(b) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption." Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by
that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
§ 190-32.2 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.2
175:642
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by Andover Township as a lien against the
real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should Andover Township fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
§ 190-32.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.2
175:643
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount
due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b. of section 37 of P.L.2008, c.46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Andover Township. Appeals from a determination of
the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by Andover Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose
of depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
§ 190-32.2 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.2
175:644
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with Andover
Township's affordable housing program.
(3) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account,
Andover Township shall provide COAH with written authorization,
in the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank and COAH to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used
on eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund
may be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the
Andover Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are
not limited to, preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose
of maintaining or implementing affordability controls,
rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and
related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance
with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in
the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Andover Township for
past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected or such amount as
approved through the COAH waiver process and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
§ 190-32.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.2
175:645
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down-payment
assistance, security-deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) Andover Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
affordable housing trust fund.
I. Monitoring. Andover Township shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with
Andover Township's housing program, as well as to the expenditure of
§ 190-32.2 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.2
175:646
§ 190-32.3. Regulations for development within steep slope areas.
[Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7; amended 5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-7]
revenues and implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees. The ability for Andover Township to impose,
collect and expend development fees shall expire with its substantive
certification unless Andover Township has filed an adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its Development Fee
Ordinance. If Andover Township fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of substantive
certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds
remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall
be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320). Andover Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance; nor shall Andover Township retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Andover Township
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
A. Purpose and findings of fact. The purpose of this section is to provide
for reasonable control of development within the steep slope areas of
the Township in order to minimize the adverse impact caused by the
development of such areas, including, but not limited to, erosion,
siltation, flooding, surface water runoff, alteration of natural drainage
patterns, pollution of potable water supplies, and destruction of unique
land forms and scenic vistas.
B. Applicability.
(1) Applicants for site plan, major subdivision or minor subdivision
approval involving the disturbance of steep slopes, as defined in
§ 190-32.3D, shall submit a steep slope disturbance application
containing all information required under this section to the
appropriate board. Any application for steep slope disturbance
which requires a variance pursuant to § 190-32.3G shall require the
submission of a site plan application to the Planning Board. The
Board shall not approve an application for steep slope disturbance
unless the approval requirements of this section are met.
(2) Applicants for construction permits involving the disturbance of
steep slopes but not involving a site plan, major subdivision or
minor subdivision, or a variance pursuant to § 190-32.3G, shall
submit a steep slope disturbance application to the Township
Engineer, in order to ensure that the proposed development of the
§ 190-32.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.3
175:647
lot will respect steep slopes and the natural features of the tract
and minimize adverse impacts associated with such clearing and/
or construction. The application shall not be approved unless the
approval requirements of this section are met.
C. Steep slope disturbance application procedures.
(1) Applicants seeking approval for the disturbance of steep slopes
shall submit information regarding steep slope conditions as
required as per § 190-32.3E to the appropriate authority as part of
the required submissions. An application for the disturbance of
steep slopes shall not be approved unless the requirements of
§ 190-32.3F have been met been met.
(2) In connection with the approval of steep slope disturbance
hereunder, the approving authority may require that the applicant
convey to the Township a conservation easement prohibiting
further disturbance of steep slopes of 15% or greater.
D. Steep slope identification.
(1) All applications involving construction, grading or clearing of any
lot shall be evaluated by the applicant to determine the presence of
steep slopes as defined in the following categories:
(a) Fifteen percent to 24.99%.
(b) Twenty-five percent to 34.99%.
(c) Thirty-five percent plus.
(2) Each category shall be separately identified on a plan showing
existing and proposed topographic information.
E. Steep slope disturbance application contents. Where an application
involving the construction, grading or clearing of any lot is being made
in conjunction with this section, the following shall be required:
(1) A legibly drawn plan at a scale as per site plan or subdivision
requirements and in no case smaller than one inch equals 50 feet
and no larger than one inch equals 10 feet shall be submitted by a
New Jersey licensed engineer, land surveyor or architect which
provides sufficient on-site detail to evaluate the proposed
development.
(2) The plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following items:
(a) Existing and proposed topographic information using two-foot
contour intervals for steep slopes less than 25% and ten-foot
contour intervals for steep slopes 25% or greater.
(b) Existing and proposed drainage patterns within 100 feet of the
lot(s) proposed for development.
§ 190-32.3 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.3
175:648
(c) Proposed limit of disturbance line(s).
(d) Location of proposed structures, driveways and other
impervious surfaces.
(e) Details concerning architectural design and how the proposed
construction will relate to, complement and minimize adverse
impacts upon the existing natural features of the lot.
(f) Details concerning proposed permanent soil erosion measures,
including supporting calculations.
(g) Location of existing and/or proposed wells and septic systems.
(h) Soil types contained on the lot, with specific reference to
highly erodible soils as defined by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
(i) Calculations of:
[1] The area of proposed steep slope disturbance for each of
the slope categories specified in § 190-32.3D;
[2] The total area within each of the slope categories; and
[3] The percentage of the total area constituted by the
proposed disturbed area for each of the slope categories.
(j) Identification of the limits of proposed areas of conservation
easements required pursuant to § 190-32.3C(2) and/or
§ 190-32.3G.
F. Permitted limit of disturbance.
(1) To the greatest extent possible, grading, the siting of any structure
or the platting of any parcel for subdivision shall avoid disturbance
of slopes 15% or greater, Where it is not feasible or practical to
avoid disturbance of slopes 15% or greater, the applicant shall
propose and implement measures to minimize the adverse impact
caused by the development of such areas, as identified in
§ 190-32.3A.
(2) Limited disturbance of steep slope areas within a subject property
is permitted only under the following conditions:
Steep Slope Category Maximum Disturbance
20% to 24.99% 15%
25% to 34.99% 3%
35%+ 0%
G. Variance required. Disturbance of steep slope areas in amounts greater
than indicated in § 190-32.3F, Permitted limit of disturbance, shall
require a variance from the approving board. As a condition for the
§ 190-32.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-32.3
175:649
granting of any such variance, the board may require the dedication
to the Township of conservation easements covering some or all of the
undisturbed areas of the site, regardless of whether such areas contain
steep slopes.
H. Exemptions. A variance pursuant to § 190-32.3G shall not be required
for additions to or accessory structures relating to an existing singlefamily
home where the proposed construction involves less than 1,500
square feet of total site disturbance and does not otherwise require
variance relief.
I. Minor steep slope areas. The applicable board or the Township
Engineer may choose to exempt small isolated pockets of steep slope
areas that are man-made and/or do not represent the character of the
area and are under 2,000 square feet in size, where such action would
be in the interest of good planning and would not seriously impair the
purposes of this section, and where strict compliance would result in
unreasonable practical difficulties to the applicant. Where, however,
the applicable board or the Township Engineer finds such pockets to
represent the character of the area and to be of such size, configuration
and location so as to constitute a substantial contiguous area, the
reviewing authority may consider them significant and subject to
regulation under this section. In such a case, they would be included in
the calculation of steep slope area.
J. Time for approval.
(1) Where an application for steep slope disturbance is submitted as
part of an application for major subdivision, minor subdivision or
site plan approval, the time of approval shall be governed by the
timing requirements applicable to major subdivisions, minor
subdivisions or site plans; provided, however, that the time of
approval for an application involving variance relief pursuant to
§ 190-32.3G shall be 120 days.
(2) Where an application for a steep slope disturbance is not submitted
in connection with a major subdivision, minor subdivision or site
plan application, the applicable board or the Township Engineer
shall act on the application within 45 days from the date of
submission of a completed application or within such additional
time as consented to by the applicant.
(3) Failure of the applicable board or the Township Engineer to act
within the prescribed time, or any extension thereof, shall be
deemed to be an approval of the application.
§ 190-32.3 ANDOVER CODE § 190-32.3
175:650
ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Zones
§ 190-33. Zoning districts. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05; 11-29-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-10; 4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Andover is hereby divided
into the following zones, differentiated according to use, area and bulk
requirements, to be designated as follows:
R-0.5 Single-Family Residential
R-1.0 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-2.5 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
SR Special Residential
MFR Multifamily Residential
ML Mount Laurel
CB Community Business
HC Highway Commercial
I Industrial
PCD Planned Commercial Development
R-0.5/A Single-Family Residential 0.5/Airport
R-2.0/A-1 Single-Family Residential 2.0/Airport-1
B/A Business/Airport
BPO/A Business Professional Office/Airport
BPO/R/A Business Professional Office/Residential/Airport
CR/A-2 Community Recreation/Airport-2
I/A-2 lndustrial/Airport-2
PO/R Professional Office/Residential
GI General Industrial
C/I Commercial/Industrial
§ 190-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-33
175:651

ARTICLE V
Use and Bulk Regulations
§ 190-34. Tables.
The use and bulk requirements for each zone are as set forth in Tables 1
through 5, located at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-35. Lot averaging development. [Amended 9-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-19]
§ 190-36. Private housing of equine animals.
A. A. On any tract of 25 acres or more in size in the R-3, R-2.5, and R-2
Zones, lot averaging development as defined in Article II is permitted.
The minimum lot size may be reduced as indicated in Table 5 (located at
the end of this chapter). The number of lot-averaged lots shall not
exceed the number of lots obtainable using conventional zoning in
conformance with subdivision requirements, land use ordinances, and
NJDEP restrictions.
B. Preservation areas. Any development using the lot averaging option
shall permanently deed restrict environmentally sensitive areas,
including wetlands, floodplains and steep slopes. Building envelopes
shall be located so as to protect environmentally sensitive areas.
C. All lots created using the lot averaging development option shall be
deed restricted to preclude future subdivision of the lot.
D. All developments using the lot averaging development provision shall
be required to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the reviewing board
that the total number of lots and residential units proposed could be
approved in a conventional subdivision of the property without utilizing
the lot averaging development provisions. A qualifying map shall be
presented to the reviewing board for review and approval prior to any
approval of a lot size averaging subdivision plan.
E. The conserved land or any portion of thereof may be dedicated to the
Township if the Township of Andover accepts the dedication.
A. The private housing of equine animals is a permitted accessory use in
the R-1, R-2, R-2.5 and R-3 Zones as indicated in Table 1 at the end of
this chapter, provided the lot is large enough to provide one acre for the
house and two acres for the first horse, with one additional acre for
each additional horse. Private housing of equine animals is prohibited
in all R-0.5 Zones. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-15]
B. Structures. Housing of equine animals must be provided in permanent,
anchored barns for all horses on the property at which the horses are
kept beyond two days and two nights. Each horse must be provided
with a box stall or straight stall. Horses shall not be housed in horse
§ 190-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-36
175:653
§ 190-37. Nursing homes.
travel trailers. Barns shall be further regulated according to the
following:
(1) Each box stall should be at least 100 square feet.
(2) Each straight stall should be at least five feet by eight feet.
(3) The minimum floor area of a barn should be 125 square feet.
(4) Enclosed roofed storage must be provided for hay, straw, feed and
tack.
(5) Rodent-proof feed containers must be provided and used.
(6) Barns must be located in the rear yard.
(7) Barns must be located no closer than 75 feet to the sides or back
property line boundaries.
C. Disposition of manure.
(1) Manure may not be kept in any area of the fifty-year floodplain or
within 50 feet of any brooks or watercourses.
(2) The manure disposal area must be in a low-profile position, cause
no nuisance, and be at least 50 feet from a property line and no
closer than 200 feet to any other existing residential purpose
permanent building or structure, attached garage, swimming pool,
tennis court or patio located on adjoining premises.
(3) The manure must be collected from the barn area and maintained
or disposed of in a sanitary manner. If stored, a covered enclosure
or covered pit should be provided to prevent offensive odors, fly
breeding and other nuisances.
D. Horse vans and trailers. Vehicles intended for the transportation of
recreational horses, such as vans and trailers, may be stored on the
premises provided they do not violate the provisions of any other
ordinance of Andover Township.
E. Lessons and boarding. Giving riding lessons or instructions, leasing of
horses or other similar activities or boarding or housing other people's
horse or horses is not allowed under private housing of equine animals.
This is not to preclude having a riding instructor come to the private
residence to give lessons to the members of that household.
F. Site plan. No site plan shall be required for the private housing of the
land occupant's own horses, but a sketch plat shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector showing the location of brooks and other
watercourses, barn, fenced-in area, manure storage area and distances
from the same to the adjacent property lines.
§ 190-36 ANDOVER CODE § 190-37
175:654
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Maximum density: a minimum of 3,630 square feet of land for each bed.
C. Spacing between buildings. The term “parallel” as used in this
subsection shall include the meaning "approximately or approaching
parallel position." The following minimum distances shall be
maintained:
(1) Between all main buildings and detached accessory buildings: 50
feet.
(2) Between end of buildings where walls are parallel to each other
with driveways between the buildings: 60 feet.
(3) Between end of buildings where walls are parallel to each other: 30
feet.
(4) From the front facade of a structure to the facing front facade of an
opposite structure where walls are parallel: 100 feet.
(5) When a structure fronts on an interior roadway, the structure shall
be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the right-of-way line.
(6) From the rear facade of a structure to the rear facade of an
opposite structure, where walls are parallel: 70 feet.
(7) From the front facade of a building to the side wall of an adjoining
building where walls are parallel but do not overlap: 20 feet with no
intervening driveway.
(8) The front facade of a building shall not overlap the side wall of an
opposite building by more than eight feet, unless such buildings are
joined together. In no case shall windows in any wall be obstructed
by any abutting walls.
(9) No building shall be erected closer than 75 feet to a public street or
right-of-way.
(10) No structure shall be closer to a property line than 50 feet.
D. Buffers. Where adjoining one-family residential lots exist, or where the
adjoining property is zoned for residential use, a buffer strip shall be
maintained at the property line within the required setback area. This
buffer strip shall be left in its natural state or planted to establish a
visual screen, in accordance with the recommendations from the Board.
E. Driveways and parking.
(1) Internal access roads, or driveways, shall be paved 14 feet wide for
a one-way roadway and 26 feet wide for a two-way roadway.
Parking is prohibited in all access roads and driveways.
§ 190-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-37
175:655
§ 190-38. Mount Laurel Zone. [Amended 6-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-06]
(2) There shall be a minimum of two means of access to the site from a
public street or streets, one of which shall be in the Township, or, in
the alternative, the interior roadway shall form a loop connecting to
a single access to a public street in the Township. This access road
shall be paved to a width of 26 feet at the entrance, with a
reservation of a right-of-way 40 feet in width.
(3) Concrete sidewalks five feet wide shall be required from each
building entrance to the parking areas and shall connect with such
sidewalks from other buildings as required by the Board. Concrete
or Belgium block curbs shall separate all grass and paved areas,
and concrete or asphalt sidewalks and curbing shall be erected
along all public street frontages, where required by the Board.
(4) All parking areas shall be paved in accordance with the standards
contained in Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, § 131-37I.
(5) All street and driveway construction shall comply with the
standards contained in Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, § 131-40.
F. No laundries are permitted on site. [Note: The reason is that the area
depends on the groundwater for its potable water supply. Laundries can
result in diminution in the quality and quantity of this groundwater.]
A. Purpose. It is the intent of the ML Zone regulations to provide a
realistic opportunity for the construction of a variety of housing types
and income levels in the Township, particularly low- and moderateincome
housing by providing specific land use regulations addressing
those needs. These regulations are designed to implement the
affordable housing strategies set forth in the Andover Township
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, dated December 16, 2008, which
is a component of the Township's Master Plan and which has received
substantive certification from the Council On Affordable Housing
(COAH) on October 26, 2009. Any provisions of this chapter or any
other ordinance in conflict with the ML zoning regulations and which
impose higher standards not related to health and safety shall be
inapplicable.
B. Commercial uses. [Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
(1) Any commercial use permitted in the HC Zone shall be permitted in
the ML Zone under the same bulk requirements as permitted in the
HC Zone.
(2) Nothing in this section shall preclude a standalone commercial use
within the ML Zone as long as such use complies with the bulk
requirements of the HC Zone and does not occupy more than the
minimum tract size noted below in Subsection C(1).
§ 190-37 ANDOVER CODE § 190-38
175:656
(3) An applicant may construct a mixed-use development consisting of
commercial uses and low- and moderate-income housing provided
that a limit of 6,600 square feet of commercial space per acre for
the part of the site used for commercial purposes shall apply.
(4) Commercial uses in the ML Zone shall be located within 500 feet of
Route 206.
(5) Any mixed-use development in the ML Zone pursuant to Subsection
B(3) above shall conform to the requirements set forth in Article
XIII, Affordable Housing.
C. Bulk regulations.
(1) Minimum tract size: 20 acres.
(2) Maximum density: six units per gross acre.
(3) The following regulations with respect to the location of the
improvements shall apply:
(a) No improvements shall be constructed in wetlands,
floodplains, or in areas where the slope exceeds 25%.
(b) The construction of improvements in areas having slopes
between 15% and 24% is discouraged and shall be avoided to
the greatest extent possible.
(4) Minimum tract setback.
(a) All development shall maintain a twenty-five-foot minimum
buffer to all exterior property lines.
(b) A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be maintained from arterial
roads for all new residential buildings.
(c) Said buffer shall be bermed or landscaped and remain
unoccupied except for entrance roads or utilities.
(5) Area, bulk and yard requirements.
Requirement Single-Family Multifamily
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
15,000 NA
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 NA
Minimum front yard (feet) 30 NA
Minimum side yard (feet) 20 NA
Minimum rear yard (feet) 35 NA
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
25 NA
Maximum height (feet) 35 35
§ 190-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-38
175:657
Requirement Single-Family Multifamily
Maximum number of units
per new residential
building(s)
NA 12
Maximum number of units
per existing residential
building(s)
NA 24
(6) Distance between buildings. The Board may reduce the following
distances by not more than 1/3 if there is an angle of 20º or more
between buildings and if extensive landscaping or buffers are
placed between buildings. The minimum distance between
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Windowless wall to windowless wall: 30 feet.
(b) Window wall to windowless wall: 40 feet.
(c) Window wall to window wall:
[1] Front to front: 85 feet.
[2] Rear to rear: 60 feet.
[3] End to end: 40 feet.
(d) Any building face to local street curb: 25 feet.
(e) Any building face to collector street curb: 40 feet.
(f) Any building face to arterial street curb: 50 feet.
(g) Any building face to common parking area: 12 feet.
D. Other regulations.
(1) Location of units. Low- and moderate-income housing units shall be
integrated throughout the development. The units shall be at least
equally accessible to common open space and community facilities.
(2) Minimum off-street parking requirements. Each dwelling unit shall
provide off-street parking in the following manner:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) All common off-street parking shall be located within 300 feet
of the dwelling unit served.
(c) Parking shall not be permitted within the required buffer
areas.
(3) Minimum floor area for dwelling units. Minimum floor area for
dwelling units is as follows:
§ 190-38 ANDOVER CODE § 190-38
175:658
(a) One bedroom: 550 square feet.
(b) Two bedrooms: 660 square feet.
(c) Three bedrooms: 850 square feet.
(4) Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
(a) All development in the ML Zone shall be required to provide
dwelling units to be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:97 as may be amended and
supplemented.
(5) Waiver of fees.
(a) Notwithstanding any ordinance requirement of the Township
of Andover, the applicable approving agency may waive the
following fees for every unit designated as lower-income
housing:
[1] Subdivision and site plan application fees.
[2] Building permit fees, except state and third party fees.
[3] Certificate of occupancy fees.
[4] Sewer connection and application fees.
[5] Engineering fees applicable to lower-income housing.
(b) The Township may endorse and support any application for
waiver of water connection and application fees.
(6) Common open space requirements.
(a) A minimum of 40% of the land area of any development, other
than single- or two-family housing, and which may include
environmentally restricted land, shall be designated for
conservation, open space, recreation and/or other common
open space.
(b) All property owners and tenants shall have the right to use the
common open space.
(c) Common open space may be deeded to the Township, if
accepted by the governing body, or to an open space
organization or trust, or to a private nonprofit organization
charged with the provision of recreation activities for the
residents of the development.
(d) All common open space deeded to an open space organization,
trust or private organization shall be owned and maintained as
provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
§ 190-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-38
175:659
§ 190-39. Planned commercial development.
(e) Utilities. All projects within the ML Zone shall be served by a
central sewer system and a central water system.
A. Definition. For purposes of this chapter, "planned commercial
development" shall mean a tract of land at least 25 acres in area within
the Planned Commercial Development District, developed according to
a plan as a single entity, whether owned by one or more parties, and
containing one or more buildings with appurtenant common areas.
B. Hotels and motels are permitted as part of a planned commercial
development, as follows:
(1) Such facility must have a minimum of 50 units.
(2) The following accessory uses are permitted in conjunction with a
hotel or motel:
(a) Convention and conference facilities;
(b) Restaurants, kitchens, and cafeterias;
(c) Bars and nightclubs;
(d) Gift shops, newspaper stands and cigar stores;
(e) Barbershops and beauty parlors; and
(f) Swimming pools, saunas, gymnasiums and health clubs.
C. The property may be developed for business purposes in accordance
with the requirements of the HC Zone.
D. Retail and service activities, banks and financial institutions and/or
restaurants shall comprise not less than 10% of the total gross floor
area within any planned commercial development, excluding hotel and/
or motel floor areas.
E. Any use that remains open in a building after normal shopping hours,
such as restaurants, theaters and the like, shall be so located that direct
access to the parking area is available from said uses and the balance of
the building can be secured.
F. The following uses are specifically prohibited within the zone district:
(1) Any type of industrial operation or use, such as manufacturing,
fabrication, assembly, disassembly, extraction or alterations of
materials.
(2) Any amusement park or amusement center, such as penny arcades
or rides or games conducted outdoors or elector, mechanical or
video game centers.
§ 190-38 ANDOVER CODE § 190-39
175:660
(3) Establishments commonly called and known as snack bars, dairy
bars or fast service food establishments and similar businesses
engaged in the sale of food, soft drinks, ice cream, and other
similar goods or confections which are so prepared and served as
to be intended for immediate consumption from which customers
are served while seated or standing outside the confines of the
building in which the business is conducted. This shall not be
construed to prohibit the fast service food establishments where
food is served within the confines of the building for takeout and
consumption off the subject site. This also shall not be construed to
prohibit fast-food establishments where food is served through a
takeout window in the exterior wall of the building which is
accessed by a drive-through aisle where the takeout food is
intended for consumption off of the subject site.
(4) Self-service or commercial laundries which conduct cleaning or
laundering on the premises.
(5) Massage parlors or stores with individual movie-viewing facilities.
(6) Automobile sales or rentals.
(7) Flea markets.
(8) Kiosk businesses.
(9) Sidewalks sales.
(10) Freestanding nightclubs.
(11) Freestanding bars and taverns.
G. Findings for planned commercial development. Prior to approval of the
planned commercial development, the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to Subsection 52c of the
Municipal Land Use Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c).
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
landscaped areas and open space are reasonable and the amount,
location and purpose of the landscaped areas and open space are
adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
§ 190-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-39
175:661
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
(6) That the water supply for the proposed development is adequate.
Adequate fire flows are required according to ISO standards. A
central water system is required.
(7) That provision for sewage treatment is adequate to serve the
proposed development and to protect the environment. A central
sewage treatment plant serving the development is required.
H. Development standards. The planned commercial development shall
comply with the following standards:
(1) A planned commercial development may contain more than one
principal building which has architecturally unified establishments.
Moreover, any principal building may contain more than one
permitted use, provided that the total floor area ratio and lot
coverage of the combined uses do not exceed the maximum
specified herein.
(2) Maximum floor area ratio: .30.
(3) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%, plus an additional 5% for
amenity areas, plazas, and similar design features approved by the
Board.
(4) Minimum floor area: the gross floor area of at least one building
within the development shall be at least 100,000 square feet.
(5) Maximum building height: two stories and 40 feet.
(6) Building setbacks. No part of any building or structure shall be
closer than the following:
(a) From any zone boundary line: 75 feet.
(b) From any public thoroughfare: 75 feet.
(c) From any other internal road: 10 feet.
(d) From any other building: 30 feet.
(e) From any property line: 30 feet.
§ 190-39 ANDOVER CODE § 190-39
175:662
(7) A planned commercial development shall have a minimum of 500
feet of road frontage on a state highway in Andover Township or an
adjacent municipality.
I. Street improvements and traffic circulation.
(1) It shall be the developer's responsibility to improve along the entire
frontage of any state highway on which the subject property has
frontage.
(2) All entrances and exits to the site shall be at locations approved by
the Board to ensure maximum traffic and pedestrian safety.
(3) Direct ingress to or egress from the site shall be from a state
highway. Direct access shall be prohibited within 200 feet of any
existing street intersection.
(4) Marginal roads or access lanes shall be provided to serve the
required parking areas approved by the Board. Such roads or lanes
shall be curbed and shall have a width between curbs of not less
than 30 feet.
(5) One-way roads or lanes properly designated as such may have a
width of not less than 20 feet.
(6) No direct access to any off-street parking space or stall shall be
permitted from roads or lanes.
(7) Parking shall only be permitted in designated parking spaces.
There shall be no vehicle parking on the sides or shoulders of the
roads or access lanes.
(8) An adequate pedestrian circulation system (walkways) will be
established separate from roads and parking lots. Ample signs and
painted lines on pavement will be used as needed to ensure safe
crossing of roadways and aisles.
(9) Any new street as may be proposed by the applicant and/or
required by the Board shall be designed to provide access to
properties in addition to the planned commercial development
where possible and appropriate, as determined by the Board. Any
land area within the tract containing a new street dedicated to
Andover Township shall nevertheless be considered part of the
tract's acreage for floor area calculation purposes.
(10) The road design shall comply with the road design for site plans
under Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, and Chapter 155, Streets and
Sidewalks, unless otherwise specified herein.
J. Landscaping and design.
(1) Those portions of the entire site that are not used for roads or
lanes, off-street parking and buildings, or pedestrian walkways
§ 190-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-39
175:663
shall be attractively planted and maintained with trees, shrubs,
plants and grass lawns as approved by the Board, provided that,
to the extent possible, existing topography and natural features
such as wooded areas, ponds and lakes shall be preserved in their
natural state.
(2) Every parking lot shall provide, within the lot, landscaped areas at
a ratio of one square foot of landscaped area for every 14 square
feet of blacktop parking lot area. For the purposes of administering
this provision, marginal and service roads and fire lanes shall not
be counted as parking area. Good transitions and any other
unpaved areas inside the area bounded by the marginal road that
are landscaped and not paved may be counted as landscaped areas.
(3) A planting plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect
upon which will be shown the following data:
(a) The number of plants, botanic names, common name, size of
plant (inches), root condition, spacing and mulch material.
(b) Installation details for trees, shrubs, shrub beds and other
unique equipment or materials (i.e., fountains or pools).
(c) Installation notes as needed to adequately clarify the design
and construction methods.
(4) The soil and erosion control plan, as required by Township, state
and county agencies, shall be in agreement with the landscape
plan.
K. Buffers.
(1) No part of any on-site parking areas, access aisle or other structure
shall be closer than the following dimensional requirements:
(a) From any residential zone boundary line: 50 feet.
(b) From any other zone boundary line: 30 feet.
(c) From any public state highway: 50 feet.
(d) From any side property line: 30 feet.
(2) At least the first 50 feet adjacent to a state highway and at least the
first 30 feet adjacent to any existing street or property line and at
least the first eight feet adjacent to any proposed street shall not be
used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in lawn area
or ground cover or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery.
(3) All areas not used for buildings, parking, loading, streets, access
aisles, driveways, pedestrian walkways or detention basins shall be
suitably landscaped with grass, shrubs, ground cover and/or
additional plantings as approved by the Board. Such landscaped
areas shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition.
§ 190-39 ANDOVER CODE § 190-39
175:664
(4) No less than 30% of the total tract area shall be landscaped. A
detention basin may be considered a landscaped area if its
embankment does not exceed a slope of 3:1 and if it is designed and
improved as a visual amenity of the development.
(5) Wetlands and transition areas may be included in the landscaped
area.
(6) The Board may require such visual buffers and barriers as it may
deem appropriate.
L. Off-street parking.
(1) There is required one off-street parking space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area of each building greater than 100,000
square feet.
(2) Every building less than 100,000 square feet of floor area shall be
provided with one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet
of gross floor area.
(3) Parking spaces shall be located within 300 feet of the building
which they are intended to serve.
M. Off-street loading.
(1) Loading and unloading spaces with adequate ingress and egress
from streets and with adequate space for maneuvering shall be
provided at the side or rear of the building.
(2) Each space shall be at least 15 feet by 40 feet.
(3) The number of spaces shall be as set forth in Article VII of this
chapter.
(4) Additional spaces may be necessary and required by the Board,
depending upon the specific activity.
(5) There shall be no loading or unloading from a street.
N. Signs.
(1) Each planned commercial development may have one freestanding
sign at each entrance to the development, provided that each such
sign does not exceed 50 square feet in area, does not exceed 20
feet in height, and is set back at least 30 feet from all street and
property lines.
(2) Each rental unit within the planned commercial development may
have one major sign attached to the building and not exceeding 5%
of the front facade of the business unit or 75 square feet, whichever
is less.
§ 190-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-39
175:665
(3) Where an individual activity occupies at least 750 square feet of
segregated area and has direct access from the outside, a sign not
exceeding four square feet in area identifying the name of the
activity shall also be permitted. Such identifying sign(s) shall be at
the entrance to the activity suspended in perpendicular fashion
from a roof over a common walkway, where and when such
common walkway exists. Suspended signs shall be no closer than
eight feet at their lowest point to the finished grade below.
(4) All signs in the planned commercial development shall conform in
character to all other signs in the development and shall blend with
the overall architectural scheme of the development.
(5) No signs shall be neon, iridescent, or internally lit.
(6) Signs shall conform to the standards contained in Article XI.
(7) Temporary or advertising signs shall not cover more than 10% of
the window area of any rental unit.
(8) All applicants shall submit a sign plan as part of the application.
O. Outdoor storage.
(1) No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed or stored outside.
(2) All solid waste not stored within a building shall be stored within an
enclosed structure situated on an adequate concrete foundation
and screened with a fence and plantings.
P. Lighting.
(1) Lighting shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 131, Site Plan
Review.
(2) There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 0.2
footcandle measured at the property line of the lot occupied by
such use.
(3) This regulation shall not apply to lights used at the entrances or
exits of service drives.
Q. Trash and recyclable materials.
(1) Every building shall be serviced with an area for recyclable
materials as set forth in Chapter 144, Article I, Recycling, and
Chapter 131, Site Plan Review.
(2) All recycling areas shall be in a location on site as approved by the
Board and shall be adequately screened so that no recyclable
material is visible.
R. Special events.
§ 190-39 ANDOVER CODE § 190-39
175:666
§ 190-40. (Reserved)76
§ 190-41. Garden apartments.
(1) Certain special events, such as antique car shows, jewelry shows,
craft shows and the like, shall be permitted within the confines of
the mall buildings.
(2) Hours of the events shall be limited to the normal business hours
that the mall is open but in no event shall extend beyond 10:00 a.m.
to 9:30 p.m.
(3) No noise shall be emitted which extends beyond the property lines.
(4) Prior to holding a special event, a permit shall be applied for and
issued by the Zoning Officer at least 10 days prior to the holding of
the event. A fee for the special event permit shall be paid in the
amount of $100.
(5) The Township or the provider shall be reimbursed for any special
expenses incurred for municipal services resulting from the special
event, including police, Fire Department or emergency squad
services. In addition, an escrow deposit in the amount of 100% of
the estimated costs of these services shall be paid to the Township
with the permit application.
S. The applicant shall give to the Andover Township Police Department
permission to enforce traffic regulations, including but not limited to
parking and handicapped spaces on the site.
A. Minimum tract size: five acres.
B. Utilities required. All garden apartments shall be served by common
water and sewer.
C. Maximum density:
(1) Efficiency garden apartments: 5,445 square feet of lot area.
(2) One-bedroom garden apartments: 6,223 square feet of lot area.
(3) Two-bedroom garden apartments: 7,260 square feet of lot area.
(4) Three-bedroom garden apartments: 10,890 square feet of lot area.
(5) Garden apartments containing more than three bedrooms are
prohibited.
D. Apartment mix. The total distribution of two- and three-bedroom units
shall be limited to a maximum of 35% of the total number of units. No
more than 5% of the total number of units shall contain three bedrooms.
76.Editor's Note: Former § 190-40, PRC Planned Retirement Community Zone, as amended,
was repealed 11-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10.
§ 190-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-41
175:667
E. Minimum spacing between buildings. The term “parallel” as used in
this subsection shall include the meaning "approximately or
approaching parallel positions."
(1) Main building to detached accessory buildings: 50 feet.
(2) Ends of building where walls are parallel to each other with
driveway between buildings: 60 feet.
(3) Ends of buildings where walls are parallel to each other: 30 feet.
(4) Front facade of a building to the facing front facade of an opposite
building where the walls are parallel: 100 feet.
(5) When a building fronts on a new interior roadway, the structure
shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way line.
(6) Rear facade of a building to the rear facade of an opposite building
where walls are parallel: 70 feet.
(7) Front facade of a building to the side wall of an adjacent building
where walls are parallel but do not overlap: 20 feet.
(8) The front facade of a building shall not overlap the side wall of an
opposite building by more than eight feet, unless such buildings are
joined together. In no case shall windows in any wall be obstructed
by any abutting walls.
(9) No building shall be erected closer than 75 feet to a public street or
right-of-way. No structure shall be closer to a property line than 50
feet.
(10) Where adjoining one-family residential lots exist, or where
adjoining property is zoned for residential use, a buffer strip shall
be maintained at the property line, within the required setback
area, of at least 10 feet in width. This buffer strip shall be left in its
natural state or planted to establish a visual screen, in accordance
with the recommendations of the Board.
F. Unit limitation for garden apartments. A garden apartment building
shall contain a maximum of 16 units connected in one attached
grouping.
G. Maximum length of structure. No building shall be more than 160 feet
in length. Within that distance the facade shall contain breaks or other
treatments to subtly and aesthetically interrupt the facade wall.
H. Occupancy restrictions.
(1) There shall be no living quarters in the space above the second
floor.
(2) There shall be no living quarters in the basement or cellar.
§ 190-41 ANDOVER CODE § 190-41
175:668
(3) In every apartment containing one or more bedrooms, access to
every living room and bedroom and to at least one bathroom shall
be provided without passing through any bedroom.
I. Ventilation of garden apartments. Buildings and units shall be so
designed that each apartment shall be provided with no fewer than two
exterior exposures for each dwelling unit, and each exposure shall have
windows to provide light and ventilation.
J. Landscaping and screening.
(1) All apartment developments shall be provided with liberal and
functional professional landscaping schemes.
(2) Interior roads and pedestrian walks shall be provided with shade
trees.
(3) Open space adjacent to buildings, malls between buildings utilized
by residents, and border strips along the sides of pedestrian walks
shall be graded and seeded to provide a thick stand of grass or
other plant material.
(4) Approaches to dwelling structures and entrances to dwelling areas
shall be provided with trees and shrubs.
(5) Areas not used for buildings, terraces, driveways and parking
spaces shall be seeded and landscaped and shall be maintained in a
stable and well-kept condition.
(6) Screening or buffers consisting of planting strips or fences shall be
required around outdoor utility and refuse disposal areas and
around any other similar areas.
(7) A buffer strip at least 10 feet in width shall be planted along
property lines of adjacent single-family homes or districts.
(8) Clothes drying yards shall be fenced and screened.
(9) Usable areas for active recreation, such as tennis courts, ballfields,
playgrounds and picnic grounds, equal to 15% of the tract shall be
provided. Lawns, landscaped areas and areas left in their natural
state shall not be included.
(10) The developer shall furnish, along with the plans and specifications
required under this chapter and Chapter 131, Site Plan Review,
landscaping plans which shall include plans for lighting the
grounds, roads, drives, walks, recreation areas, parking areas and
building entrances of the development, as well as the plantings and
other landscaping intended for the development.
(11) Topsoil can be removed from the site during construction but shall
be stored on the tract and redistributed on the site.
K. Utilities and facilities.
§ 190-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-41
175:669
(1) Compaction of all garbage and refuse shall be undertaken by
management prior to refuse and garbage pickup. In addition,
compacted refuse and garbage will be stored in appropriate
containers provided for each building and shall be adequate to
contain all garbage and refuse produced. Pickup of compacted
refuse and garbage shall be made at least twice per week.
Individual refuse storage cans for use by occupants shall be
prohibited.
(2) Storm drainage plans shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(3) The installation and design of other apartment tract improvements
and utilities shall comply with the improvement and design
standards established in Chapter 159, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 131, Site Plan Review, of the Code of the Township of
Andover.
(4) Common water and sewers, as defined in this chapter, shall be
provided.
(5) All electric, gas, television, cable, oil tank and telephone services
shall be located underground.
L. Other requirements.
(1) One permanent identification sign may be erected at the main
entrance to the garden apartment site. Such sign shall be of size
and design approved by the Board, in accordance with the sign
requirements of this chapter.77
(2) Usable areas for active recreation, such as tennis courts, ballfields,
playgrounds and picnic grounds, equal to 15% of the tract shall be
provided. Lawns, landscaped areas and areas left in their natural
state shall not be included.
(3) Coin-operated laundry washing and drying machines may be
located in the basement or cellar area of the apartment buildings
for the sole use of the occupants.
(4) Each apartment building shall contain a minimum of 300 cubic feet
of storage area for each dwelling unit, located in a convenient place
in the basement or ground floor, where personal belongings and
effects of occupants may be stored without constituting a fire or
health hazard. Each storage area should be adequately lighted and
have locking equipment.
(5) Each apartment building shall contain 50 cubic feet of common
storage area for each dwelling unit for the storage of bicycles,
carriages and similar types of frequently used equipment and
utensils.
77.Editor's Note: See Article XI, Signs.
§ 190-41 ANDOVER CODE § 190-41
175:670
§ 190-42. Agricultural, farm and horticultural uses.
§ 190-43. Golf courses.
(6) In each apartment development, television and cable antenna
equipment shall be built into the building, thereby eliminating the
need for individual antennas being erected on the roof.
(7) Floors and dwellings and partitions between apartment units shall
be constructed so as to produce an airborne sound transmission
loss of at least 50 decibels.
(8) Application for multifamily residential housing as provided for in
this section shall comply with all Township ordinances, including
major subdivision and site plan ordinances.78 Wherever a conflict
exists between ordinances, the stricter interpretation shall apply.
A. Minimum area: not less than six acres.
B. Spacing requirements. The following minimum distances shall be
maintained:
(1) Between residence and barns, outbuildings and accessory
buildings, except residence garage: 75 feet.
(2) Between all barns, outbuildings and accessory buildings, except
residence garage, and property line: 150 feet.
C. Except as noted above, all other bulk requirements in the applicable
zone shall apply.
D. Prohibited activities. The following agriculture, farm and horticulture
activities are prohibited: feed lot operation where animals are confined
to limited areas for fattening prior to slaughtering.
A. Minimum area: 90 contiguous acres for a nine-hole golf course and 180
acres for an eighteen-hole golf course.
B. Spacing requirements. The following minimum distances shall apply:
(1) No tee or fairway shall be located closer than 50 feet to an outside
property line, and no green shall be located closer than 75 feet to
an outside property line.
(2) No clubhouse or other facility where food or beverages are served
shall be located within 100 feet of an outside property line.
C. Parking requirements:
(1) All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any outside
property line.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Subdivision of Land, and Chapter 131, Site Plan Review.
§ 190-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-43
175:671
(2) All parking areas shall be attractively landscaped to provide a
visual buffer to the view of area residents and the public.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided as shown in the following table:
Use Required parking spaces
Golf Course 3.0 parking spaces per hole
Clubhouse/retail sales
area
1 per 200 square feet
Clubhouse/restaurant
area
1 per every 3 seats
Accessory uses As required under this chapter
D. Other requirements.
(1) Maximum building coverage: 2%.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 5%.
(3) There shall be separate points of ingress and egress to the tract.
(4) No public address system or other amplifying system shall be used
in such a manner that sounds may be heard off site.
(5) Lighting shall be constructed so that all light is directed downward
and ambient light shall be contained on the subject tract.
(6) One identification sign not exceeding eight feet by 10 feet in area
may be constructed at the entrance to the facility; otherwise, only
directional signs shall be permitted.
(7) Site plan approval is required.
(8) The applicant shall provide a water resource monitoring program
designed to minimize the use of off-tract surface water and
groundwater resources while maximizing the use of stormwater
retained on the site. This plan shall provide for ground and surface
water quality monitoring for nutrients, pesticides and other
parameters to be determined by the approving authority.
(9) The applicant shall provide a turf management plan which is
consistent with the grading and landscaping plans and shall discuss
and define the use of drought-tolerant turf and landscaping
material, the area to be irrigated, the required capacity of the
irrigation system and the need for any water diversion permits. The
plan shall also provide a proposed integrated pest management and
turf management plan that defines the nature and use of the
pesticides and other chemicals and fertilizers involved.
(10) All plans shall be integrated and coordinated in an effort to absorb
and filter fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other nonpointsource
pollutants to minimize contamination of streams and
§ 190-43 ANDOVER CODE § 190-43
175:672
§ 190-44. Shopping centers.
groundwater supplies. The course shall be required to have a
golf course superintendent, certified by the Golf Course
Superintendents Association of America, on staff and an ongoing
site management program to monitor water use and weather
conditions in conjunction with the application of fertilizer,
pesticides and herbicides in order to adhere to the turf
management plan and the water resources monitoring program.
The monitoring and reporting data shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer on a quarterly basis.
A. Principal uses and structures permitted in a shopping center.
(1) A shopping center, as defined in Article II, may include the
following uses:
(a) Retail sales of goods.
(b) Retail sales of personal services and minor appliance or office
machinery repair.
(c) Business services.
(d) Delicatessens, bakeries, candy stores, food markets and
grocery stores.
(e) Banks, including drive-through facilities.
(f) Offices.
(g) Fitness centers.
(2) Permitted accessory uses and structures: other uses customarily
incidental to the principal permitted use.
B. General requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: six acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 400 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: .25.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 60%, plus an additional 5% for amenity
areas, plazas and similar design features.
C. Principal building(s).
(1) Minimum distance to property line: 50 feet.
§ 190-43 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-44
175:673
(2) Minimum distance to street line: 75 feet.
(3) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(4) Maximum building size: 65,000 square feet.
(5) Minimum store size: 1,000 square feet.
(6) Distance to other buildings: 20 feet if buildings are separated by a
pedestrian walkway; 50 feet if buildings are separated by a
roadway.
D. Accessory buildings
(1) Distance to property line: 50 feet.
(2) Maximum height: 25 feet.
E. Parking and circulation.
(1) The minimum setbacks for parking areas shall be as follows:
(a) Distance to street line: 50 feet.
(b) Distance to property line: 25 feet.
(2) Each individual use shall provide parking spaces according to its
respective minimum provisions. Where a permitted use includes
different specific activities with different parking requirements, the
total number of parking spaces shall be obtained by individually
computing the parking requirements for each use and adding the
numbers together.
(3) A maximum of 40% of the site parking shall be in the front yard.
(4) Vehicular and pedestrian connections to adjacent properties shall
be provided for existing and future use.
(5) Defined pedestrianways shall be designed to connect freestanding
buildings on the site. Amenities shall be provided and may include,
but are not limited to, plazas, benches and landscaping. Pathways
shall be a minimum of eight feet wide.
(6) Curbed pedestrian walks, not less than 10 feet wide, shall be
provided along the entire length of any wall of stores that contains
public entrance or exit ways and/or display windows. Said walks
shall be at least five inches but no more than six inches higher than
the abutting paved parking area.
(7) Each shopping center shall provide roads or access lanes to serve
the required parking area as approved by the Board. Such roads or
lanes shall be curbed with a width between curbs of not less than
30 feet and shall have no direct access to any off-street parking
space stalls. There shall also be a service drive at least 30 feet wide
to service each building on the site.
§ 190-44 ANDOVER CODE § 190-44
175:674
(8) There shall not be more than one driveway for each 200 feet of road
frontage along an arterial roadway. Alternative access and egress
shall be encouraged, provided that a driveway on a corner lot shall
not be closer than 100 feet to the intersection.
(9) Each principal use shall provide for off-street loading and
unloading with adequate ingress and egress from streets and with
adequate space for maneuvering and shall provide such area at the
side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
50 feet, and a minimum of one space shall be provided for each
building.
F. Architectural design.
(1) Buildings shall be located according to topography, with
environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent
possible.
(2) Uniform streetscape, signage, landscaping and architectural style
shall be provided.
(3) All exteriors of perimeter walls of principal structures shall be of
brick or stone facing, solid brick or stone or some other accepted
durable material. Asbestos shingle or cinder block exterior finishes
are prohibited.
(4) Flat roofs are not permitted, unless they are surrounded by
articulated cornices.
G. Other requirements.
(1) One building may contain more than one individual use, provided
that the total floor area ratio and lot coverage of the combined uses
do not exceed the maximums defined above.
(2) More than one principal building is permitted.
(3) All areas not used for buildings, parking, loading, aisles, driveways
and pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with shrubs,
ground cover, seeding or plantings and maintained in good
condition.
H. Outdoor storage.
(1) The outdoor storage and/or display of merchandise, product,
equipment, waste or similar material or objects shall be prohibited,
except as follows:
(a) Shopping carts at supermarkets may be stored within
accessory building setback distances.
(b) Garbage/recycling containers, containers for flowers,
decorative plantings, nursery stock and benches may be
displayed or maintained within accessory building setbacks.
§ 190-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-44
175:675
§ 190-45. Home occupations.
(c) Outside public telephones shall be attached to the principal
building on a property.
(d) Outside delivery service receptacles (other than United States
postal receptacles) shall be maintained within three feet of a
principal building.
(e) Other items may be permitted through site plan approval.
(2) All solid waste not stored within a building shall be stored within an
enclosed structure obscured from view from parking areas, streets
and adjacent residential uses or districts by a fence, wall, planting
or combination of all three. There shall be at least one trash and
garbage pickup location, including provision for recyclable
materials collection, provided by each building which shall be
separated from the parking spaces.
I. Signs.
(1) Each shopping center may have one freestanding sign, not
exceeding 75 square feet in area, provided that no other
freestanding signs are erected on the site. Freestanding signs shall
be set back at least 15 feet from all street rights-of-way and
property lines and shall have a maximum height of 20 feet.
(2) Where a principal use occupying at least 1,000 square feet in a
segregated area in a shopping center has direct access from the
outside, a sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area identifying the
name of the use shall also be permitted. Such additional signs shall
be either flat against the building at the entrance to the use or
suspended in perpendicular fashion from a roof over a common
way. Suspended signs shall be no closer than 10 feet at their lowest
point to the finished grade below.
A. Home occupations are permitted in all residential zones, in accordance
with the following requirements:
(1) Such uses shall be subject to site plan review and approval.
(2) The Board may impose reasonable requirements on the use,
including but not limited to off-street parking, landscaping,
screening and buffering, depending on the nature of the use and
the surrounding uses.
(3) Not more than one person in addition to members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
(4) The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The maximum area
devoted to the home occupation shall be limited to not more than
§ 190-44 ANDOVER CODE § 190-45
175:676
§ 190-45.1. PO/R Professional Office/Residential Zone. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
Permitted uses and standards for the PO/R Professional Office/Residential
Zone are as follows:
25% of the gross floor area of the principal building, not including
the cellar, or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
(5) There shall be no external evidence of the home occupation.
(6) Goods, chattel, materials, supplies or items of any kind delivered
either to or from the premises in connection with the home
occupation shall take place in noncommercial registered vehicles
or typical delivery vans with a maximum length of 20 feet.
(7) Any goods or merchandise for sale must be produced on the
premises.
B. Home occupations that meet the following requirements are exempt
from site plan review and approval:
(1) There is no external evidence of the home occupation.
(2) There are no retail sales conducted on the site and no clients will
visit the site.
A. Principal permitted uses
(1) Office buildings, including business, professional, medical and
administrative.
(2) Home offices.
(3) Child-care centers licensed by the Department of Human Services
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq.
(4) Essential services.
(5) Places of worship and religious institutions.
(6) Financial institutions.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Fences and walls in accordance with Article XII of Chapter 190.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Private garages.
(4) Signs in accordance with Article XI of Chapter 190.
(5) Uses customarily related to and incidental to the principal use.
C. Permitted conditional uses.
§ 190-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-45.1
175:677
(1) Expansion of existing single-family detached residential dwellings,
provided that any such expansion shall maintain the character and
single-family use of the existing dwelling and conform to the
setback requirements of the PO/R Zone district.
(2) Banks with drive-through windows and/or automatic teller
machines (ATMs), provided that a landscaped buffer with a
minimum depth of 50 feet is provided between any drive-through
lane or ATM and the closest residential use or residential zone
district boundary.
D. Lot area and bulk standards. The recommended lot area and bulk
standards shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: One acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(3) Principal building setbacks.
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Side yard: 20 feet (each side).
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(4) Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Side yard: 20 feet.
(b) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Side and rear yard: 20 feet for parking areas, driveways and
traffic aisles.
(5) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories / 35 feet.
(6) Maximum structure lot coverage: 20%.
(7) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60%.
§ 190-45.1 ANDOVER CODE § 190-45.1
175:678
ARTICLE VI
Conditional Uses
§ 190-46. Essential services.
§ 190-47. Public and private schools.
§ 190-48. Places of worship and religious institutions.
A. Essential services are utility installations, electric stations and uses
generally related to the supply of energy to activities and uses in the
Township. Because of the wide range of uses which constitute essential
services, no specific regulations are contained in this chapter. Each use
shall be evaluated by the Board and standards imposed based on the
following:
(1) Degree an intensity of nuisance characteristics.
(2) Probable traffic impact.
(3) Character of surrounding existing and future development.
B. The Board may require alternate site arrangements and provisions for
parking, loading, screening, fencing, buffers and lighting.
A. Public or private institutions of education for primary and secondary
compulsory education shall conform to the following criteria:
(1) Minimum tract size: 10 acres.
(2) There shall be a buffer strip between school playgrounds and
adjoining residences, of evergreen or other appropriate planting,
as approved by the Board.
(3) There shall be no substantial adverse impact upon surrounding
properties due to traffic, noise, light, or other factors.
B. Public or private preschool establishments providing nursery, day-care
or similar education-type activities shall conform to the following
criteria:
(1) There shall be a buffer strip between playgrounds and adjoining
residences, of evergreen or other appropriate planting, as
approved by the Board.
(2) There shall be no substantial adverse impact upon surrounding
properties due to traffic, noise, light, or other factors.
A. General. In reviewing the site plan for houses of worship, the Board
shall make particular note of ancillary uses, such as social events,
recreational activities, convocations and similar activities. Reasonable
requirements shall be established to minimize any adverse impact to
the surrounding area.
§ 190-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-48
175:679
§ 190-49. Animal hospitals and kennels.
§ 190-50. Country clubs, swimming clubs and neighborhood
outdoor recreation facilities.
B. Minimum requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(2) Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 40%.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
A. Minimum lot size: five acres.
B. Structure setback. Structures housing animals and exercise areas for
animals shall be at least 200 feet from any property line.
C. Minimum yards. Minimum front, rear and side yards shall be at least
200 feet each, except if abutting a residence or a residential zone. In
this case the Board may require additional setbacks to provide
adequate buffers and to protect adjacent uses from nuisance
characteristics.
D. Maximum height. The maximum height of such uses shall be two stories
or 25 feet.
A. Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
B. Minimum frontage: 400 feet.
C. Minimum setbacks. All structures, parking areas and recreation
facilities shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines.
D. Swimming pool setback. Swimming pools, other than private residential
swimming pools under 3,499 square feet, shall have a setback from any
property line of 300 feet. A pool of greater than 3,500 square feet shall
have a setback of 400 feet.
E. Nuisance restrictions.
(1) If outdoor lighting is provided, it shall be shielded and arranged in
such a manner that source and object of illumination shall not be
visible from any adjoining property.
(2) Public address systems or any other amplified sounds are
prohibited.
§ 190-48 ANDOVER CODE § 190-50
175:680
§ 190-51. Automobile, truck, farm machinery, construction
equipment and recreation vehicle sales.
§ 190-52. Gasoline service stations.
F. Access. Direct access from a local minor road, as defined in the Master
Plan, is prohibited.
A. Minimum lot size: four acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
C. Accessory uses. Used cars, machinery, equipment or vehicles shall not
be sold, except as an accessory use to a new car, machinery or
equipment dealer or in accordance with Chapter 78, Licensing, and
Chapter 183, Vehicles, Sales of, of the Code of the Township of Andover.
D. Minimum building size: 2,500 square feet of usable floor area.
E. Maximum coverage. The area devoted to outside display of new and
used cars, machinery, equipment or vehicles shall not exceed the area
of the building or 25% of the total lot area, whichever is greater.
F. All outdoor display and service areas, including driveways and parking
facilities, shall be paved.
G. Vehicles, machinery and construction equipment shall be kept at least
50 feet from the right-of-way and property lines and be neatly arranged
on the lot.
H. The front yard shall be attractively landscaped.
I. Lighting. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the traveling
public or to neighbors. In particular, so-called "string lights" shall not
be permitted.
J. Additional restrictions. The Board may impose other reasonable
restrictions on these uses as part of site plan review.
A. Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum frontage: 150 feet.
C. Bulk requirements:
(1) Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
(2) Side yard setback: 20 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
D. Front yard. Pumps shall be located at least 40 feet from the right-of-way
line.
§ 190-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-52
175:681
§ 190-53. Riding academies and stables.
The keeping of horses, ponies or other equine animals where stall space
is rented for more than one horse, horses are available for hire, riding
lessons or instruction is undertaken on the premises or similar activities are
conducted is regulated as follows:
E. The applicant shall meet the requirements contained in § 190-54 with
regard to the storage of oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form,
including but not limited to oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil,
oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils and liquid
propane.
A. Structures. Housing of equine animals must be provided in permanent,
anchored barns for all horses on the property at which the horses are
kept beyond two days and two nights. Each horse must be provided
with a box stall or straight stall. Horses shall not be housed in horse
travel trailers. Barns shall further be regulated according to the
following:
(1) Each box stall should be at least 100 square feet.
(2) Each straight stall should be at least five by eight feet.
(3) Minimum floor area of a barn should be 125 square feet.
(4) Enclosed roof storage must be provided for hay, straw, feed and
tack.
(5) Rodent-proof feed containers must be provided and used.
(6) Barns must be located in the rear of the property.
(7) Barns must be located no closer than 75 feet to the side or back
property line boundaries.
B. Parking.
(1) One-half permanent paved parking space shall be required for each
horse housed or ridden in the arena on the property.
(2) Sufficient temporary field parking should be provided for special
events.
(3) Police ordinance requires special permits for show events to be
acquired through the Township Committee and Police Department.
C. Minimum land area: nine acres.
D. Minimum frontage: 400 feet.
E. Equine density. For nine acres, up to 20 equine animals are permitted
on the lot, five acres of which shall be accessible to the animals. Two
§ 190-52 ANDOVER CODE § 190-53
175:682
§ 190-54. Warehousing, storing and wholesaling of certain
materials.
The warehousing, storage, wholesaling or retailing of materials listed
herein shall not be conducted until a conditional use permit is issued from
the reviewing board. Such permit shall be granted only if the applicant
meets the conditions listed herein.
additional animals may be permitted for each additional acre accessible
to those equine animals.
F. Disposition of manure.
(1) Manure may not be kept in any area of the fifty-year floodplain nor
within 50 feet of any brooks or watercourses.
(2) Manure disposal area must be in a low-profile position, cause no
nuisance, and be at least 50 feet from a property line and no closer
than 200 feet to any other existing residential purpose permanent
building or structure, attached garage, swimming pool, tennis
court or patio located on adjoining premises.
(3) The manure must be collected from the barn area and maintained
or disposed of in a sanitary manner. If stored, a covered enclosure
or covered pit should be provided to prevent offensive odors, fly
breeding and other nuisances.
G. Horse vans and trailers. Vehicles intended for the transportation of
recreational horses, such as vans and trailers, may be stored on the
premises provided they do not violate the provisions of any other
ordinance of Andover Township.
H. Lessons and boarding. Giving riding lessons or instructions, leasing of
horses or other similar activities or boarding or housing other people's
horse or horses is permitted if a conditional use permit is issued for a
stable and riding academy hereunder. The term “horses” herein shall be
determined to include all equine animals as defined in this chapter.
A. Conditions of approval.
(1) The applicant shall include in the publication of application, and in
the notice to surrounding property owners and other notice as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, the specific description of the
material to be warehoused, stored or wholesaled.
(2) The applicant shall prove that the materials can be stored and used
safely on the property and in accordance with all applicable
governmental laws, rules and regulations. Specific details of the
proposed use and storage facilities for the subject materials shall
be submitted to the reviewing municipal board.
§ 190-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-54
175:683
(3) The materials or their by-products shall not be disposed of or
discharged on the premises and shall not be discharged into onpremises
septic or sewage disposal systems.
(4) There shall be no detriment to the public health and safety of
residents in the neighborhood or community.
(5) No materials or wastes shall be deposited on a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces.
(6) All materials shall be stored in a secure manner so that they may
not be removed by unauthorized persons.
(7) No substance or material that has the potential to contaminate a
stream, watercourse, groundwater supply or aquifer or otherwise
render such stream, watercourse, groundwater supply or aquifer
undesirable as a source of potable water or recreation, or which
can destroy aquatic life, shall be permitted to enter any stream,
watercourse, groundwater supply or aquifer. The applicant shall
provide the Board with competent evidence that this condition has
been met.
(8) All materials or wastes that may cause fumes or dust, or which
could constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored indoors and
enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
(9) The applicant shall prove to the Board that the use does not emit
excessive or exceptional amounts of dust, fumes, noise, odor,
smoke, vibration, glare or waste products and does not constitute
an excessive fire or explosive hazard or a hazard beyond the
capabilities of the Township Fire Department.
B. Materials covered:
(1) Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form, including but not
limited to oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil
refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils and liquid propane.
(2) All pesticides designated as "prohibited," "restricted" or
"specifically restricted" pursuant to the New Jersey Pesticide
Control Act of 1971, N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et seq., as amended, and
N.J.A.C. 7:30-1.5 through 7:30-1.7; excepted from this subsection
are pesticides used for agricultural uses as defined in this chapter.
(3) Any use which directly or indirectly utilizes materials listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:26-6.13 and 7:26-6.14.
(4) Substances identified as hazardous by the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency as 40 FR 59961, December 30, 1975, proposed
pursuant to Section 311(b)(2)(a) of the Federal Water Pollution
§ 190-54 ANDOVER CODE § 190-54
175:684
§ 190-55. Automobile repair services.
Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 53 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as
amended.
(5) Explosives.
(6) Gases.
(7) Acids.
(8) Plastics.
(9) Halogenated hydrocarbons and their derivatives.
(10) Fireworks.
(11)Weapons.
(12)Wood distillables.
(13) Any other dangerous, hazardous or toxic materials.
A. Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no repair garage shall
store wrecked, damaged, disassembled (either whole or in part) or
abandoned motor vehicles, boats or used automotive or marine parts or
used supplies or materials thereof.
B. The temporary storage of wrecked, damaged or disassembled and
abandoned motor vehicles is permitted as follows:
(1) Such vehicles may be stored on a temporary basis while insurance
claims are being processed or while junk title is being obtained
from the Division of Motor Vehicles. Temporary storage is also
permitted of abandoned motor vehicles pending disposition of
court complaints or the processing of junk title being obtained from
the Division of Motor Vehicles; provided, however, that such
vehicles have been brought or stored there at the direction or
request of a local, county, state or federal law enforcement agency.
(2) Such vehicles shall be located in a rear yard and screened so that
no stored vehicle or equipment shall be visible off premises.
(3) On corner lots in those cases where no rear yard exists, storage
areas are restricted to the single side yard behind the line
projected by the building face and subject further to all the
regulations set forth in this section.
(4) In no event shall storage be closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(5) In no event shall the temporary storage of more than 10 such
vehicles be permitted simultaneously at any one public garage or
gasoline service station. The area of such storage shall be
§ 190-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-55
175:685
§ 190-55.1. FCC licensed radio stations.
Conditions of approval.
§ 190-55.2. Concrete and asphalt product and production facilities.
[Added 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05]
Concrete and asphalt product and production facilities in the General
Industrial Zone district are subject to the following requirements:
maintained in a clean and safe manner, free from all debris, glass,
loose parts and leaking fuel, lubricants and other fluids.
A. The applicant shall be a radio station licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
B. The FCC licensed radio station shall be existing in Andover Township as
of July 1998.
C. Site plan approval shall be required.
A. Lot area.
(1) Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 500 feet.
B. Coverage standards.
(1) Maximum building and structure (principal and accessory)
coverage: 15%.
(2) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 40%.
C. Principal building.
(1) Front yard setback: 300 feet.
(2) Side and rear yard(s) setback: 200 feet.
(3) Maximum building height: 75 feet.
D. Accessory buildings and structures.
(1) Storage silos, bins and/or hoppers for containment of raw materials
shall not exceed a maximum height of 125 feet and shall be located
to provide a minimum setback ratio of 2.5 times the height of the
building or structure to a side or rear lot line. Storage silos, bins
and/or hoppers for containment of raw materials shall not be
located within the restricted one-hundred-foot buffer area to a
residential zone district or an existing residential use in accordance
with § 131-37M nor shall same be permitted within the required
front yard setback applicable to the principal building.
§ 190-55 ANDOVER CODE § 190-55.2
175:686
(2) Off-street parking may be permitted within 50 feet of a front, side
or rear lot line but shall not be permitted within the restricted onehundred-
foot buffer area to a residential zone district or an existing
residential use in accordance with § 131-37M.
E. Outdoor storage. Notwithstanding the restrictions pertaining to
outdoor storage as set forth in § 190-21 of this chapter, designated
areas for the storage of materials utilized in the production process and
finished products may be located in the front, side or rear yard setback
applicable to the principal building subject to the following conditions:
(1) No storage or placement of materials or products or loading/
unloading operations shall be located within the restricted onehundred-
foot buffer area to a residential zone district or an existing
residential use in accordance with § 131-37M.
(2) Storage or placement of materials or products and loading
operations may be located within 50 feet of a front, side or rear lot
line, except where the one-hundred-foot residential buffer standard
applies. All storage areas must be designed with appropriate
design elements, including landscaping, graded berms, solid walls
or a combination thereof, to provide a visual screen of said
activities from view beyond the boundaries of the site. Said buffer
shall consist of a minimum depth of 40 feet and shall extend along
the entire length of the storage and/or loading area.
(3) All raw materials shall be placed upon an impervious surface and
be designed to have a solid wall on the side(s) and rear for
containment purposes.
(4) The preservation of natural wooded tracts shall be an integral part
of all site plans and may be calculated as part of the required buffer
area, provided that the growth is of a density and the area is of a
width to serve the purpose of a buffer. Where additional plantings
are necessary to establish an appropriate tone for an effective
buffer, said planting may be required.
(5) Trees shall be of a species common to the area, of nursery stock
and free of insects and disease. A minimum of 1/3 of the trees
provided in the buffer plan must have a caliper of three inches at
planting.
(6) The buffer area shall remain in place for the duration of the
approved activity. Any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season.
(7) Screen plantings and landscaping shall be broken at points of
vehicular and pedestrian access to assure a clear sight triangle.
§ 190-55.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-55.2
175:687

ARTICLE VII
Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 190-56. Residential uses.
Each dwelling unit shall be required to supply parking spaces in accordance
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 190-57. Commercial uses.
Commercial, mercantile, retail sale and personal service establishments
shall provide one parking space per each 200 square feet of gross leasable
floor area. The following specific uses have particular parking space
requirements:
§ 190-58. Offices.
Professional and business offices shall provide at least one space per 200
square feet. Doctors and other medical practitioners' offices shall provide at
least one space per 150 square feet of gross leasable floor area.
A. Restaurants or similar places dispensing food, drink or refreshments:
one space for every three seats at a table, plus one space for every seat
or stool at a bar, plus one space for every employee at peak shift.
[Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
B. Barber and beauty salon: at least two spaces per barber or beauty chair.
C. Hotel or motel: at least one space per sleeping room.
D. Wholesale establishments, building materials establishments and
furniture stores: at least one space for each 400 square feet of gross
leasable floor space.
E. Farm stands: at least five spaces minimum.
F. Shopping centers: at least 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable floor area.
G. Laundromats: at least one space per three machines.
H. Nurseries, automobile sales and landscape gardener establishments: at
least one space per 1,000 square feet of area used for such purposes.
I. Service stations: one parking space for every two pumps for a quick
service station and three parking spaces for every bay for a full service
station, plus one space for each employee. Storage of autos for sale is
prohibited, except in accordance with Chapter 78, Licensing, and
Chapter 183, Vehicles, Sales of, of the Code of the Township of Andover.
J. Mortuary/funeral home: at least one parking space per four seats in the
chapel, plus two spaces for the resident family, plus one garage space
for each funeral/mortuary vehicle.
§ 190-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-59
175:689
§ 190-59. Institutional uses.
§ 190-60. Educational uses.
At least one parking space per employee plus a minimum of five visitor
parking spaces for elementary-type schools shall be provided. For high
schools, parking shall be provided as required by the Planning Board.
§ 190-61. Industrial uses.
Warehousing, industrial and manufacturing shall provide at least one space
per employee or one space for every 500 square feet of gross area,
whichever is greater.
§ 190-62. Recreational uses.
§ 190-63. All other uses.
All other uses shall provide parking as required by the Planning Board.
§ 190-64. Loading spaces.
A. Churches, auditoriums and theaters shall provide at least one space for
each four seats.
B. Community buildings shall provide at least one space for each 1,000
square feet of gross leasable floor area.
C. Hospitals, nursing homes and medical institutions, excluding teaching
hospitals, shall provide at least one space for each three beds plus at
least one space for two employees at maximum shift.
A. Bowling shall provide at least three parking spaces for each lane.
B. Equestrian stables, academies or riding establishments shall provide
one permanent paved parking space for each two horses housed or
ridden on the property, whichever is greater. Sufficient temporary field
parking should be provided for special events.
C. Racquet and court establishments shall provide at least six spaces per
court.
D. Swimming pools shall provide at least two spaces per 100 square feet of
water area.
A. Industrial, warehousing and manufacturing uses. Loading spaces shall
be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Square Feet Loading Space
10,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 4
Each 50,000 thereafter 1
§ 190-59 ANDOVER CODE § 190-64
175:690
B. Commercial uses. Commercial uses with gross floor area greater than
15,000 square feet shall have at least one loading space per 15,000
square feet to 30,000 square feet and one loading space per 25,000
square feet thereafter.
§ 190-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-64
175:691

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 190-65. Continuation.
A use, building or structure lawfully in existence at the effective date of this
chapter which shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this chapter
or any applicable amendment thereto may be continued except as otherwise
provided in this section.
§ 190-66. Changes.
No existing building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall
be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered
except when changed to a conforming use, or when required to do so by
law, or as allowed in § 190-72.
§ 190-67. Partial destruction.
Any nonconforming use or structure partially damaged by fire, casualty or
act of God may be repaired, restored, reconstructed or used as before,
provided that the area of such use, building or structure shall not exceed
the area which existed prior to such damage. Cessation of use or failure
to diligently prosecute the rebuilding of a partially destroyed building or
structure for a period of 12 consecutive months shall be interpreted as a
rebuttable presumption of the intention to abandon such nonconforming
use or structure, and it shall be the burden of the applicant or party
supporting the preexisting nonconforming use or structure to demonstrate
to the Board of Adjustment that the use or structure was not abandoned
under both the objective and subjective tests of New Jersey case law. In the
event total destruction occurs, then the provisions of § 190-68 shall apply.
§ 190-68. Damage beyond repair.
When a nonconforming structure or use is destroyed or damaged by fire or
other casualty or an act of God beyond repair, the nonconforming structure
or use shall thereupon be terminated.
§ 190-69. Normal maintenance and repairs.
Normal maintenance or repair of the nonconforming structure or use is
permitted, provided it does not extend or expand the nonconformance.
§ 190-70. Termination.
A nonconforming use which has been terminated or abandoned shall not
thereafter be revived. A change of use to a conforming use shall be
considered a termination of the nonconforming use, and such
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be revived.
§ 190-71. Nonconforming building lawfully under construction.
§ 190-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-71
175:693
§ 190-72. Expansion of nonconforming residential uses.
A nonconforming use or structure may be expanded to provide additional
living space in accordance with § 190-27.
§ 190-73. Registration and certification of nonconforming uses.
A. Any nonconforming structure or use lawfully under construction on the
effective date of this chapter pursuant to plans filed with the
Construction Official and approved by him and all other municipal
boards and agencies as required under law may be completed and may
be used for the nonconforming use for which it was designed to the
same extent as if such building had been completed and was in use on
the effective date of this chapter.
B. The Township Clerk is directed to give notice at least 10 days prior to
the hearing on the adoption of this section to the County Planning
Board and to all others entitled thereto pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15. Upon the adoption of this section after public
hearing thereon, the Township Clerk is further directed to publish
notice of the passage thereof and file a copy of this section as finally
adopted with the Sussex County Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-16.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure
exists may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate stating that
the use or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which
rendered the use or structure nonconforming.
B. Application pursuant hereto may be made to the Zoning Officer within
one year of the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use or
structure nonconforming or at any time to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
C. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant,
the nonconforming use so operated, the date on which the use
commenced, the tax lot and block number of its location, any buildings
or structures in which such use is contained or which are necessary for
the operation of such use, the numbers and types of equipment and/or
vehicles utilized in the operation of said use and the time period during
which the use was conducted.
D. The applicant shall have the burden of proof as to all matters alleged.
Where application is to the Zoning Officer, it shall be in the form of an
affidavit and shall be notarized. Where application is made to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, the application shall be processed as in
the case of all other applications to said Board. Notice of such
application shall be given in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
§ 190-71 ANDOVER CODE § 190-73
175:694
E. If the Zoning Officer fails or refuses to issue a certificate, he shall notify
the applicant in writing as to the reasons therefor within 45 days from
the date of application. Such denial may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72, notice of which shall be given in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
F. An application to the Zoning Officer shall be accompanied by payment
of a fee of $25. Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
accompanied by a payment of the fee specified in Chapter 74, Land Use
Procedures, § 74-57.
§ 190-73 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-73
175:695

ARTICLE IX
Zone Map
§ 190-74. Boundaries. [Amended 11-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10;
4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
The boundaries of the Zone Map are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map – Township of Andover, Sussex County, New
Jersey," prepared by Golden & Moran Engineering, revised as of May 1,
2011, which accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter.79
§ 190-75. Airport Safety Zone Districts.
A. Pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S.A
6:1-80 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 16:62-2.2 et seq., there are established two
Airport Safety Zone Districts on the Zoning Map of the Township of
Andover, one for Aeroflex-Andover Airport and one for Newton Airport.
Said zone districts have subzone districts as well. The Airport Safety
Zone Districts consist of a runway subzone and two runway end zones
and a clear zone. The shape of these zone districts and the subzones are
shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of Andover and are depicted
and defined on Figures 1 to 7 annexed hereto and made a part hereof.80
B. Pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983, N.J.S.A.
6:1-80 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq., there are established two
clear zones within the Air Safety Zone District for the Aeroflex-Andover
Airport and two clear zones within the Air Safety Zone District for the
Newton Airport. The location of these clear zones is shown on the
Zoning Map of the Township of Andover. The Zoning Map is amended in
order to include these clear zones.
79.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: Figures 1 to 7 may be found at the end of § 190-31.
§ 190-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-75
175:697

ARTICLE X
Performance Standards and Guidelines
§ 190-76. Certification of compliance; applicability.
§ 190-77. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
§ 190-78. Regulation of nuisance elements.
A. As a condition of approval of any use, occupancy or other structure, and
operation of any process or equipment, the application shall certify that
the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment, devices,
procedures or methods is in compliance with all governmental laws,
statutes, rules and regulations regarding the same. Permits and
certificates required by other governmental agencies shall be
submitted to the Planning Board as proof of compliance with applicable
codes.
B. For use variances which are required to meet those performance
standards, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not issue a permit for
any use, structure, process or equipment until it receives a report or
recommendation from the Planning Board regarding compliance with
the performance standards established herein.
C. The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to single-family
detached dwellings.
A. In the event a determination cannot be made at the time of application
that a proposed use, process or unit of equipment will meet the
standards established in this article, the Planning Board may
recommend issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. The
temporary certificate of occupancy shall be based on submission of
evidence that the proposed use, process or equipment will meet the
standards established herein after completion or installation and
operation.
B. Within 60 days after a temporary certificate of occupancy is granted, a
final certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and satisfactory
evidence submitted that all standards established by this article have
been met.
A. Definition. A nuisance element is any noise, radioactivity, vibration,
glare, smoke, odor, air pollution or dust which exceeds the performance
standards established under this article.
B. Locations for enforcement of performance standards. The
determination of the existence of nuisance elements shall be made at
the following locations:
§ 190-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-78
175:699
§ 190-79. Air pollution, toxic materials, smoke, open burning, dust
and odors.
Characteristic
All Residential Zones and
Uses, Excluding Agricultural
Uses and Commercial Motor
Vehicle Operations
Smoke Vent or stack
Solid particles and fly ash Vent or stack
Odors Property line
Liquid wastes Building wall
Solid wastes Setback lines
Radiation Vent or stack
Noise Property line
Vibration Property line
Glare Property line
Rust* Vent or stack - property line
*For heat, measurement shall be made at the vent or smokestack for
heated air and at the property line for heated liquid or solid discharge.
C. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with the performance
standards stated herein shall be a requirement for the continued
occupancy of any structure or the operation of any process or
equipment.
A. Air pollution. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, as amended, or the
regulations contained in this article, whichever shall be the more
stringent, shall be complied with.
B. Toxic materials.
(1) Toxic materials are any solid, liquid, mist or gaseous matter
containing properties which by chemical means are harmful and
impair health or are capable of causing injury to the well-being of
persons or damage to property.
(2) The ambient air quality standards for the State of New Jersey Air
Pollution Control Code, as amended, shall be the guide to the
release of airborne toxic materials across lot lines. Where toxic
materials are not listed in the ambient air quality standards of the
State of New Jersey, the release of such materials shall be in
§ 190-78 ANDOVER CODE § 190-79
175:700
§ 190-80. Liquid and solid wastes.
accordance with the fractional quantities permitted of those toxic
materials currently listed in the Threshold Limit Values (TLV)
adopted by the American Conference of Environmental Hygienists.
The industrial performance standard for a toxic substance shall be
determined by applying a multiplier of 2.5 to the industrial TLV.
Unless otherwise stated, the measurement of toxic material shall
be at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average
of any twenty-four-hour sampling period.
C. Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance
of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be
emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning equipment; provided,
however, that smoke emitted during the clearing of a fire box or the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a
period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any 15
consecutive minutes.
D. Solid particles and fly ash.
(1) Solid particles. No discharge of solid particles through a stack,
duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than 50% of the
allowable emission in pounds per hour established by Chapters 7
and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
(2) Open burning. No open burning shall be permitted, except on
qualified farms of no less than five acres in size. Such open burning
shall be limited to herbaceous or infested plant life, the burning of
orchard prunings and the clearing of agricultural land. The owner
of the farm must obtain permits from the State of New Jersey
Forestry Service and the Andover Township Fire Official.
(3) Incinerators. All incinerators shall be approved by the State
Department of Environmental Protection.
E. Dust. Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial movement of
vehicles or equipment shall be paved or otherwise stabilized during
construction sufficient to prevent the generation of dust from
movement of such vehicles or equipment.
F. Odors. No noxious odors may be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities sufficient to be detected without instruments.
A. Liquid wastes. No liquid industrial waste shall be discharged into any
sewage collection and disposal system unless the appropriate Township
or authority officials shall have first investigated the character and
volume of such waste and shall have certified that it will accept the
discharge of such waste material into the system. The applicant shall
comply with any requirements of such officials, including the
§ 190-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-80
175:701
§ 190-81. Radiation.
All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may be sources
of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and requirements
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and any codes, rules or
regulations promulgated under such Act, as well as the Radiation Protection
Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., as amended, whichever shall be more
stringent. In no instance shall any radiation emit from structures, measured
at the outside structure wall.
§ 190-82. Noise.
pretreating of such wastes, the installation of processing methods,
separation or screening of wastes, control of pH, and other methods of
improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of approval of
such facilities.
B. Solid wastes. Each proposed use shall:
(1) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse, except where the Township assumes such
responsibility.
(2) Comply with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(4) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or
other objectionable materials.
(5) Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property,
except as may be permitted by this chapter or other Township
codes and ordinances.
A. The purpose of this section is to ensure that the environmental
character of the area surrounding the proposed use with respect to
noise shall not be altered. The standards established herein shall be
interpreted in any specific case with this objective in mind.
B. Measurements, if required under this section, shall be made at the
location noted in § 190-78. Measurements, where required, shall be
made by a competent acoustical engineer using equipment meeting the
United States of America Standards Institute Standard S 1.4-1961, or
the latest revision thereof, and S 2.22, or the latest revision. The
instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and the meter
to the slow response.
C. The permitted noise level readings of the proposed use, measured at
the measuring line, in any zone shall not exceed 55 dBA during the
§ 190-80 ANDOVER CODE § 190-82
175:702
§ 190-83. Vibration.
In any zone, no vibrations discernible without instruments at the measuring
point shall be permitted.
§ 190-84. Glare.
No single standard for glare is promulgated in this chapter due to the
impracticability of establishing such standards. It is the intent of these
performance standards to ensure that both direct and indirect glare, to
the extent possible, are eliminated or activities producing such glare are
carried on within a structure. Necessary glare-producing devices, such
as roadway and walkway lighting, shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in such a manner as not to be a nuisance to surrounding uses.
§ 190-85. Heat.
Heat is thermal energy of a radiative, conductive or convective nature.
In any zone, any use or process shall not produce a temperature rise
discernible at the measuring point, or discharge water into any watercourse
which shall produce a temperature increase of greater than 3º in that
watercourse measured at a point 10 feet from the point of discharge.
§ 190-86. Fire and explosion hazards.
If it appears that any proposed use, structure, process or resulting product
or material may constitute a fire or explosion hazard, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to supply proof of:
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and shall not exceed 45 dBA during the
hours 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
D. In addition, noise control shall be subject to standards established by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Where
standards are established and are more restrictive than contained in
this chapter, the more restrictive standards shall be applicable.
A. Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or material
from the State Department of Labor and Industry indicating that
adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have been taken or
installed.
B. Approval from the Township Fire Inspector that the applicant has
complied with all applicable Township fire prevention regulations.81
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Fire Prevention.
§ 190-82 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-86
175:703

ARTICLE XI
Signs
[Amended 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
§ 190-87. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to:
§ 190-88. Permit required; fee; exemptions.
A. Encourage and permit signs which, by uniformity of lettering and
design and by limitation of size and number, enhance the Township
environment and are compatible with its rural character.
B. Discourage and render unlawful signs which:
(1) Obstruct scenic vistas and natural features.
(2) Contribute to visual pollution.
(3) Contribute to traffic hazards.
A. Application for permit. Application for a permit shall be made upon
forms furnished by the Zoning Official. A sign permit is required for the
erection, re-erection or alteration of a permanent sign, excluding
repainting or relettering of existing signs.
B. Fees. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be as provided in
§ 30-10C(11) of this Code.
C. Exemptions. The following signs do not require a permit and are
exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1) Nameplates and professional practice signs, not exceeding two
square feet.
(2) Tablets indicating the name of a building and the date of erection,
not exceeding three square feet.
(3) Public signs erected by the state, county or municipality in the
performance of a public duty.
(4) Temporary signs indicating garage sales and other similar activities
not exceeding 10 square feet. Such signs shall be removed within
24 hours after the event has taken place.
(5) Signs which are located for policing or parking purposes, not
exceeding two square feet.
(6) Nonilluminated window signs whose total area does not exceed
25% of the total window area.
(7) Real estate for sale, rent or lease signs, not exceeding eight square
feet.
§ 190-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-88
175:705
§ 190-89. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign is defined as nonconforming which does not meet the requirements
of this article. Any sign legally constructed and existing at the time of
passage of this article that fails to comply with the minimum requirements
of this article shall constitute a nonconforming use. A nonconforming sign
shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged or extended, unless such action
creates a conforming use. Article VIII, Nonconforming Uses and Structures,
shall apply to nonconforming signs.
§ 190-90. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs or artificial lighting are prohibited in all zones:
(8) Signs erected upon the premises of houses of worship and
charitable and nonprofit organizations, not exceeding 10 square
feet.
(9) Temporary signs indicating special sales events, including grand
openings, business closings and special sales, not exceeding 10
square feet. Such signs shall be posted 30 days prior and removed
within five days after the special sales event is over.
(10) Customary warning, trespassing and posted signs.
(11) Sandwich board signs, not exceeding three feet in height and total
area of seven square feet. Such signs may not be placed within 10
feet of any property line.
(12) One suspended or hung banner is allowed to be placed on a
commercial facade, not exceeding dimensions of three feet by six
feet or a total of 18 square feet.
A. Billboards.
B. Exposed neon tubing.
C. Any flashing, moving or animated signs except in the CB, HC and B/A
Zone Districts. [Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
D. Any sign whose lighting or central mechanism causes radio or
television interference.
E. Signs utilizing the color red, green, or yellow in their illumination
within 100 feet of a street intersection.
F. Signs which resemble, simulate or may be mistaken for a traffic sign
within 20 feet of a roadway.
G. Signs which are a menace to public safety.
H. Roof signs.
I. Signs affixed to trees, rocks or other natural things.
§ 190-88 ANDOVER CODE § 190-90
175:706
§ 190-91. General sign requirements.
All signs in Andover Township shall conform to the following:
J. Signs affixed or painted on water towers or similar structures.
K. Freestanding pylon signs located in a public right-of-way or approved
sight easement.
L. String banners, string flags, aluminum ribbons or similar attentiongetting
devices, except that commercial businesses shall be allowed to
hang or suspend one banner from a structure or business as long as it is
not offensive or inappropriate. String banners strung on poles sunk into
the ground are prohibited.
A. All support, braces, hooks, anchors and other fastening devices of any
sign shall be of sturdy and substantial construction, shall be kept in
good repair and shall be maintained in a clean, safe and orderly
appearance.
B. The owner of the property upon which a sign is located shall be
responsible for maintaining the sign and its surroundings.
C. Indirect or interior lighting is permissible provided the source of light
will not cause glare upon a street or adjacent property.
D. Permanent signs shall be located only on the premises of the use or
activity to which they are calling attention.
E. No sign shall be placed as to interfere with or be mistaken for a traffic
light or similar safety device.
F. No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing or intermittent
illumination. All lights used for the illumination of any use or building or
the areas surrounding them or for the illumination or display of
merchandise or products of business establishments shall be
completely shielded from the view of vehicular traffic using the road or
roads abutting such business properties. Floodlights used for the
illumination of such premises, or of any sign thereon, whether or not
such floodlights are attached to or separate from the building, shall not
project above the highest elevation of the front wall of the building. In
addition, such signs may be allowed upon approval of a special permit
therefor issued by the Township Zoning Officer to be displayed on any
property operated by the Township (municipal building/recreation),
Police Department, Fire Department, and First Aid Squad. Any new
electronic messaging signs shall be no larger than 32 square feet per
sign face and contain no more than four lines of text, and must contain
no less than a thirty-second interval change. Any electronic messaging
signs must be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
located in any zone district within the Township. [Amended
10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14]
§ 190-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-91
175:707
§ 190-92. Special permit required for certain signs.
G. No sign as permitted shall extend or project above the highest elevation
of the wall to which it is attached or above the height of the building as
defined in this chapter.
H. No sign shall extend further than 15 inches from the face of the building
upon which it is attached.
I. The area of a sign shall be computed as the total square foot content of
the background and frame upon which the lettering, illustration or
display is presented. If there is no background, the sign area shall be
computed as the product of the largest horizontal dimension and the
largest vertical dimension of the lettering, illustration or display. Each
side of a two-sided sign shall be allowed the maximum permitted area.
J. All signs shall be limited to noniridescent colors, including the
background, with the exception of safety and directional signs of not
more than two square feet.
A. The following signs or similar signs require a special permit. This
permit shall be granted by the Planning Board subsequent to a finding
that the sign conforms to the intent and purposes of this article:
(1) Signs integrated or structurally incorporated into the architecture
of a building.
(2) Signs made of landscape materials or plantings.
(3) Off- and on-premises directional signs.
(4) Signs displaying time or temperature.
(5) Temporary signs on new construction sites, except permitted signs,
and one sign not to exceed eight square feet stating the
contractor's name, address and telephone number.
(6) Supergraphics.
(7) Three-dimensional signs.
B. Submission of application; requirements.
(1) The applicant shall file, at least 14 days before the date of the
regular public meeting of the Planning Board, eight copies of a site
plan or plat and three copies of an application for a special permit
sign, together with all other drawings and documentation required
herein or by any rule of the Planning Board, with the Township
Clerk. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Township Clerk. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board. A fee shall accompany the
application in the amount set forth in § 190-112.
§ 190-91 ANDOVER CODE § 190-92
175:708
(2) Approval by County Planning Board required. All applications for
site plan approval for signs on a county road shall be submitted to
the County Planning Board for its review and recommendations
and, where applicable, approval where required by state statute or
county requirements. The applicant shall furnish proof of such
submission within 10 days of the submission of his application to
the Township reviewing board by presenting a copy of his site plan
with an indication from the county that it has been filed with the
county. Any application for site plan approval shall not be deemed
complete in the absence of proof that it has been filed with the
County Planning Board, if required. If the County Planning Board
has failed to grant or deny approval of the site plan at the time of
approval of the applicant's application, such approval shall be
conditioned on approval of such site plan by the County Planning
Board.
C. Notice and publication required. A public hearing, after proper notice
and publication by the applicant in accordance with Chapter 74, Land
Use Procedures, shall be held on all applications.
D. Plat details. A complete application for a special permit sign shall also
consist of the following:
(1) A plat or map with the following details and information:
(a) The boundaries of the tax lot where the proposed sign is to be
located and dimensions of said lot.
(b) The tax lot and block number of said lot.
(c) The location of all structures within 100 feet of the proposed
sign location, including underground utilities.
(d) The location and dimensions of the existing paved surface.
(e) The distance from the paved surface of the road.
(f) A sketch showing the design of the proposed sign and the
dimensions of the same. Said sketch may be contained on the
same sheet as the map showing the location of the sign but in a
separate area thereof. Said drawing shall be of sufficient size
to clearly show the proposed sign design, including the height
of the lettering. The materials to be used in the construction of
the sign shall be specified thereon, as well as sign colors.
(2) An affidavit of ownership and consent of the property owner shall
be submitted if the applicant is not the owner of the subject
property where the sign is to be located.
(3) Applicant shall submit, in written narrative form, a statement
specifying:
(a) The necessity for the sign.
§ 190-92 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-92
175:709
§ 190-93. Facade signs.
§ 190-94. Signs in business, commercial, recreation, industrial and
multifamily districts.
Each establishment shall be permitted only one facade sign and only one
freestanding general directory or pylon sign, provided that such signs
conform to the Schedule of Sign Regulations82 for the districts and other
applicable requirements. Directional signs, such as "loading," "shipping"
and "receiving," are permitted, provided that they do not exceed two square
feet.
§ 190-95. Signs in residential and agricultural districts.
Signs in residential districts shall conform to the applicable requirements of
this article and to the Schedule of Sign Regulations.83
(b) Whether the sign will obstruct the view of motorists in the
area.
(c) The nature of the sign, e.g., advertising, directional,
informational, decorative, etc.
(4) The Board may require the applicant to submit a survey of the
subject premises showing the location and dimension of the road
right-of-way, the exact location of the proposed sign and
requirements of Subsection D(1) above. Said survey shall be
prepared, signed, sealed and certified to by a surveyor or engineer
licensed under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
A. No facade sign shall project higher than the highest point of the facade
of the building upon which it is to be erected, and it shall not project
more than 15 inches from the building line.
B. Only one facade sign shall be permitted on each establishment, except
that a corner establishment may have two.
C. A facade sign shall not exceed, in area, 15% of the total area of the story
or level of building on which it is erected or 64 feet, whichever is lesser,
and shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the
building.
A. One customary professional sign or nameplate sign not more than two
square feet in area, which may be illuminated, may be permitted,
provided the direct source of light is shielded in such a manner that it is
not visible from the street or any adjoining residential property, unless a
porch light or lamppost light.
82.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
83.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 190-92 ANDOVER CODE § 190-95
175:710
§ 190-96. Signs at automobile sales, service and vehicle rental
establishments.
The following signs may be permitted:
B. A nonilluminated temporary sign, pertaining to the lease or sale of the
premises upon which it is placed, not exceeding eight square feet, may
be permitted. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after
signing the contract for sale, the signing of a sale transaction or the
execution of a lease.
C. Subdivision developments involving six or more residential lots may
contain a sign advertising the sale of the dwellings contained therein,
as approved by the Planning Board, as follows:
(1) One nonilluminated sign no larger than 32 square feet shall be
permitted at each entrance of the development. In addition,
nonilluminated trade and professional signs no larger than four
square feet shall be permitted on the lots being developed.
(2) All signs permitted under this subsection shall be removed within
seven days after signing the contract of sale, signing of a sale
transaction or the execution of a lease of the last house in the
development.
D. A sign deemed necessary to the public welfare by the governing body
may be permitted. Signs for public buildings, parks and other public
community facilities shall not exceed 20 square feet.
E. A sign, not more than 10 square feet in area, advertising the name of a
house of worship on the premises, its pastor and its coming activities
may be permitted.
F. Agricultural uses may have the following signs:
(1) Two signs advertising the sale and price of seasonal and farm
produce, provided the total area of such signs does not exceed 10
square feet.
(2) One identification sign of not more than two square feet which may
be directly illuminated, stating the name of the agricultural use, the
address and the name of the owner.
G. Permitted identification signs for a subdivision development shall not
be larger than 25 square feet at each entrance.
A. One freestanding or pylon sign advertising the name of the station or
garage, including any company or brand name, insignia or emblem,
provided that each sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and shall
be hung within the property and not less than 10 feet nor more than 18
feet from the ground to the base of the sign.
§ 190-95 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-96
175:711
B. One temporary sign located inside the property line and specifically
advertising special seasonal servicing, provided that the sign does not
exceed eight square feet in area.
C. Directional signs displayed over individual entrance doors or bays
consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic
on duty" or other closely similar words shall be permitted, provided that
there shall only be one such sign over each entrance or bay, the letters
thereof shall not exceed 12 inches in height, and the total area of each
sign shall not exceed two square feet.84
84.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Sign Regulations, which immediately followed this section,
is now included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-96 ANDOVER CODE § 190-96
175:712
ARTICLE XII
Fences
[Amended 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-9; 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-21]
§ 190-97. General requirements.
§ 190-98. Exceptions.
A. The finished side of a fence shall face the adjoining property.
B. Aboveground electric fences, razor wire and barbed wire fences are
prohibited in all residential zones. Electric fences are permitted to
contain livestock or equine animals, provided they are inside another
fence and not accessible from outside. Where an outside fence does not
exist or is not feasible, warning signs of the electric fence shall be
posted at intervals not to exceed 100 feet.
C. Fences are permitted as follows:
(1) Up to 100% solid, up to four feet high: anywhere on property up to
the property line
(2) Up to 100% solid, up to six feet high: anywhere behind the back
building line to the side and rear property lines.
(3) Fencing, which shall not exceed twenty-five-percent solid or eight
feet in height, intended solely for the exclusion of deer: anywhere
behind the back building line to the side and rear property lines.
A. The fence standards indicated in § 190-97 shall not apply to commercial
agricultural uses.
B. The fence standards in § 190-97 shall not apply to fences around tennis
courts. Fences around swimming pools must comply with the Building
Code.
§ 190-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-98
175:713

ARTICLE XIII
Affordable Housing
[Amended 6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-14; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-35]
§ 190-99. Affordable housing obligation.
§ 190-100. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
A. This article is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time
and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This article shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable
law.
B. The Andover Township Land Use Board has adopted a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by the
governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways Andover
Township shall address its fair share for low- and moderate-income
housing as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH)
and documented in the Housing Element.
C. This article implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
D. Andover Township shall file monitoring reports with COAH in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, tracking the status of the
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Any plan
evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
monitoring prepared by COAH in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 shall be
available to the public at the Andover Township Municipal Building,
Municipal Clerk's Office, 134 Newton-Sparta Road or from COAH at
101 South Broad Street, Trenton, New Jersey and on COAH's website,
www.nj.gov/dca/affiliates/coah.
§ 190-99 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-100
175:715
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C.
5:97 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9; in the case of an
ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the standards
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented,
and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and
supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a portion of
which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
ASSISTED-LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
All the residents of the development where the unit is situated are 62
years or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or
older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 190-100 ANDOVER CODE § 190-100
175:716
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted-living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
§ 190-100 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-100
175:717
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by COAH's adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted-living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit
financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
§ 190-100 ANDOVER CODE § 190-100
175:718
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 190-101. Affordable housing programs
Andover Township has determined that it will use the following mechanisms
to satisfy its affordable housing obligations:
A. A market-to-affordable program.
(1) A market-to-affordable program is established to permit the
purchase or subsidization of units through a written agreement
with the property owner and sold or rented to low- and moderateincome
households. Subject to the provisions of Subsection A(2)(c)
below, the market-to-affordable programs may produce both lowand
moderate-income units. (The program may be limited to only
low- or only moderate-income units as per the Fair Share Plan.)
(2) The following provisions shall apply to market-to-affordable
programs:
(a) At the time they are offered for sale or rental, eligible units
may be new, pre-owned or vacant.
(b) The units shall be certified to be in sound condition as a result
of an inspection performed by a licensed building inspector.
(c) The municipality will provide a minimum of $25,000 per unit to
subsidize each moderate-income unit and/or $30,000 per unit
to subsidize each low-income unit, with additional subsidy
depending on the market prices or rents in a municipality.
(d) The maximum number of creditable market-to-affordable units
shall be equal to no more than 10 for sale units and 10 rental
units or a combined total of 10% of the fair share obligation,
whichever is greater. (Additional units may be approved by
COAH if the municipality demonstrates the successful
completion of its initial market-to-affordable program.)
(3) The units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC with the
following exceptions:
(a) Bedroom distribution [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b) and (c)];
(b) Low/moderate income split [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(a)]; and
(c) Affordability average [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) and (e)]; however:
[1] The maximum rent for a moderate-income unit shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income and the maximum rent for a low-income
§ 190-100 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-101
175:719
§ 190-102. through § 104. (Reserved)
§ 190-105. New construction.
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low- and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
unit shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 44% of median income; and
[2] The maximum sales price for a moderate-income unit shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income and the maximum sales price for a lowincome
unit shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 40% of median income.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate- income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
§ 190-101 ANDOVER CODE § 190-105
175:720
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(e) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, or evidence that the
Andover Township has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the
development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Andover Township's affordable housing
trust fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Andover Township for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable unit accessible, when requested to do so by a
person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy
the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Andover Township.
§ 190-105 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-105
175:721
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14, and that
the cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Andover Township's
affordable housing trust fund in care of the Municipal
Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are deposited
into the affordable housing trust fund and appropriately
earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.14.
C. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and in COAH, utilizing the regional income limits
established by COAH.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
(a) At least 10% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income. NOTE: N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 (P.L. 2008, C. 46)
includes the requirement that all municipal fair share plans
provide for the reservation of at least 13% of the affordable
units for very-low-income households, i.e., households earning
30% or less of the median income. The new statute states that
the requirement is not project-specific. Each municipality's
version of this article must reflect the determinations made in
the Fair Share Plan as to the percentage of units necessary for
very-low-income units in rental projects. Additional incentives
to subsidize the creation of affordable housing available to
very-low-income households may be included in the zoning
section of this article or specified in a developer's or
redeveloper's agreement.
§ 190-105 ANDOVER CODE § 190-105
175:722
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assistedliving
facilities, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
§ 190-105 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-105
175:723
§ 190-106. General guidelines.
The following general guidelines apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated
future developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing
units.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing
Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low- income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low- income housing tax
credits.
(11) Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent
with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8
program.
A. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) Andover Township shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of COAH, compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The affirmative marketing plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward COAH Housing Region
2 and covers the period of deed restriction.
§ 190-105 ANDOVER CODE § 190-106
175:724
§ 190-106.1. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
(3) The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 1
comprised of Sussex, Bergen, Hudson, and Passaic counties.
(4) The Administrative Agent designated by Andover Township shall
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent
with the affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
(5) In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
(6) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
(7) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by Andover Township.
B. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the Administrative Agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
(c) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(2) Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall
be provided in the municipal operating manual.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article until Andover Township elects to release the unit from
such requirements; however, and prior to such an election, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, for at least 30 years.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
§ 190-106 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-106.1
175:725
§ 190-106.2. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 190-106.3. Buyer income eligibility.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value.
D. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note obligating the
purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to
repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
requirements of this article, an amount equal to the difference between
the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and
the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
B. The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
§ 190-106.1 ANDOVER CODE § 190-106.3
175:726
§ 190-106.4. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership
unit; subordination.
§ 190-106.5. Control periods for restricted rental units.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article until Andover Township elects to release the unit from such
requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, and prior to such an
election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, for at least 30 years.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Sussex. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 190-106.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-106.5
175:727
§ 190-106.6. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 190-106.7. Tenant income eligibility.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted-living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income, lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to
the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40%
for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
§ 190-106.5 ANDOVER CODE § 190-106.7
175:728
§ 190-106.8. Administration.
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
Administrative Agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
with the Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for Andover Township
is established by this article. The Township Council shall make the
actual appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
(1) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of
Andover Township.
(2) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to COAH for
approval.
(3) The MHL must meet all COAH requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training. NOTE: if the MHL position is
one that will always be included in the job description for a
particular position in the local staff, e.g., Township Clerk, that
position can be named in this article.
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for Andover
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the Administrative Agent:
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(b) The implementation of the affirmative marketing plan and
affordability controls.
§ 190-106.7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-106.8
175:729
(c) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent.
(d) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Andover
Township's Fair Share Plan;
(e) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by COAH;
(f) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(g) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
B. Andover Township shall designate by resolution of the Township
Committee, subject to the approval of COAH, one or more
Administrative Agents to administer newly constructed affordable units
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C. 5:97 and UHAC.
C. An Operating Manual shall be provided by the Administrative Agent(s)
to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to
approval of COAH. The Operating Manuals shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the
Administrative Agent(s).
D. The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC and which are
described in full detail in the Operating Manual, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
(1) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(2) Affirmative marketing;
(3) Household certification;
(4) Affordability controls;
(5) Records retention;
(6) Resale and re-rental;
(7) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(8) Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(9) The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities,
hereunder.
§ 190-106.8 ANDOVER CODE § 190-106.9
175:730
§ 190-106.9. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Andover Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the
same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderateincome
unit.
§ 190-106.9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-106.9
175:731
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession
terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to
the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by
the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In the
event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens,
the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit
by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit
could have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing
affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
§ 190-106.9 ANDOVER CODE § 190-106.9
175:732
§ 190-106.10. Appeals
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent designated pursuant
to this article shall be filed in writing with the Executive Director of COAH.
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low-and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable
housing units.
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 190-106.9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-106.10
175:733

ARTICLE XIV
Historic Preservation
§ 190-107. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to preserve those buildings and
sites of historic and architectural significance throughout the Township.
§ 190-108. Historic buildings and sites.
§ 190-109. Building permit required; maintenance; adaptive use.
A. Historic buildings and sites are defined as:
(1) Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history.
(2) Associated with the lives of persons significant in our past.
(3) Having distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or representing the work of a master builder or
possessing high artistic value or representing a significant and
distinguishable entity.
(4) Having yielded or may be likely to yield information important in
prehistory or history.
B. These historic buildings and sites are listed in the Andover Township
Master Plan, 1976, pages 77 to 79, and are shown on Plate XIV Historic
Site, page 76. In order to effectuate these goals and objectives, an
Historic Preservation Commission or, until such Commission is
established, the Planning Board shall act to review site plans and
building permits relative to historic sites and buildings.
A. Structural changes. No historic buildings or sites shall be altered,
renovated, modified or otherwise changed without obtaining a building
permit.
B. Building permits. A building permit shall only be issued after review by
the Historic Preservation Commission or Planning Board. The
Commission or Planning Board shall be guided in its review by the
following criteria:
(1) Preservation of architectural integrity.
(2) Preservation of building materials and construction techniques.
C. Maintenance. No historic building or site shall be demolished or
permitted to become dilapidated through lack of maintenance.
D. Adaptive use. Adaptive use of historic sites and buildings is permitted,
consistent with uses permitted in the zone district.
§ 190-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-110
175:735
§ 190-110. Application procedure.
The applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector plans and specifications
of the proposal according to the following guidelines:
A. Where a simple alteration is proposed, a sketch of all structural
changes and of the property showing lot size, surrounding streets and
lot and block number. The Historic Preservation Commission or, in its
absence, the Planning Board shall review the material and consider
recommendations by the Township Building Official and others as
needed.
B. Where a major alteration is proposed, an architectural drawing
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed architect shall be submitted.
In addition, a site plan may be required if a structure is to be added to
the site or there is a change of use. The site plan shall be submitted in
accordance with Chapter 131, Site Plan Review. The Historic
Preservation Commission or, in its absence, the Planning Board shall
review the material and consider recommendations by the Township
Building Office and others as needed.
C. The review board may waive sections of Chapter 131, Site Plan Review,
if not necessary to the review process.
D. The applicant is encouraged to informally discuss the proposal with the
Township reviewing board to explain the proposal and to be apprised of
submission requirements.
§ 190-110 ANDOVER CODE § 190-110
175:736
ARTICLE XV
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Planning Board
§ 190-111. General administration.
§ 190-112. Fees and costs.
Fees and costs for applications for development, as well as review fees
charged by Township professionals for review of applications, shall be paid
in accordance with Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, §§ 74-56 and 74-57.
A. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
heretofore established is hereby continued. The membership, powers,
expenses and costs, appeals and applications to the Board of
Adjustment, time for decision, modification on appeal, stay of
proceedings by appeal, exception and other powers are as enumerated
in the Municipal Land Use Act of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 through
40:55D-76 inclusive, and by Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of the
Code of the Township of Andover. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is
also governed by its own rules and bylaws.
B. Planning Board. The Planning Board heretofore established is hereby
continued. The Planning Board membership, organization, powers,
referral powers, citizen advisory committee, environmental
commission, review in lieu of Board of Adjustment and time periods are
as enumerated in the Municipal Land Use Act of 1975, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 through 40:55D-27 and 40:55D-60 through 40:55D-61
inclusive, and by Chapter 74, Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the
Township of Andover. The Planning Board is also governed by its own
rules and bylaws.
§ 190-111 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-112
175:737

ARTICLE XVI
Wind and Solar Energy Systems
[Added 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
§ 190-113. General provisions.
§ 190-114. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — Solar panels and all associated equipment that
collect, store and distribute solar energy for heating, cooling or electricity
generating.
SOLAR PANEL — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into useable electrical energy
through the use of solar panels.
TOWER — A monopole, freestanding or guyed structure that supports a
wind generator.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind turbine and all associated equipment,
including a base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane,
wire, inverter, batteries, or other components necessary to fully utilize the
wind generator.
A. Whereas, the primary purpose of a wind or solar energy system will be
to provide power for the principal use of the property whereon said
system is to be located and shall not be for the generation of power for
commercial sale purposes, although this provision shall not be
interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to
time from a wind or solar energy system designed to meet the energy
needs of the principal use on the property. For the purposes of this
article, the sale of excess power shall be limited so that in no event an
energy system is generating more energy for sale than what is
otherwise necessary to power the principal use on the property.
B. Whereas, wind and solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal use. Wind energy systems
shall require a site plan approval from the Land Use Board. All
applications shall demonstrate that the wind velocity and conditions at
the proposed location will be suitable for the generation of electricity.
All energy systems require approval from the Zoning Officer and
Construction Official prior to installation. All applications for an energy
system shall include appropriate information demonstrating
compliance with this chapter, including a record of the electric usage
for the principal use on the property for the previous year. In the event
that the Zoning Officer or Construction Official does not agree that the
provisions of this chapter will be satisfied, an applicant may apply to the
Land Use Board for an interpretation or variance as necessary.
§ 190-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-114
175:739
WIND TURBINE — Equipment that converts energy from the wind into
electricity. This term includes rotor, blades and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components necessary to generate, store and/or
transfer energy.
§ 190-115. Wind energy systems.
A. Residential zones. Wind turbines are permitted in all residential zone
districts subject to the following:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres. No more than one wind turbine
per lot. Lot averaging shall not be permitted for installation of more
than one wind turbine.
(2) Minimum setbacks. All wind turbines shall be set back from all
property lines a minimum distance equal to 100% of the height of
the structure, including blades. Guy lines used to support the tower
may not encroach into any setbacks.
(3) Wind turbines, support equipment and/or guy wires shall not be
permitted in the front yard.
(4) Mechanical equipment and buildings provided for storage of
materials and equipment shall conform to the standards for an
accessory structure within the applicable zone.
(5) Maximum height for a wind turbine shall not exceed a height of 80
feet, including the height of the blades at their highest point.
(6) Wind turbines shall not be permitted as rooftop installations.
(7) Wind turbines on residential properties shall have a nameplate
capacity of 100 kilowatts or less.
B. Nonresidential zones. Wind turbines are permitted in all nonresidential
zone districts, subject to the bulk requirements of the district and the
following:
(1) Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres. No more than one wind turbine
shall be permitted per lot. Lot averaging shall not be permitted for
installation of more than one wind turbine.
(2) The maximum height for a wind turbine shall not exceed 120 feet,
including the height of the blades at their highest point.
(3) Minimum setbacks. All wind turbines shall be set back from all
property lines a distance equal to 100% of the height of the turbine,
including the blades. Guy wires used to support the tower may not
encroach into any setbacks.
(4) If there is a principal structure on the lot, no wind turbines, support
equipment and/or guy wires shall be permitted in the front area of
the principal structure.
§ 190-114 ANDOVER CODE § 190-115
175:740
§ 190-116. Solar energy systems.
(5) Mechanical equipment and buildings provided for storage of
materials and equipment shall conform to the standards for an
accessory structure within the applicable zone.
(6) Wind turbines shall not be permitted as a rooftop installation.
(7) Wind turbines on nonresidential properties shall have a nameplate
capacity of 100 kilowatts or less.
C. All wind energy systems shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Sound levels of the wind energy system shall not exceed 55 dBA at
a common property line. These levels may be exceeded during
short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe storms.
(2) Wind turbines shall be designated with an automatic brake or other
similar device to prevent over-speeding and excessive pressure on
the tower structure.
(3) Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted except to the
extent required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
(4) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(5) Wind energy systems shall be designed to prevent interference
with any television, radio, or electronic reception or transmission
and shall be in compliance with any federal, state or county
regulations.
(6) The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step
bolts, a ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the
tower for a minimum of 10 feet above the ground level.
(7) All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a minimum of
25 feet above the ground level.
(8) The blades of the wind energy system shall be constructed of a
corrosive-resistant material.
(9) A clearly marked manual shut-off switch for the electricity from the
wind energy system shall be installed in close proximity to the
meter on the exterior of the principal structure.
(10)New Jersey Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics
and/or FAA approval or jurisdictional determination for the
monopole shall be obtained by applicant.
A. Rooftop solar systems.
(1) Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any
zoning district. The solar panels shall not exceed a height of 12
§ 190-115 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-116
175:741
inches from the rooftop. The height of the solar panels shall not be
included in any calculations for total building height.
(2) Panels installed in a rooftop configuration must be installed not
more than one foot beyond the actual boundaries or edges of the
roof.
(3) A clearly marked manual shut-off switch for the electricity from the
solar panels shall be installed in close proximity to the meter on the
exterior of the principal structure.
(4) An official National Electric Code (N.E.C.) placard, stating there
are solar panels on the principal structure, shall be placed near the
front entrance of the structure.
B. Ground-mount solar panel systems.
(1) Ground arrays shall not be permitted in the front yard.
(2) Ground arrays shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from side or
rear property lines in all residential zones or in conformance with
the required setbacks for accessory structures in nonresidential
zones.
(3) Ground arrays shall be located to minimize any glare towards an
adjoining property.
(4) Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
(5) Ground arrays shall not be permitted in the R-0.5 Zone or on any lot
that is 0.5 acre or less.
(6) A ground array system shall not add, contribute to or be calculated
to cause an increase in impervious coverage for the purposes of
conforming to zone standards.
(7) A clearly marked shut-off switch for the electricity from the solar
panels shall be installed in close proximity to the meter on the
exterior of the principal structure.
(8) Ground arrays shall be screened and/or landscaped to shield the
system when viewed from the street and/or adjacent properties.
(a) The recommended distance and planting material is identified
in Figure A attached.85
(b) Where natural evergreen or dense deciduous screening is
already in existence, no additional screening shall be required
between the property line(s) and the ground arrays.
(c) Screening is not required between the ground array and the
principal structure located on the same lot as the array if it is
85.Editor's Note: Figure A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 190-116 ANDOVER CODE § 190-116
175:742
§ 190-117. Requirements for all wind and solar energy systems.
completely shielded from the front, rear and side property
lines.
C. The provisions in this article do not apply to the installation of
decorative solar pathway lights that do not provide power for another
use or structure.
D. All solar energy systems shall meet all National Electric Code (N.E.C.)
requirements.
A. Wind and solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying or
advertising except for the labeling information noted in Subsection F
below.
B. The design of wind or solar energy systems shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural setting and
existing environment.
C. The wind or solar energy system shall be located so that tree removal is
not required to the extent reasonably possible.
D. All electric lines and utility wires shall be installed underground.
E. The installation of a wind or solar energy system shall conform to the
requirements of the electric utility company for interconnection as the
case may dictate.
F. A minimum of one sign shall be posted near ground level on the
interconnection cabinet warning of high voltage. In addition, the
following information shall be posted on a label or labels installed at the
site:
(1) The maximum power output of the system.
(2) Nominal voltage and maximum current.
(3) Manufacturer's or installer's name, address and telephone number,
and the serial number and model number of the equipment.
(4) Emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
G. Systems that connect to the electric utility shall comply with the New
Jersey net metering and interconnection standards for Class I
renewable energy systems at N.J.A.C. 14:4-9.86 Systems shall not be
installed to generate more electricity than needed for the principal use
on the property.
H. A wind or solar energy system that is out of service for a continuous
twelve-month period shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
86.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 14:8-4.1 et seq.
§ 190-116 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-117
175:743
(1) The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to the
owner. The notice shall be sent via regular mail and certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of record.
(2) Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's sole
expense within six months of the date on the notice of
abandonment from the Zoning Officer. Prior to removal, the owner
shall obtain a demolition permit from the Construction Official.
Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, restored and landscaped to
blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at the time of the
removal.
(3) The Zoning Officer may issue a summons to the owner for failure to
remove the abandoned system as requested in the notice of
abandonment.
(4) When the owner of the wind or solar energy system had been
notified to remove same and has not removed the system within six
months after receiving the notice, the Township may pursue legal
action to have the system removed at the owner's expense.
(5) Solar panels removed from the site shall be deposited at a
recognized solar panel recycling center. Panels that are not
recycled must be disposed of in accordance with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency requirements.
I. A zoning permit and building permit shall be required for the
installation of a wind or solar energy system. Site plan approval shall
also be required for a wind energy system installation. Documents
required for a zoning permit shall include the following:
(1) Property survey.
(2) Location, dimensions (including height) of existing major
structures on the property.
(3) Location, dimensions and type of proposed energy system,
including all structures accessory to the system.
(4) Manufacturer's energy system specifications, including make and
model.
(5) Proof of notification to the electric utility company for
interconnection purposes.
(6) Certification from a professional engineer and/or the installation
company that the proposed installation is in compliance with
manufacturer's guidelines.
(7) Other documents and plans containing enough information
concerning installation of the system for the Zoning Officer to make
a formal decision concerning conformance with the article
§ 190-117 ANDOVER CODE § 190-117
175:744
§ 190-118. Violations and penalties.
standards. The amount and accuracy of information provided shall
be in the judgment of the Zoning Officer.
(8) Statement from applicant that installation will comply with all
environmental guidelines.
(9) Application shall include a current photograph of the site where the
proposed system is to be installed.
J. No wind or solar energy system shall be permitted on any governmentdesignated
historical zone or structure.
K. If a section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of the article
shall be judged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that
section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision, and the remainder
of this article shall be deemed valid and effective.
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a wind or
solar energy system that is not in compliance with this article or with
any condition contained in a building permit issued pursuant to this
article.
(1) Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this article, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
(2) Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and every
day in which a violation of any provision of this article exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
(3) Lesser penalty. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not
intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every
violation. Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no
penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or violation.
(4) Minimum penalty. The Township Committee may prescribe that at
least a minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a
fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding $100.
B. Solar energy systems installed prior to the adoption of the article are
exempt.
§ 190-117 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 190-118
175:745
Part II, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 191
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 190-118 ANDOVER CODE § 190-118
191:746
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions; Construction; Severability
[Adopted 12-12-1973 as § BH:1-1 of the 1973 Code]
§ 191-1. Adoption of provisions by reference.
The provisions of Chapter 1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Andover87 in the County of Sussex (1973) concerning short
title, definitions, construction and severability shall apply to all chapters
adopted by the Board of Health.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions.
§ 191-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 191-1
191:747

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 12-12-1973 as § BH:1-2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 191-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the
Board of Health of the Township shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $500 for each offense. Complaint
shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Township or before another
judicial officer having authority under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
The Court shall have the power to impose the other and additional penalties
provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 and 26:3-78.
§ 191-3. Continuation; separate offense.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the Board of Health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 191-4. Collection of fees and penalties.
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Township.
§ 191-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 191-4
191:749

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[An ordinance to adopt Part II, Board of Health Legislation, of the
Code of the Township of Andover is presently proposed before the
Township Board of Health. Upon final adoption, it will be included
here as Article III of this chapter.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 191-4
191:751
Chapter 194
ADMINISTRATION
§ 194-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Board of Health of the Township of Andover," and is herein referred
to as the "code."
§ 194-2. President of Board of Health.
There shall be a President of the Board of Health who shall preside at all
its meetings. The President shall be appointed by the Board from among its
members for a term of one year.
§ 194-3. Secretary of Board of Health.
There shall be a Secretary of the Board of Health who shall be responsible
to the Board and who shall issue all licenses authorized by the Board. The
Secretary shall be appointed by the Board for a term of one year.
§ 194-4. Registrar of Vital Statistics.
There shall be a Registrar of Vital Statistics who shall be responsible to
the Board of Health. The Township Clerk shall be the Registrar of Vital
Statistics and shall serve for a term of three years.
§ 194-5. Health Officer.
There shall be a Health Officer of the Board of Health who shall be
responsible to the Board of Health. The Health Officer shall hold the
necessary licenses and he shall be appointed by the Board of Health for a
term of one year. The Health Officer shall, subject to the superior authority
of the Board, be the general agent of the Board for the enforcement of its
ordinances and the sanitary laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 194-6. Special health officers.
When appointed by the Board, there shall be special health officers of the
Board of Health who shall promptly report to the Board every violation
of health ordinances, rules and regulations which may come within their
observation or knowledge. The police and fire officers of the Township of
Andover may be designated special health officers of the Board of Health.
§ 194-7. Plumbing Inspector.
There shall be a Plumbing Inspector of the Board of Health who shall be
responsible to the Board. The Plumbing Inspector shall be appointed by the
Board for a term of one year.
§ 191-4 ANDOVER CODE § 194-8
191:752
§ 194-8. Employment of additional personnel.
The Board may employ such other personnel as it deems necessary,
including technicians, inspectors and others necessary to carry out the
powers vested in the Board by law and by this revision. All such personnel
shall be appropriately licensed where required.
§ 194-9. Emergency powers of Health Officer.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings and without the necessity of giving notice or
holding any hearing which would otherwise be required under any provision
of this revision:
§ 194-10. Right of entry.
§ 194-11. Abatement of nuisances.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption which is unwholesome or dangerous
or likely to cause sickness or injury to the persons who consume it.
A. Inspection of premises. The Board of Health, its agents and employees
shall have the right to inspect any premises in the Township of Andover
if they have reason to believe that any provision of this chapter is being
violated, or as part of a regular program of inspection.
B. Search warrant. If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to
permit entry for the purpose of inspection, the Board of Health may
apply to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant. The application shall
be based upon an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of a
regular program of inspection or that conditions and circumstances
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary
or unhealthy condition exists on the premises. If the Judge is satisfied as
to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of the
premises.
A. Notice to abate nuisances.
(1) Whenever anything declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises
within the Township, notice shall be given to the owner or person in
control of the premises to remove or abate it within the time
§ 194-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 194-11
191:753
§ 194-12. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Board of Health may by resolution make rules and regulations which
interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
making the provisions of this chapter more effective. No such regulation
shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this chapter
and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or
greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed
by any provision of this chapter.
Chapter 198
specified not less than five days from the date of service in the
notice.
(2) Whenever anything declared by this chapter to be a nuisance or
any unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any public
property, highway or other public premises or place, notice shall be
given to the person in charge to remove or abate the same within
the time specified. If that person fails to comply with the notice
within the time specified, the Board of Health or its agents or
employees may remove or abate such nuisance or condition in the
manner provided for a like condition existing on a private premises
or place.
B. Abatement by Health Officer. If the owner or person in control of the
premises, upon being notified as provided by Subsection A, does not
comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove or
abate the nuisance or condition, the Board of Health or its agents or
employees shall proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may
cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means
as shall be deemed proper.
C. Recovery of costs. Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the
Township as a result of the Board of Health, its agents or employees
abating or removing or causing to be abated or removed any nuisance
or unsanitary or unhealthy condition, such costs and expense may be
recovered in the following manner:
(1) In all cases where practical and permitted by law, such costs shall
be certified to the tax assessment authority and shall be a part of
the taxes next assessed against the premises upon which the
nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition was located.
(2) Where it is impossible or impractical to proceed under Subsection
C(1) above, the cost or expense shall be recovered in an action at
law in any court of competent jurisdiction, the action to be
instituted by the Board of Health in the name of the Township or ex
rel the State of New Jersey. Regardless of how costs are actually
recovered, they shall be in addition to and shall not affect the
imposition of any penalties for the violation of this section.
§ 194-11 ANDOVER CODE § 194-12
191:754
FEES
§ 198-1. Board of Health Fee Schedule. [Amended 4-21-2004 by
Ord. No. BH-04-2]
Chapter 202
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 59.
§ 202-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is
annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion of the
text.88
A. Fees shall be as follows: [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-16]
Description Fee
Locate and construct an individual sewage disposal
system (two-year permit)
$300
Alter an existing individual sewage disposal system $50
Renewal to alter existing individual sewage disposal
system
$50
Repair an existing individual sewage disposal system $25
Reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system $50
Inspection of soil logs for new construction and
alterations for expansions
$25 per hole
Locate and construct a water supply system,
monitoring well, geothermal and all other wells
$100
Renewal of permit to locate and construct a water
supply system, monitoring well, geothermal and all
other wells
$50
Reinspection of an individual water supply system,
monitoring well, geothermal and all other wells
$50
B. Permits granted under this fee schedule are valid for a period of one
year unless otherwise noted.
88.Editor's Note: Said Code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 194-12 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 202-2
202:755
§ 202-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965).”
§ 202-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of
Health and the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 206
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 82. Solid waste — See Ch. 144.
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Meat and vegetable waste solids and liquids resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and shall
include cans, glasses, bottles and other containers in which food has been
preserved for consumption. It shall also include offal and any other decaying
or vegetable substance.
REFUSE — All other waste including paper, cardboard. books, bags, rags,
old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, sawdust, tree
branches, furniture, vehicles, ashes, cinders, metal shavings, wire, tin cans,
glass, crockery and similar materials, cartons, boxes, manure and the
wastes resulting from building construction or alteration work.
§ 206-2. Permit required.
No person shall burn, dump or otherwise deposit litter, garbage or refuse on
any land, vacant or occupied, within the Township unless a written permit
has first been obtained from the Board of Health.
§ 206-3. Application for permit; contents; expiration.
Every person desiring to burn, dump or otherwise deposit garbage or refuse
within the Township shall apply in writing to the Board of Health for a
permit. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the type and quantity of garbage or refuse to be handled and the specific
location to be used for dumping or burning. Each permit shall expire 10
§ 202-2 ANDOVER CODE § 206-3
206:756
days after date of issue and permission shall not be granted unless the
applicant satisfies the Board that the intended action will not create a
hazard to health or property.
§ 206-4. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Any person procuring a license shall be subject to any rules and regulations
imposed by the Board of Health, and to all provisions of law and of the State
Department of Health, for the violation of which a permit may be suspended
and, after hearing, revoked.
Chapter 210
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 26.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Noise — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 107.
§ 210-1. Establishment of code.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or acts and
each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds, requiring
the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental of certain
buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings, conveyances or
sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing official,
providing for the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery
of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in removing or abating such
nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this
chapter and made a part of it without the inclusions of the text herein.89
§ 210-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953).”
§ 210-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health for
the use and examination of the public.
89.Editor's Note: Said code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 206-3 NUISANCES § 210-3
210:757
Chapter 214
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
219.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 223.
§ 214-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
cesspools or other receptacles, regulating the practice of plumbing and the
issuance of licenses to practice plumbing, is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and
made a part of it without the inclusion of the text herein.90
§ 214-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964).”
§ 214-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964) have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health for the
use and examination of the public.
§ 214-4. Fees.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted as a part hereof, the following fees shall be
charged and received:
A. For the examination of any applicant for license as master plumber:
$50.
B. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license as master: $15.
C. For the filing of plans for a proposed plumbing work: $2.
D. For the issuance of a permit for proposed plumbing residential
construction: $10, plus $1 per fixture over five in number; commercial
construction: $25, plus $1 per fixture over five in number; $3 for
installation of any wet heating system where connection must be made
to the water system; and $0.25 per head for a sprinkler system.
90.Editor's Note: Said code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 210-3 ANDOVER CODE § 214-4
214:758
§ 214-5. Amendments to code.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is modified and amended
in the following particulars:
E. For the issuance of a permit for the replacement of a plumbing fixture
or for the addition of each new fixture in an existing structure: $1.
F. For each reinspection of plumbing work caused by the failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or permit issued: $5.
G. For the issuance of a permit and the filing of plans of proposed
swimming pool installation: $15.
A. Section 8.6.5 of the code shall be deleted and is not enacted by this
chapter.
Return Circulation (Where Required). Hot water supply systems in
building where the developed lengths of hot water piping from the
source of hot water supply to the farthest fixtures supplied exceeds
100 feet shall be of the circulation type.
Fixtures Back to Back. Two fixtures set back to back within the
distance allowed between a trap and its vent may be served by one
continuous soil or waste vent pipe, provided that each fixture wastes
separately into an approved double fitting having inlet openings at the
same level.
Vents of Sumps and Sewers. Drainage, piping, below sewer levels shall
be vented in similar manner to that for a gravity system. Building sump
vents shall be sized in accordance with Section E-114 of the code.
Maintenance. The plumbing and drainage system of every building
shall be maintained in such a manner as to be at all times in
compliance with the provisions of the code; except that existing
plumbing installed under prior regulations or lack thereof may remain
unchanged unless immediate hazards to life, health or property are
evident.
Dishwashing Machines (Residential). Water shall be supplied to all
dishwashing machines and the water lines shall be protected against
backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer. Dishwashers shall
discharge separately through an air gap or air break into a trap or
trapped fixture which is properly vented.
Stand Pipe Receptors (Auto Washing Machines). The stand pipe
receptors shall be individually trapped and vented and provided with
a stand pipe extended no more than 30 inches nor less than 18 inches
above its trap, and in no case shall the trap be installed below the floor.
Water Connections. Lily ponds, fish tanks, ornamental fountain basins,
swimming pools, and similar constructions, when provided with water,
shall be protected from back siphonage as required in Section E-800
of the code.
§ 214-4 PLUMBING § 214-5
214:759
§ 214-6. Examinations.
No examination shall be required for any plumbing contractor personally
holding two or more plumber's licenses in the County of Sussex.
§ 214-7. Installation of gas appliances.
All installation of gas appliances and gas piping shall conform to "American
Standard Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping," 1964 edition.
Chapter 219
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Fees — See Ch. 198.
Plumbing — See Ch. 214.
B. Section 3.4-a (Standards for Plumbing Material) shall be amended to
add under the category of "Miscellaneous Materials" the following:
"Rubber gaskets for cast iron soil pipe and fittings."
C. Section 4.2.1 of the code shall be amended to add the following
paragraph:
"When specified, joints and cast iron bell and spigot soil pipe and
fitting may also be made by means of preformed, elastomeric,
compression type gaskets conforming to A.S.T.M. C364-65T. Such
gaskets shall be installed in strict accordance with the pipe
manufacturer's recommendations and shall be acceptable to the
administrative authority."
D. Section 8.5.4 (Backflow Preventers and Air Caps) shall be amended to
add the following: "Water outlets for private and public swimming
pools, either on the ground or buried, shall also be provided with a
backflow preventer."
E. Section 8.7 (Protection of Auxiliary Equipment and Facilities) shall be
amended to add the following: "Private and public swimming pools
must also be constructed in such a way as to prevent contamination of
any potable water supply."
F. Section 14.1.1 (Permits) shall be amended to add a paragraph (d) as
follows:
"(d) A permit shall be obtained from the administrative authority for
any swimming pool installation."
§ 214-5 ANDOVER CODE § 219-1
219:760
§ 219-1. Code established.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance, and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems, and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a
part of it without inclusion of the text.91
§ 219-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1978).”
§ 219-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey
(1953) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board
of Health and the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the public.
§ 219-4. Permit for work required.
§ 219-5. License requirements for installation of systems.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a permit for the location, construction or
alteration of the sewage disposal system has been issued by the Board
of Health.
B. The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issuance and may be
renewed once and shall be valid for one year from date of renewal upon
payment of a renewal fee. Failure of permittee to complete work within
one year of renewal shall require permittee to reapply for a new permit
and a permit fee shall be due and payable. For each reinspection of an
individual sewage disposal system, or part thereof, caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the
aforesaid code, a reinspection fee shall be charged.
C. Issuance of permit. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an
application is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating that
the design of the individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in
compliance with the code.
A. Required. No person shall engage in the business of installing
individual or any other type of sewage disposal systems in the Township
unless and until such person has demonstrated a thorough knowledge
91.Editor's Note: Said code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 219-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL § 219-5
219:761
§ 219-6. Operation of new system.
of the law applicable to installation of individual sewage disposal
systems.
B. Examination. The Board of Health or its authorized agent shall conduct
examinations designed to test the knowledge and ability of applicants
for a license as a certified builder and installer of individual sewage
disposal systems in accordance with this code. Examinations shall be
held at least once yearly. No person shall be admitted to the
examination for a license as a certified individual sewage disposal
system installer unless he has met the requirements as set forth on the
application and has shown proof of being at least 21 years of age, is a
citizen of the United States, and has had at least two years' experience
in the business of installing individual sewage disposal systems or the
equivalent thereof.
C. Issuance. The Board of Health shall issue an appropriate license to each
applicant who has successfully passed the examination for a license to
build and install individual sewage disposal systems in Andover
Township. Such license shall not be transferable. Licenses held in other
towns shall not be accepted in lieu of taking the examination.
D. Renewal. All licenses to build and install individual sewage disposal
systems in Andover Township shall expire on the last day of December
of each year, and shall be renewed for the ensuing year prior to any
work being done during the year.
E. Revocation. The license held by a certified installer of individual sewage
disposal systems in Andover Township may be suspended or revoked by
the Board of Health or by the Board's authorized agent should the
holder of such license be shown to be incompetent in his work or it be
proven that the license was obtained through fraudulent means or
misrepresentation.
F. Fee. A fee of $10 shall be paid annually by each certified installer of
individual sewage disposal systems for a license to operate in the
Township of Andover.
A. Certificate required. New individual disposal systems shall not be
placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions
thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely on such a system for
sewage disposal, until the Board of Health has issued a certificate
indicating that the disposal system has been located and constructed in
compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of
the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for
alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. Issuance of certificate. The Board of Health may issue such certificate if
an engineer licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey
submits a statement in writing signed by him to the Board of Health
§ 219-5 ANDOVER CODE § 219-6
219:762
§ 219-7. Emptying or cleaning septic tanks.
§ 219-8. Hearing on denial of license, permit or certificate.
If a license, permit or certificate required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request is made by the applicant. Upon the hearing, the Board
of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within 15 days after the hearing.
§ 219-9. Violations and penalties; stop-work order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy the violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of the provisions of the code. After issuance of such order and the
service of a copy upon the person connected with or working in and about
the erection or installation of the disposal system, or any part thereof, no
further work shall be done except as aforesaid.
§ 219-10. Minimum standards.
The following minimum standards for construction of individual sewage
disposal systems are established:
that the disposal system has been located and constructed in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements
of the code.
A. License required. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying
or cleaning septic tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the
reception or storage of human excrement who do not hold licenses to
engage in such business issued by the Board of Health. Licenses shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance but may be
renewed by the Board of Health. The license may be revoked for failure
of the licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or any rule or
ordinance of the Board of Health.
B. Permit required. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or
other receptacle containing human excrement shall not be removed
until a permit for removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
A. Minimum size disposal beds or fields.
(1) For proposed new individual sewage disposal systems, two
complete disposal areas shall be provided, each of which shall meet
all requirements. An approved effluent diversion device shall be
provided between the two disposal areas. The device shall be
accessible to adults, but not to children. The disposal areas should
§ 219-6 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL § 219-10
219:763
be alternated annually to allow rejuvenation of one area while the
other area is in use.
(2) Where a second disposal area is added to alter an existing system,
the old disposal area shall be salvaged, if practical. This may be
accomplished by the use of an approved effluent diversion device
as described in Subsection A(1) herein, or by other methods
acceptable to the administrative authority or its authorized agent.
(3) Disposal trenches shall be the preferred type of disposal area.
Other types of disposal areas may be used where a trench system
would be clearly infeasible.
B. Seepage pits. When a seepage pit system is so designed for an
individual sewage disposal system, it shall meet the following minimum
standards of construction:
(1) Diameter: 10 feet.
(2) Depth: 15 feet.
(3) When two or more seepage pits are to be used, they shall have
minimum diameters of 10 feet and minimum depths of 10 feet.
(4) Seepage pits shall be a minimum of 20 feet apart. A precast
concrete distribution box shall be used to distribute the effluent
equally to two or more seepage pits.
(5) When seepage pits are used, a dual system shall be installed as in
Subsection A.
C. Septic tanks. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. BH-98-1;
4-21-2004 by Ord. No. BH-04-1]
(1) Septic tanks serving single-family dwelling units with four or fewer
bedrooms shall have a minimum capacity of 1,500 gallons. Septic
tanks serving single-family units with five or more bedrooms shall
have an additional capacity of at least 250 gallons per bedroom.
(2) All septic systems must have either a single tank with two
compartments or two tanks providing the required capacity. The
septic tank must be provided with a manhole frame and cover for
septic tank access on each compartment and installed at the
finished grade of the property. The manhole and frame must be
equivalent to Campbell Foundry Pattern No. 1302A and be
constructed with a bituminous seal where the casting meets the top
of the septic tank. The finished grading must divert surface water
away from the manhole cover, which shall be left exposed.
(3) There shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet between all water
wells and the disposal field.
§ 219-10 ANDOVER CODE § 219-10
219:764
(4) When reviewing plans for a repair or alteration of an existing septic
system, the Board of Health or its authorized agent may grant a
waiver from the strict application of the requirement as set forth in
Subsection C(1) and (2). The granting of this waiver would be
based upon the determination by the Board or its authorized agent
that, by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the Board or its authorized agent finds
that the strict application of Subsection C(1) and (2) of this section
would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of such property.
D. Piping. All piping shall conform to the standards set forth in the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey, 1978.
E. Percolation rates. All percolation rates shall conform to the standards
set forth in the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey,
1978.
F. Percolation tests. The quality of soil available as a percolation media for
the disposal of septic effluent shall be determined from the results of a
test as herein described:
(1) Percolation tests shall be performed at the site of each disposal
area. A minimum of two percolation tests shall be performed,
distributed over the proposed area of the disposal system.
(2) Percolation tests shall be performed as described in Subsection
F(5).
(3) Percolation tests shall not be made in test holes which have been
allowed to remain open to the atmosphere for periods over two
days or in frozen ground. Tests shall not be made in filled ground
unless the soil has been compacted or allowed to settle to the
satisfaction of the administrative authority.
(4) The percolation test hole shall be placed at the depth of the
proposed disposal system. In deep disposal systems, such as
seepage pits, the percolation test hole shall be located in each soil
stratum.
(5) Percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the
following procedure:
(a) Step 1: A test hole shall be dug to the depth intended in
Subsection F(4) with a hand auger or shovel producing a hole
having a diameter of 14 inches or 12 inches square.
(b) Step 2: Any smeared soil surfaces from the sides of the hole
shall be removed to provide as natural a soil interface as
practical to infiltrating waters. All loose material on the bottom
§ 219-10 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL § 219-10
219:765
of the hole shall be removed and a two-inch layer of fine gravel
shall be placed in the hole to prevent scouring of the bottom.
(c) Step 3: The hole shall be presoaked with clean water to allow
to drain. If the soil is known to have a low shrink-swell
potential, less than 15% clay content, proceed with Step 4. If
the soil has a high shrink-swell potential, a high clay content,
then the test hole should be kept wet for a period of 24 hours,
prior to proceeding with Step 4.
(d) Step 4: Determination of soil suitability. The percolation test
hole as prepared in Step 3 shall be equipped with a float gauge,
Figure 1.1. The hole shall be filled with clean water to exactly
six inches above the bottom of the hole. After a period of 30
minutes, the water level shall be measured. The hole shall be
refilled to a depth of six inches above the bottom and the
process repeated until four determinations have been made. If
the average percolation rate is less than one inch of water in 30
minutes, the soil is unsuitable for ground disposal.
(e) Step 5: Determination of percolation rate for design purposes.
The percolation test hole shall be equipped as prepared in Step
3 with a float gauge, Figure 1.1. The hole shall be filled with
clean water to exactly six inches above the bottom of the hole.
With the float gauge and timepiece, the time for the water to
recede one inch shall be determined. The tester shall refill and
repeat the procedure until successive time intervals needed for
one inch to be absorbed indicate that a stabilized rate has been
obtained. A minimum of two trials shall be recorded. The
stabilized percolation rate is recorded in minutes per inch.
(6) Reports shall be furnished to the administrative authority
indicating the results of each percolation test in minutes per inch,
the date of the test, effect of recent rain or lack of rain, the
apparent moisture of the soil prior to the test, the depth to
groundwater, if encountered, the number of preliminary tests made
to determine the suitability of the soil, the type or types of soil
encountered, together with the thickness of each layer and all
other factors affecting percolation.
(7) Subsoil and groundwater determinations. The suitability of the soil
mantle for a septic tank depends also upon the geological setting.
Information relative to the soil structures and groundwater
elevations adjacent to or below the proposed disposal area shall be
required.
(8) A soil profile of the proposed disposal area shall be determined by
excavating a hole with a backhoe as deeply as possible before rock
or groundwater is encountered to limit excavation. If a soil profile
deeper than the limits of a backhoe is required, a power auger may
be used.
§ 219-10 ANDOVER CODE § 219-10
219:766
(9) The depth of the soil profile shall be a minimum depth of 10 feet or
to solid rock when encountered within the foregoing depth
requirement. The data obtained from this soil profile will be the
basis of design of the disposal area.
(10) Reports of the type, depth and nature of the soils found, with the
soils classified according to the National Comprehensive System of
Soil Classifications system and depth to groundwater, shall be
made and furnished to the administrative authority. If soils
encountered are mottled, indicating seasonal groundwaters, the
depth and extent of the mottling shall be noted. The report shall
also state the climatic conditions of the six weeks prior to the
excavation of the soil log.
(11) Where rock is encountered within the depth as required in
Subsection F(9), the report shall state its kind and depth
encountered. If the rock is the type that is fractured or seamy, the
direction of the slope and approximate degree of slope shall also be
stated.
(12) Where groundwater is encountered within the depth as required in
Subsection F(9), the report shall state the depth at which the water
was encountered, whether flowing from the bottom of the
excavation or from the side in a water-bearing strata. Also the
administrative authority may request additional soil profiles at
other times of the year if a high groundwater table is suspected,
based on vegetative growth and knowledge of the area.
G. Design procedures.
§ 219-10 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL § 219-10
219:767
(1) The design procedures as described in this section shall pertain to
all types of individual disposal methods, leaching fields, seepage
pits, leaching trenches. The type of disposal system to be installed
shall be determined on the basis of location, topography, soil
permeability and groundwater elevation. The system shall consist
of a septic tank discharging its effluent to a suitable subsurface
disposal area as hereinbefore described, except as it may be
modified in accordance with Subsection A.
(2) All engineering designs for sewage disposal systems shall consider
the limitations for soil absorption systems specified in the latest
U.S.D.A. Soil Survey of Sussex County. Where the U.S.D.A. Soil
Survey designates the land to be used for sewage disposal as
having "severe limitations" for soil absorption systems, the
engineer shall provide a detailed justification, satisfactory to the
administrative authority or its authorized agent, of how the design
compensates for the limiting conditions.
(3) The design of the disposal areas shall be performed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of New
Jersey. All plans, test data and any other information requirements
shall be certified and sealed by the professional engineer designing
the system.
(4) A site plan shall be submitted by the owner or applicant prepared,
pursuant to Subsection G(3), prior to the issuance of a building
permit and the following shall be shown:
(a) Existing contours at ten-foot intervals covering an area 100
feet beyond the limits of any component part of the disposal
system.
(b) All wooded areas on the property.
(c) The location of wells on adjoining property.
(d) The location of septic systems on adjoining property.
(e) All storm drains as to size, type and location.
(f) Existing structures and structures on adjoining property.
(g) Location and description of benchmark to check disposal and
building installations.
(h) Proposed contours at ten-foot intervals.
(i) Proposed house location with first-floor elevations.
(j) Location of driveway.
(k) Location of retaining walls or terraces.
(l) Location of proposed well.
§ 219-10 ANDOVER CODE § 219-10
219:768
§ 219-11. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges are herewith established.
Chapter 223
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Zoning — See Ch. 190.
Plumbing — See Ch. 214.
Water supply — See Ch. 231.
§ 223-1. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter,
except when the context requires a different meaning, shall be defined as
follows:
CONSTRUCTION — Building or installing a new swimming pool or
enlarging an existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
(m) Location of all component parts of the sewage disposal system.
H. Design criteria. The design of the disposal areas shall be based on the
following: percolation tests shall be performed under the supervision of
the engineer, or his duly appointed representative, according to
Subsection F.
A. Locate and construct an individual sewage disposal system: as set forth
in Chapter 198, Fees.
B. Renewal of individual sewage disposal system: as set forth in Chapter
198, Fees.
C. Reapplication to locate and construct individual sewage disposal
system: as set forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
D. Alter an existing individual sewage disposal system: as set forth in
Chapter 198, Fees.
E. Renewal to alter an existing individual sewage disposal system: as set
forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
F. Reapplication to alter an existing individual sewage disposal system: as
set forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
G. Reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system: as set forth in
Chapter 198, Fees.
§ 219-10 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-1
223:769
NONPORTABLE POOL — Any above-surface pool in excess of 75 cubic
feet capacity considered stationary and not capable of being removed or
dismantled for storage.
PERMANENT BUILT-IN-GROUND POOL — Any pool in excess of 75 cubic
feet capacity considered to be constructed in such a manner as to require
the excavation of the ground.
PORTABLE POOL — Any above-surface type pool of more than 75 cubic feet
capacity, not stationary or fixed, and capable of being removed for storage.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool of water having a water depth in
excess of 12 inches and an area greater than 7.5 square feet, designed,
used and maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by
his household and guests without fees, and located on property owned,
leased or otherwise used and maintained by the owner of such swimming
pool; it shall further mean and include fill and draw, flow-through and
recirculation pools which are artificially constructed to provide recreational
facilities for swimming, bathing or wading, and all buildings, equipment and
appurtenances thereto. It shall not include natural outdoor ponds, rivers or
lakes, nor baths used for cleansing of the body or practice of the healing
arts.
WADING POOL — Any artificially constructed pool intended for use by
children, not designed or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 75
square feet and a maximum water depth of 12 inches.
§ 223-2. Installation of pools; requirements.
A. Construction and maintenance. All materials used in the construction of
swimming pools, wading pools, portable pools, nonportable or
permanent built-in-ground pools shall be waterproof and so designed
and constructed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning, and shall be
maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary
at any time when any such pool shall be in use or at such times as the
same shall be subject to use. Inlets of the treated water shall be so
located and spaced as to secure satisfactory dispersion of the water
throughout the pool and not to interfere with draining, cleaning and
disinfecting of the bottom and sides. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be
used.
B. Electrical connections. No person shall use any temporary electrical
connections in or about any swimming pool, portable pool or wading
pool. All electrical connections shall be of waterproof type and shall
bear the Underwriter's Laboratory seal of approval and shall be
effectively grounded. Underwater pool lighting fixtures must be
inspected and approved by the Electrical Underwriter's Inspection
Agency.
C. Water supply pipe, pump, filters and disinfecting equipment.
(1) There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply system and such swimming pools, wading
§ 223-1 ANDOVER CODE § 223-2
223:770
pools, or portable pools below the maximum water line of the
pool or to a recirculating or heating system of such pool. The
piping system shall be designed to circulate the pool water through
filtering equipment. All water used shall be potable and subject
to inspection by the Health Department of the Township. Potable
water shall feed the pool overflow level. Potable water siphons
shall not be permitted to drain the aforesaid pools. The installation,
repair, and control of the plumbing facilities shall comply with the
plumbing codes of the Township.92 All circulating units shall have
sufficient capacity to recirculate the entire contents of a pool within
24 hours or less. Any pool having capacity in excess of 750 gallons
shall have pumps, filters, and disinfecting equipment.
D. Discharge systems. All swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools
with a water depth of more than one foot, hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained within the Township, shall be
provided with the necessary equipment to completely pump out or
empty such pool, or shall be emptied by providing one drainage outlet,
to be installed at the lowest point of such pool not in excess of three
inches in diameter, extending from the pool to either a storm sewer
catch basin, lawn watering system, adequate dry well or sand filtering
pit on the premises on which such pool is located. The discharge of
water from such pools into a storm sewer shall be permitted only where
the capacity is adequate as determined by the Township Engineer. No
pool drain, wading pool drain, or portable pool drain shall be connected
into the sanitary sewer system. The discharge of such waters shall in no
case cause or create a nuisance to the abutting property, and the
discharge of waters, either directly or indirectly, upon the property of
others shall be deemed a nuisance under the terms of this chapter.
E. Fencing of pools.
(1) All swimming pools hereafter constructed, installed, established or
maintained shall be completely and continuously surrounded by a
permanent durable wall, fence or barrier which shall be no more
than six feet nor less than four feet in height above grade, and shall
be so constructed as to have no opening, mesh, hole, or gap larger
than two inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates;
provided that if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the
horizontal dimension of any gap or opening shall not exceed 2 1/2
inches. No fence of any kind or material shall be constructed or
maintained which shall contain projections of any kind at any point
on the outer surface of such fence. A dwelling house or accessory
building may be used as part of such enclosure. All gates used in
conjunction with any of the above-described enclosures shall
conform to the specifications required above as to height and
dimensions of openings, mesh, holes or gaps in the case of fences,
and all gates and doors shall be equipped with self-closing and self-
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 214, Plumbing.
§ 223-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-2
223:771
§ 223-3. Setbacks for private swimming pools.
§ 223-4. Pool safety and sanitation.
latching devices for keeping the gate or door securely closed at
all times when not in actual use. Gates and doors shall be locked
when the pool is not in use or is unguarded or unattended; provided
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the
construction of an additional wall, fence or barrier where, in lieu
thereof, the entire premises or a part thereof wherein the pool is
contained shall be fully enclosed by a wall, fence or barrier which
meets the specifications set forth herein.
(2) Every outdoor wading pool or portable pool shall be enclosed by a
durable wall, barrier or fence as described in the preceding
subsection, unless such outdoor wading pool or portable pool be:
(a) Emptied when not in use or unattended.
(b) Covered with a suitable, strong, protective covering fastened
or locked in place when not in use or locked in place when not
in use or unattended. A cover shall be considered to be of
sufficient strength and securely fastened or locked in place if,
when fastened or locked in place, it shall support a minimum
dead weight of 200 pounds.
(3) All pools considered as aboveground type having a height above
ground level of not less than four feet shall be exempt from
perimeter fencing only when the pool is provided with a retractable
or swing-up ladder or steps or having additional fencing above the
48 inches or four-foot minimum and be supplied with a gate and
lock to deny access when pool is not in use.
A. In-ground pools. All pools requiring excavation and having variable
depth shall be placed no less than 10 feet from the back property line
and no less than 10 feet from the side property line. In the case of
corner property, the front setback shall be no less than the minimum
setback for the principal structure of the zone in which it is, on both
streets. Pools shall be placed with the shallow end closest to the
foundation and a distance of no less than 10 feet. All in-ground pools
shall be placed a distance of no less than 10 feet from a septic tank, and
a distance of no less than 15 feet from a disposal field and a distance of
no less than 20 feet from a seepage pit. The front setback shall be no
less than the minimum setback for the principal structure of the zone in
which it is located.
B. Aboveground pools. Setbacks for this type of pool shall be the same as
in-ground pools.
A. General.
§ 223-2 ANDOVER CODE § 223-4
223:772
§ 223-5. Permit requirements; fees.
(1) Any nuisance which may exist or develop in, or in consequence of
or in connection with, any swimming pool shall be abated and/or
removed by the owners.
(2) Whenever any swimming pool, by reason or mechanical defects or
lack of supervision, is, in the opinion of the Board of Health,
polluted and detrimental to health, it shall be summarily closed.
(3) Owners or persons in possession of swimming pools shall allow the
Sanitary and Health Officer and the Building Inspector access to
inspect such pool and the appurtenances at any time it may be
required by the Board of Health.
(4) Any accessory building, such as locker rooms, toilets, runways, or
any other physical facility or equipment incident to the
maintenance and operation of any of the above described, shall be
in conformance with the rules and regulations of both the Board of
Health and the building codes of the Township.93
B. Disinfection of pools. All swimming pools, wading pools or portable
pools with a water depth of more than one foot shall be disinfected by
the use of disinfecting agents with disinfecting qualities equal to that
obtained from chlorine-bearing compounds. No water shall be used for
swimming purposes which, when tested, shall show coliforms contained
therein. For the purposes of this subsection, the use of disinfecting
agents approved by the National Swimming Pool Institute, or such
disinfecting agents as shall meet the same or higher standards, shall be
deemed compliance with this subsection.
C. Lighting, noise and nuisances.
(1) No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection
with the swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool in such a
manner as to be a nuisance or any annoyance to neighboring
properties. Such lighting shall not shine directly upon any abutting
property. No unshielded lights shall be permitted.
(2) No excessive noise or other nuisance which annoys or disturbs the
comfort of anyone on neighboring properties shall be permitted in
connection with the operation or maintenance of any swimming
pool, wading pool or portable pool.
A. Application requirements. Application for permits for the construction
and maintenance of any swimming pool or portable pool, as defined in
§ 223-1 hereof, shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner of
the property upon which it is to be constructed or by the contractor who
shall construct the same. The application shall be accompanied by
duplicate sets of plans, specifications and plot plan, and shall also show
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Building Construction.
§ 223-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-5
223:773
§ 223-6. Enforcement.
the location, height and type of all existing fencing or walks on the
boundary lines of the property together with the type and height of
fencing or enclosure as may be required by this chapter.
B. Fees. Applicants shall pay a fee to the construction official for a permit
to erect a swimming pool or portable pool, as defined in this chapter,
which permit fee shall be exclusive of the permit fee required for the
erection of any accessory structure or structures to be used in
connection with such swimming pool, and which shall be at the same
rate as is provided for other improvements in the Township.
(1) The following fees and charges are herewith established for all
pools classified as private, public or semipublic, regardless of
ownership:
(a) For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a
swimming pool, in accordance with § 30-10C.
(b) For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool, in
accordance with § 30-10C.
(2) No permit for a swimming pool or portable pool as defined in this
chapter shall be issued by the construction official until the plans,
specifications and plot plan have been approved.
(3) Portable pools that are dismantled at the end of the usable season
and erected prior to the swimming season shall pay the permit fee
only for the initial erection, provided that a signed affidavit is given
to the construction official indicating intent.
A. Compliance with building and zoning ordinances. The Board of Health
may cause any swimming pool, as defined in this chapter, to be
inspected for compliance with the building and zoning ordinance of the
Township.94
B. Compliance with Board of Health requirements. Every swimming pool,
wading pool or portable pool constructed, installed, established or
maintained in the Township shall at all times comply with the
requirements of the local Board of Health. Any nuisance or hazard to
health which may exist or develop in, or in consequence of or in
connection with, such swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool
shall be forthwith abated and removed by the owner, lessee or occupant
of the premises on which the pool is located upon receipt of notice from
the Board of Health of the Township.
C. Access to pools; inspecting officials. The Sanitary and Health Officer
and/or the Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The owner or operator of any pool within the Township shall
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Building Construction, and Ch. 190, Zoning.
§ 223-5 ANDOVER CODE § 223-6
223:774
§ 223-7. Closing of pools by Board of Health.
§ 223-8. Existing pools.
§ 223-9. Appeals.
In connection with all appeals under this section it shall be the duty of
the applicant to supply the Board of Health with sufficient information,
by way of surveys, specifications, and plot plans showing salient locations,
heights and types of all existing fencing, walkways, lighting and other
allow the Sanitary and Health Officer and/or the Building Inspector
access to any swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool and
appurtenances therein for the purpose of inspecting to ascertain
compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent Township
ordinances, at all reasonable times.
A. Water shortage. All pools supplied by a public or quasi-public water
supply system and not equipped with facilities for the recirculation and
reuse of the pool water shall be subject to closure by order of the Board
of Health during any period of emergency water shortage declared by a
duly authorized public official.
B. Pools constituting health hazard. Whenever any pool is a hazard to the
health of the public, the Sanitary and Health Officer shall be authorized
to summarily close such pool upon the failure of the owner, lessee or
occupant of the premises upon which such pool is located to take
satisfactory action to abate such hazard to the health of the public
within 24 hours after the receipt of the notice required by § 223-6
hereof, and keep such pool closed until no further hazard to the public
exists, subject to the right of appeal to the Board of Health by the owner
of such pool. Such appeal, however, shall not stay the action of the
Sanitary and Health Officer.
C. Abandoned pools. In the case of abandoned pools of any type and when
the Health Officer determines if such pool is a hazard he shall then
request the Mayor and Township Committee to take such necessary
action to have such pool drained or covered, or both, at the owner's
expense.
A. Change of use. An existing pool used for swimming or bathing or
accessory equipment or part thereof shall not be altered or converted
for any other use unless it shall comply with all provisions of this code
applicable to the use intended.
B. Continuation of existing use. Existing swimming pools may be
continued without change provided no unsafe or hazardous condition
exists as determined by the building official. The building official may
order safety changes on existing uses not in conformity with § 223-2E
and determined to be unsafe or hazardous.
§ 223-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-9
223:775
improvements where appropriate to the individual application, to assist the
Board of Health in ruling on all such applications.
§ 223-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction,
be subject to such penalties as provided by § 223-2. Each day a particular
violation continues may constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 227
SWINE, MAINTENANCE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 20.
§ 227-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; and declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a
part of it without inclusion of the text herein.95
§ 227-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey
(1957).”
§ 227-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 227-4. Permit required.
No person shall maintain more than 10 swine, as defined in the code, on
premises within the boundaries of the Township until a valid permit has
been issued by the Board of Health.
95.Editor's Note: Said code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 223-9 ANDOVER CODE § 227-5
227:776
§ 227-5. Denial and suspension of permits.
Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended by the
Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or code. The Board of
Health shall afford the person whose permit to maintain swine on premises
has been denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard in public hearing,
and following this to be informed of the Board's decision within two weeks.
§ 227-6. Permit fee.
The fee for a permit to maintain swine on premises shall be $25 for each 10
swine or portion thereof.
§ 227-7. Expiration of permits; renewal.
Permits issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on December 31 of each year and application for renewal shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to December 1 of each year.
Chapter 231
WATER SUPPLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 198.
§ 231-1. Establishment of code.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain permits,
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a
part of it without inclusion of the text herein.96
§ 231-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the “Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1966).”
§ 231-3. Copies of code on file.
Three copies of the Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1966) have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health for the
use and examination of the public.
96.Editor's Note: Said code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 227-5 WATER SUPPLY § 231-4
231:777
§ 231-4. Permit required.
§ 231-5. Certificate of compliance required.
New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings
or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely on
such a supply for water, until the Board of Health has issued a certificate
indicating that the water supply has been located and constructed in
compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of
the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for
alteration to an existing water supply.
§ 231-6. Denial of permit or certificate; hearing.
If any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the Board
of Health or its authorized agent, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
Board within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant. Upon
such hearing the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of
such hearing.
§ 231-7. Violations; stop-work order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any water
supply which is being erected or installed in violation of the code to be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such
violation, and thereafter the work continued without any violation of any of
the provisions of the code. After issuance of any such order and the service
of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in and about
the erection of any such water supply, or any part thereof, no further work
shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 231-8. Special regulations.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of the water supply
has been issued by the Board of Health.
B. The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issuance and may be
renewed once and shall be valid for one year from date of issuance upon
payment of a renewal fee. Failure of permittee to complete work within
one year of renewal shall require permittee to reapply for a new permit
and a permit fee shall be due and payable. For each reinspection of an
individual water supply system or part thereof, caused by the failure of
the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in accordance
with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the aforesaid code, a
reinspection fee shall be charged.
A. Pitless adapter installations. The only approved type of well pump and
supply line installation shall be the pitless adapter. Well pits shall not be
permitted to be used for individual water supply installations. In all
§ 231-4 ANDOVER CODE § 231-8
231:778
§ 231-9. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
Appendix
Chapter A234
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A234-1. Purpose of ordinance.
The Municipality hereby grants to the company its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highway, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the Municipality, poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
in the Municipality of a cable television system and cable communications
system. Construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior
approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
cases, where a pitless adapter is installed, the well casing shall
protrude a minimum of 12 inches above finished grade to prevent
contamination by surface flooding and reduce the possibility of other
surface contamination. Well caps or coverings shall be bonnet type, an
example of which are Harvard or Martinson brands, and are the type
preferred. Other makes may be approved by the Sanitary Inspector. All
well caps and coverings shall be vented as directed by the Sanitary
Inspector.
B. Wells. Every new water well installed in Andover Township shall have a
minimum of 50 feet of steel casing, six inches minimum diameter, or to
such depth greater than 50 feet until solid rock is encountered. In all
instances, wells for new construction shall be located 100 feet from any
individual sewage disposal device. In the case of existing structures,
such distance may be reduced, with administrative approval, to 50 feet
from any sewage disposal device.
A. Locate and construct a water supply system: as set forth in Chapter
198, Fees.
B. Alter an existing supply system: as set forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
C. Renewal of permit to locate and construct a water supply system: as set
forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
D. Reapplication for a new permit to locate and construct a water supply
system: as set forth in Chapter 198, Fees.
E. Reinspection of an individual water supply system: as set forth in
Chapter 198, Fees.
§ 231-8 WATER SUPPLY § A234-2
231:779
§ A234-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the
Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") Rules and Regulations, 47
C.F.R. Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act,
47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter
or conflict with federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and known as
Service Electric Cable TV of New Jersey, Inc.
MUNICIPALITY or TOWNSHIP — The Township of Andover, County of
Sussex, State of New Jersey.
§ A234-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held, after proper public notice, on December 14, 2009, pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Act. Said hearing, having been held and
fully open to the public, and the Municipality having received all comments
regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this consent, the
Municipality hereby finds that the company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial, and other qualifications, and that the
company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible.
§ A234-4. Grant of municipal consent.
The Township hereby grants to the company a nonexclusive consent to
the issuance of a franchise by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across,
above, over, and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways
and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and
additions thereto, in the Township of Andover, such poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and
fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Township of a
cable television system and cable communications system for the purpose
of distributing television and radio signals, and other electronic impulses in
order to furnish television and radio programs, and various communications
and other electronic services to the public. The rights so granted include
the right to use and occupy said highways, streets, alleys, public ways and
public places, and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth
and as provided by federal and state law, and are subject to the terms and
conditions herein.
§ A234-2 ANDOVER CODE § A234-5
231:780
§ A234-5. Duration of franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of expiration
of the previous certificate of approval as issued by the Board of Public
Utilities (BPU). The company further agrees to extend service to the entire
Township and to build out all uncabled areas of the Township in accordance
with the company's line extension and nonstandard installation policies.
§ A234-6. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the Municipality, or any amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or otherwise allowable by law.
§ A234-7. Rates.
Rates shall be set by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities as required
by law or as otherwise specified by federal or state law, to the extent
applicable.
§ A234-8. Township remedies.
§ A234-9. Applicability.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Municipality, and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A234-10. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any persons, residents
or business in conformance with its tariff on file with the Office of Cable
Television, including any policies for line extension and/or nonstandard
installations.
A. In the event the company breaches its responsibilities herein, the
Township reserves the right to seek redress administratively through
the Board of Public Utilities, or at law in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. The company will restore any property damaged by the installation of
its wires or facilities to its original condition at its own cost and
expense. In the event it fails to so restore said property upon the receipt
of 30 days' written notice by the Township to do so, the Township may
withdraw a portion of the performance bond posted with the Township
to compensate the owner for the restoration cost. In the event said
funds are withdrawn, the company shall restore the balance of the
$25,000 performance bond upon 30 days' written notice by the
Township to do so.
§ A234-5 WATER SUPPLY § A234-11
231:781
§ A234-11. Construction requirements.
§ A234-12. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office in Sussex County for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment, malfunctions, and similar matters. Such local
business office shall be staffed from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday for customer service inquiries, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Monday
through Friday for technical support, and from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. on
Saturday.
§ A234-13. Municipal complaint officer.
§ A234-14. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give a bond to the
Municipality, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, streets, surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed to as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its
facilities to allow for the moving of buildings and machinery, or in other
similar circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party
requesting such action, except when required by the Municipality, in
which case the company shall bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Municipality, so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
A. The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint
officer for the Municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5a-26(b).
B. All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
§ A234-11 ANDOVER CODE § A234-14
231:782
be to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as
represented in its application and incorporated herein.
§ A234-15. Local programming and public educational and
governmental access.
The company shall provide public, educational, and governmental (PEG)
access channels and facilities in accordance with its application for renewal
of municipal consent.
§ A234-16. Free services.
A. The company shall provide services in accordance with its tariff for
cable television service approved by the Board of Public Utilities on
January 1, 2010.
B. In addition, the company shall provide cable television services free of
charge to the following facilities located in the Township:
(1) The Township Municipal Building.
(2) The Township Fire Department.
(3) The Township Police Department.
(4) Each Township school and its corresponding library.
C. Free cable television services shall also be provided to the Township
Senior Center, pending the issuance of all requisite permit approvals
and the necessary cable build-out of the location in question. The
Township understands that the company has agreed to a build-out of
the area and that free services shall be provided to the Township Senior
Center only upon the completion of all required construction.
D. The company shall also provide the following additional services to the
Township:
(1) Although the company does not donate/provide video equipment
nor allow its video equipment to be personally used by the
Township, the company shall, upon reasonable notice, videotape
any such events that the Township deems necessary, in return for a
reasonable fee, if any.
(2) The company shall also allow the Township to utilize its public
access channel for any and all nonprofit public announcements
and/or messages. The Township is to provide the company with
such announcements and/or messages, and the company will, upon
reasonable notice, post the announcements and/or messages on the
company's public access channel.
§ A234-14 WATER SUPPLY § A234-17
231:783
§ A234-17. Programming.
Although nothing herein shall require the company to carry or transmit
any particular television stations or programming source, the company
shall provide the subscribers in the Township with at least the same broad
categories of programming, in approximately the same quantity, as are now
provided and which appear in the application for municipal consent.
§ A234-18. Liability insurance.
§ A234-19. Filing with Township Engineer.
The company shall cause all construction plans relating to work on any
extensions of its plant, or work which could have significant impact on
public works within the Township, to be filed with the Township Engineer's
office.
§ A234-20. Prohibited activities.
The company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception or persons not served by the company, nor shall the
system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of
the various utilities serving the residents of the Township.
§ A234-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference, as long as it does not conflict with state or federal law.
§ A234-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court,
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
A. The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect, at its
sole expense, at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient
liability insurance naming the Municipality as an insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand, in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury or death to one person and $500,000 for property damage
resulting from any one accident.
B. The contractor building the cable television lines shall file a worker's
compensation certificate of insurance with the Township Clerk prior to
commencing the work.
§ A234-17 ANDOVER CODE § A234-22
231:784
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A234-23. Consistency with future federal and state statutes,
regulations, rules and orders.
Should any of the federal or state acts, regulations, or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of cable television service be modified in any
way, such modification, to the extent it embodies required terms and
conditions, and meaningfully can be incorporated into this ordinance, shall
be so incorporated, consistent with any applicable effective dates specified
in such modification. To the extent that any such modification(s) place(s)
limits on permissible terms and conditions, and any provision of this
ordinance becomes invalid by virtue of such modification(s), the preceding
section, § A234-22, shall apply.
§ A234-24. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter A235
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A234. Water franchise — See Ch. A236.
§ A235-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance the following terms shall mean:
LOCATE FACILITIES — To erect, construct, reconstruct, remove, lay,
inspect, maintain, repair, replace and operate telephone and
telecommunication facilities.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Any and all of the land dedicated to the interest and
use of the public in this Township of Andover, including all of the various
sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues, highways, bridges and waterways,
throughout their entire length and parts thereof.
STREETS — Any and all of the streets, roads, avenues and highways, and
parts thereof, in the Township of Andover.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES — Communications facilities and
other transmission or processing equipment used by United Telephone for
its local and through lines and systems in connection with the provision of
telephone and telecommunication services, including poles, posts, supports,
guys, wires, cables, antennae, pedestals, cable termination and distribution
cabinets, and underground facilities including conduits and subways,
§ A234-22 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A235-1
A235:785
manholes, loading coil vaults, loading coils, and all other equipment,
fixtures and appurtenances.
TOWNSHIP — Any form of municipality or government into which the
Township of Andover, or any part thereof, may at any time hereafter be
changed, annexed or merged, and the term "Township Committee" or any
other term used to refer to the governing body of this Township shall be
held to apply to and include the governing body of such other form of
municipality.
UNITED TELEPHONE — United Telephone Company of New Jersey, Inc.,
a corporation of the State of New Jersey doing business as Sprint, its
predecessors, successors and/or assigns
§ A235-2. Grant of permission and consent.
Permission and consent is hereby granted to United Telephone to provide
telephone and telecommunication services and to locate its
telecommunications facilities, including the necessary street openings and
lateral connections to curb poles and property lines, in, through, upon,
along, over, under and across all of the rights-of-way throughout their entire
length and parts thereof, in this Township, and all of the various rights-ofway
throughout their entire length and parts thereof are hereby designated
and prescribed for those uses and purposes. United Telephone shall not
place any poles, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities in such as a manner
as to obstruct the use of the Township's sidewalks or streets.
§ A235-3. Placement of telecommunication facilities in relation to
curblines.
§ A235-4. Placement of telecommunication facilities underground.
A. All telecommunication facilities hereafter located within said rights-ofway
shall be placed in back of and within 18 inches of the curb lines
where shown on the official maps of this Township, in addition to the
places now occupied by United Telephone's facilities, and at other
convenient or necessary places upon the streets adjacent to such curb
lines.
B. Where curb lines have not yet been established, or where an
established curb line is relocated in order to widen an existing street or
highway, upon receipt of notice from the Township Clerk that the new
curb line has been so established United Telephone shall change the
location of its poles at its own expense so that the same shall be in back
of and adjacent to the new curb line and within 18 inches thereof.
A. United Telephone may locate telecommunications facilities
underground in the rights-of-way.
B. With the exception of lateral branches to curb poles and property lines,
the underground conduits and facilities shall be placed below the
surface of the rights-of-way and parts thereof, and said conduits
§ A235-1 ANDOVER CODE § A235-4
A235:786
§ A235-5. Township approval and permits required.
§ A235-6. Restoration of area to original condition.
The surface of the sidewalks and streets, and any pavement or other surface
or planting disturbed by United Telephone in locating its telecommunication
facilities shall be restored to as good condition as it was before the
commencement of the work, and no right-of-way shall be encumbered for a
longer period than shall be necessary to execute the work.
§ A235-7. Township not obligated to open or accept any street.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to impose an
obligation on the part of this Township to open any street not heretofore
dedicated or opened to the public use, and nothing herein shall be
construed as an acceptance by the Township of any unaccepted street or
any part thereof.
§ A235-8. Township responsibility when vacating a right-of-way.
In the event that the Township vacates any public right-of-way that has
United Telephone's facilities on, over, under or above it, the municipality
generally shall not be constructed more than 10 feet from the curb lines
unless obstructions make it necessary to deviate from such course.
All underground conduits shall be placed at least 18 inches below the
surface.
C. All manholes and loading coil vaults shall be located beneath the
surface of the rights-of-way, and parts thereof, at such points along the
line of the underground facilities as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining and operating the cables and other electrical
conductors which United Telephone may from time to time place in said
underground facilities, and shall be so constructed as to conform to the
cross-sectional and longitudinal grade of the pavement and so as not to
interfere with the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles traveling
on or over the right-of-way.
A. Before proceeding with any new construction to locate
telecommunication facilities pursuant to this ordinance, United shall
file with the Township a map or plan showing the location and size of
any such proposed pole(s) or underground facilities, to be approved by
the Township or its authorized representative before any such work is
begun. Such maps or plans are for the Township's information only and
shall not be considered as construction specifications upon which
subsequent construction or excavation may proceed either by the
municipality or a third party.
B. Prior to the opening or excavation of any street, United Telephone must
first obtain, and pay a reasonable fee for, such street opening or
excavation permits as may be required by local ordinances.
§ A235-4 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A235-8
A235:787
agrees to reserve unto United Telephone the rights granted by this
ordinance.
§ A235-9. Joint use of facilities.
United Telephone or any other companies or corporations having legal
authority to erect and maintain facilities within the Township's rights-of-way
may now and hereafter jointly use facilities for all lawful purposes, provided
that United Telephone consents to such use upon terms and conditions
that it accepts and that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ A235-10. Space provided to Township.
A. As long as this ordinance continues in effect and the poles are occupied
by the company, United Telephone shall provide, free of charge to this
Township, space on its poles for the Township to place one crossarm or,
in lieu thereof, two pins on a crossarm of United (to be designated by it),
and space in its main underground facilities (not exceeding one clear
duct of standard size) to accommodate the wires or electrical
conductors required for signal control in connection with its police
patrol, fire alarm telegraph signal systems and traffic signal control
systems. This does not include circuits for the supply of electrical
energy for the traffic control or other signals. This also does not include
facilities to provide a means of transmitting any signal to a private,
commercial or nongovernmental location which is usually provided by a
nongovernmental supplier.
B. The use or attachment by the municipality shall be installed, used or
maintained in such manner that it does not interfere with the facilities
or use of United Telephone, and all costs or expenses incurred in
connection therewith shall be paid by the Township.
C. The Township shall give United Telephone 30 days' notice, in writing,
before proceeding, either itself or on the part of a person, firm or
corporation engaged to perform such work, with the attachment of its
said crossarms and/or wires to the poles, or the placing of its electrical
conductors in United Telephone's main subways or manholes, in order
that the work may be performed under the supervision of United
Telephone.
D. If any or all of the said streets or highways are later taken over by the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Sussex, or the State
Highway Department, then the Board of Chosen Freeholders or the
State Highway Department may use the same clear duct of standard
size referred to for their respective police patrol, fire alarm telegraph
and traffic signal control systems in conjunction with the Township's
use thereof for similar purposes, but only after making such satisfactory
arrangements as may be necessary with the Township and United
Telephone for the full protection of each other's interests.
§ A235-8 ANDOVER CODE § A235-11
A235:788
§ A235-11. Indemnification and hold harmless agreement.
§ A235-12. Duration of consent and obligations of parties.
§ A235-13. Scope of consent.
§ A235-14. United Telephone to pay advertising costs.
United Telephone shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising done
in connection with the passage of this ordinance within 30 days after its
effective date.
A. The Township shall indemnify and save United Telephone harmless
from all claims or suits for damages arising from the attachment or use
of its poles or other facilities, or the location in its main subways of any
crossarms, wires or electrical conductors used by this Township
pursuant to § A235-10 above.
B. United Telephone agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township
of Andover, its officers, agents and employees from and against all
claims, liabilities, costs or expenses arising from any loss of life or
property, or injury to any property or person or entity, caused by or
arising out of conditions in the public right-of-way resulting from any
excavation or installation in connection with the work and/or equipment
of United Telephone. This indemnification/save harmless provision shall
not apply when the loss, injury or damage is attributable to the fault,
failure or negligence of the Township. If such loss, injury or damage is
caused by the joint and concurring fault, failure or negligence of the
Township and United Telephone, the same shall be borne by the parties
to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
A. The permission and consent given by this ordinance shall continue for a
period of 20 years from the date of its approval by the Board of Public
Utilities, subject to the right of United Telephone to seek such changes
from time to time as it may necessary and reasonable.
B. Throughout the full time that this ordinance is in effect, United
Telephone shall furnish safe, adequate and proper service within this
Township, at just and reasonable rates, and keep and maintain its
property and equipment in such condition as to enable it to do so.
A. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be construed to grant United
Telephone an exclusive right, or to prevent the granting of permission
and consent to other companies, to use the rights-of-way to of this
Township for like purposes.
B. The permission and consent granted by this ordinance shall apply to
and cover the telecommunication facilities heretofore and hereafter
located in the Township by United Telephone.
§ A235-11 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A235-15
A235:789
§ A235-15. Acceptance by United Telephone.
United Telephone shall file its written acceptance of this ordinance with
the Township Clerk of this Township within 30 days after receipt of notice
from the Township Clerk of its final passage, and said ordinance shall, upon
publication and the filing of such acceptance, become effective, subject to
approval by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New
Jersey.
Chapter A236
WATER FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A234. Telephone franchise — See Ch. A235.
§ A236-1. Consent for water supply system.
Municipal consent is hereby granted to United Water New Jersey
(hereinafter the “Water Company") for the construction, operation and
maintenance of a public utility to provide water supply service within the
franchise area defined in § A236-2A of this ordinance. This consent shall
entitle the Water Company to own, construct, operate, and maintain a
water supply system, including facilities such as wells, mains, storage tanks,
service pipes, hydrants, valves and other appurtenances within the
franchise area, subject to such additional approvals, endorsements or
consents as the law may require.
§ A236-2. Franchise area.
§ A236-3. Duration of franchise.
The consent granted pursuant to § A236-1 shall be for a period of 50 years
from the date of final adoption of this ordinance. The Mayor and Clerk of the
Township of Andover (hereinafter "the Township") are hereby authorized to
execute on behalf of the Township, all documents required to acknowledge
said consent.
A. The franchise area for the consent granted in § A236-1 to the Water
Company is further described in Schedule A attached hereto.97
B. In addition to the parcels set forth in Schedule A, this consent shall
include any properties presently serviced by the existing water system
being acquired by the Water Company, but which cannot be identified at
this time.
97.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ A235-15 ANDOVER CODE § A236-4
A236:790
§ A236-4. Installation of pipes and mains; restoration of streets.
Municipal consent and authority are also hereby granted to the Water
Company to lay its mains (pipes) beneath such public roads, streets and
places within the franchise areas as it may deem necessary for its corporate
purposes, free from all charge to be made by any person or body politic
whatsoever for such privilege, provided that the mains (pipes) shall be laid
at least three feet below the surface and shall not unnecessarily obstruct
or interfere with the public travel or damage public or private property.
Nothing herein shall require removal or replacement of existing mains. For
all new installations, the consent of the public body charged with the repair
and maintenance of such roads, streets and places shall first be obtained.
The Water Company shall be required to restore such public roads, streets
and places as nearly as practicable to the condition they were in prior to the
installation of mains by it.
§ A236-5. Compliance with all applicable laws and permits required.
The Water Company, as the case may be, in the construction, installation,
maintenance and operation of the water supply system shall comply with
all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, rules, regulations and
ordinances and shall obtain all necessary approvals, permits and licenses
from all federal, state and local agencies having jurisdiction over any aspect
of the water supply system.
§ A236-6. Liability insurance.
The Water Company shall indemnify and hold the Township harmless from
and against any and all claims, losses, or damages of any type, arising out
of the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of the water
supply system or any part of its component parts. The Water Company shall
maintain liability insurance with respect to the construction, installation,
maintenance and operation of its water supply system so as to provide
coverage in amounts not less than $2,000,000 or such other amounts as the
Township may from time to time require, and shall name the Township as
an additional insured on such policies. The Water Company shall provide to
the Township certificates of such insurance on an annual basis showing the
Township as an additional insured.
§ A236-7. Applicability to annexed territory.
To the extent now or hereafter permitted by the statutes or laws of the State
of New Jersey, this ordinance shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding
upon, any city, village or other municipal corporation to which the franchise
area presently within the Township of Andover may hereafter be attached
or annexed, or into which it may be incorporated.
§ A236-4 WATER FRANCHISE § A236-8
A236:791
§ A236-8. Written acceptance by company required.
Within 30 days after receiving notice of the approval of this ordinance, the
terms of this ordinance shall be accepted by the Water Company by filing
with the Township Clerk, a written acceptance thereof.
§ A236-9. Severability.
To the extent that any part or parts of this ordinance are repealed or
otherwise modified or voided by state statute or case law, the remaining
sections of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A236-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage, approval and
publication as required by law.
Chapter A237
WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL
SYSTEM FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
219.
Water franchise — See Ch. A236.
§ A237-1. Consent granted.
Municipal consent is hereby granted to Applied Wastewater Management,
Inc. (hereinafter, "AWM"), for the operation and maintenance of a public
utility to provide a sewerage collection, treatment and disposal service
and potable water production, storage and distribution services to those
lands encompassed within an area more completely defined in § A237-2
of this ordinance. This consent shall entitle AWM to own, operate and
maintain a sewerage collection, treatment and disposal system, including
but not limited to facilities such as collection mains, treatment plants,
driveways, recharge fields, water reuse facilities and other appurtenances
and equipment in order to provide sewer service to the franchise area; and
a potable water production, storage and distribution system, including but
not limited to wells, pumps, treatment facilities, pipes, valves, distribution
mains, water storage tanks and other appurtenances and equipment in
order to provide potable water service to the franchise area; and subject
to such additional approvals, endorsements or consents as the law may
require.
§ A237-2. Franchise area.
§ A236-8 ANDOVER CODE § A237-2
A237:792
§ A237-3. Term of franchise.
The consent granted pursuant to § A237-1 shall be for a period of 50 years
from the final adoption of this ordinance. The Mayor and Clerk of the
Township of Andover are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the
Township all documents required to acknowledge said consent. Hereafter,
the Township of Andover is referred to as "the Township."
§ A237-4. Installation of mains; street restoration.
Municipal consent and authority is also hereby granted to AWM to lay
their mains (pipes), valves, pumps, manholes and other equipment beneath
such public roads, streets, private roads or streets and places as may be
deemed necessary for their corporate purpose, free from all charge to be
made by any person or body politic whatsoever for such privilege, provided
that the mains (pipes) shall be laid below the surface in accordance with
plans approved by the Township and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or
interfere with the public travel or damaged public or private property. All
such property shall be restored in a workmanlike manner to the condition
A. The franchise for the consent granted in § A237-1 of this ordinance
consists of the lands known and designated as:
Block Lot
73 4.02
72.04 1.03
105 12.01, 11
105 6.01
108 1.01
108 1.02
105.06 6.04
108 7
109 6, 7
110 1.01
110 6, 7
111 20
B. The foregoing designated blocks and lots are further graphically
represented as areas "?", "°" "±", “"” and "=" on the attached Schedule
A.98 In addition to, and not in limitation of, the provisions of § A237-4 of
this ordinance, AWM shall have the right to lay, maintain and operate
such mains, pipes, pumps, valves and other appurtenances as are
needed to provide service to Block 73, Lot 4.02, which is not contiguous
to the other lands within the service area described herein.
98.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Township offices.
§ A237-2 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § A237-4
A237:793
said property was in prior to the installation of said pipes. Except in the
event of an emergency, the consent of the public or private body charged
with repair and maintenance of such roads, streets and places shall be first
obtained in writing, and such fees as are generally charged by the Township
for any such permits are paid. AWM shall be required to restore such public
roads, streets or private roads or streets and the places to the conditions
they were in prior to the installation of mains, valves, pumps and other
equipment by AWM.
§ A237-5. Compliance with applicable laws and permits.
AWM, in the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of both
its sewerage treatment and collection system, and its potable water
production, storage and distribution system, shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances and
shall obtain all necessary approvals, permits and licenses from all federal,
state and local agencies having jurisdiction over any aspect of the sewerage
collection and treatment system. Upon expiration of the franchise term
granted herein, should the franchise consent not be renewed or extended
for any reason, AWM shall continue to provide service at its then current
rates until such time, if any, as all required regulatory approvals for
termination of service are received.
§ A237-6. Insurance.
§ A237-7. Successors and assigns.
All provisions of this ordinance, which are obligatory upon or shall inure
to the benefit of AWM shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the
benefit of all successors and assigns of AWM.
§ A237-8. Applicability to annexed territory.
To the extent now or hereafter permitted by the statutes or laws of the State
of New Jersey, this ordinance shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding
upon, any city, town, or other municipal corporation to which the franchise
A. AWM shall maintain general liability insurance (or a combination of
general liability and excess liability insurance) in effect with coverage
of no less than $5,000,000 and provide certificates in standard format
to the Township showing such coverage at least annually. The Township
shall be named as an additional insured on the certificate(s), which
shall also provide for no less than 20 days' notice of cancellation to the
Township.
B. Further, AWM shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township from
and against any and all claims, losses or damages of any type arising
out of the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of the
sewerage collection and treatment system or the potable water or any
of its component parts.
§ A237-4 ANDOVER CODE § A237-8
A237:794
area of the Township of Andover may hereafter be attached or annexed, or
into which it may be incorporated.
§ A237-9. Severability.
To the extent that any part or parts of this ordinance are repealed or
otherwise modified or voided by state statute, case law or regulatory action,
the remaining sections of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
§ A237-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and approval and
publication as required by law.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-14 8-27-2003 Salaries NCM
2003-15 8-27-2003 Bond NCM
2003-16 10-8-2003 Street acceptance NCM
2003-17 Hotel and motel room
occupancy tax
Not adopted
2003-18 11-12-2003 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
2004-1 2-11-2004 Street acceptances NCM
2004-2 2-11-2004 Transfer of assets NCM
2004-3 2-25-2004 Deed of drainage
easement acceptance
NCM
2004-4 2-25-2004 State uniform construction
code amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-10
2004-5 Police Department
amendment
Not adopted
2004-6 4-14-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
BH-04-1 4-21-04 Individual sewage disposal
systems amendment
Ch. 219
BH-04-2 4-21-04 Fees amendment Ch. 198
§ A237-8 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:795
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-7 5-12-2004 Salaries NCM
2004-8 6-9-2004 Bond NCM
2004-9 Fire prevention
amendment
Not adopted
2004-10 6-23-2004 Capital improvement NCM
2004-11 Recreation and open space
amendment
Not adopted
2004-12 8-18-2004 Capital improvement
(recreation fields)
NCM
2004-13 9-8-2004 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
2004-14 9-8-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
2004-15 10-13-2004 Wastewater collection,
treatment and disposal
system franchise
Ch. A237
2004-16 9-8-2004 Recreation field
improvements
NCM
2004-17 9-8-2004 Salaries NCM
2004-18 10-27-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
2004-19 12-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2005-1 2-9-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2005-2 2-23-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2005-3 2-23-2005 Acceptance of deed
dedication
NCM
2005-4 2-23-2005 Fire prevention: code
adoption and
administration amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
2005-5 2-23-2005 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2005-6 4-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2005-7 4-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2005-8 3-23-2005 Salaries NCM
2005-9 4-13-2005 Exceed budget; establish
CAP bank
NCM
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:796
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-10 4-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2005-11 4-27-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 103
2005-12 6-8-2005 Street acceptance and
dedication
NCM
2005-13 5-25-2005 Building construction:
State Uniform
Construction Code
requirements amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-10
2005-14 5-25-2005 Soil erosion amendment Ch. 136
2005-15 6-22-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2005-16 7-27-2005 Public Records Ch. 125
2005-17 7-27-2005 Bond NCM
2005-18 8-24-2005 Salaries NCM
2005-19 9-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2005-20 9-28-2005 Salary amendment NCM
2005-21 10-26-2005 Bond NCM
2005-22 10-26-2005 Storm sewer system: illicit
connections
Ch. 148, Art. I
2005-23 10-26-2005 Storm sewer system:
improper disposal of waste
Ch. 148, Art. II
2005-24 10-26-2005 Animals: wildlife feeding Ch. 20, Art. II
2005-25 11-30-2005 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2006-1 2-13-2006 Taxicabs, autocabs and
limousines
Ch. 163
2006-2 2-13-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-3 2-13-2006 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 175
2006-4 2-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2006-5 2-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2006-6 Not adopted
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:797
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-7 2-28-2006 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision of
land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 131; 159; 190
2006-8 3-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2006-9 3-13-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-10 4-10-2006 Cap ordinance NCM
2006-11 4-25-2006 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 103
2006-12 5-8-2006 Land use procedures
amendment; subdivision of
land amendment
Chs. 74; 159
2006-13 6-12-2006 Bond NCM
2006-14 5-23-2006 Zoning amendment
(Municipal Housing
Liaison)
Ch. 199
2006-15 6-27-2006 Removal of snow and ice
from dedicated but not
accepted streets
Ch. 155, Art. VI
2006-16 Not adopted
2006-17 7-24-2006 Stormwater management Ch. 150
2006-18 6-27-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-19 7-24-2006 Bond NCM
2006-20 7-24-2006 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 74
2006-21 8-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2006-22 9-26-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2006-23 9-26-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2006-24 Not adopted
2006-25 11-28-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2006-26 12-11-2006 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 112
2006-27 12-11-2006 Bond NCM
2006-28 12-28-2006 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:798
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-29 12-28-2006 Administration of
government amendment
(Open Space, Recreation
and Farmland and Historic
Preservation Committee)
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2018-04
2007-1 2-26-2007 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2007-2 2-26-2007 Fire prevention: code
adoption and
administration amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
2007-3 3-12-2007 Exceed budget and
establish Cap bank
NCM
2007-4 3-26-2007 Capital improvement
(recreation areas)
NCM
2007-5 6-12-2006 Bond NCM
2007-6 5-14-2007 Capital improvement
amendment (recreation
areas)
NCM
2007-7 5-29-2007 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision of
land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 131; 159; 190
2007-8 6-11-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2007-9 6-11-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-10 6-11-2007 Building construction:
State Uniform
Construction Code
requirements amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-10
2007-11 7-23-2007 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 74
2007-12 6-25-2007 Easement acceptance NCM
2007-13 8-13-2007 Bond NCM
2007-14 8-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2007-15 9-10-2007 Littering amendment Ch. 82
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:799
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-16 9-10-2007 Violations and penalties
amendment
Chs. 1; 7; 20; 24;
55; 82; 144
(repealed by Ord.
No. 2009-31); 150;
155; 159; 190
2007-17 12-10-2007 Hotel and motel
occupancy tax
Ch. 66
2007-18 12-10-2007 Bond NCM
2007-19 12-10-2007 Lease agreement NCM
2008-01 1-17-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-02 2-11-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-03 2-25-2008 Building construction:
State Uniform
Construction Code
requirements amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2011-10
2008-04 4-14-2008 Animals: regulations
amendment, wildlife
feeding amendment
Ch. 20, Arts. I and
II
2008-05 4-28-2008 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision of
land amendment
Chs. 131; 159
2008-06 4-28-2008 Abandoned property Ch. 122
2008-07 4-14-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2008-08 5-12-2008 Bond NCM
2008-09 4-28-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-10 6-9-2008 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 103
2008-11 6-23-2008 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 26
2008-12 Not adopted
2008-13 8-25-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
2008-14 Not adopted
2008-15 9-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2008-16 10-13-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 127, Art. I
2008-17 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:800
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-18 10-27-2008 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
2009-01 2-9-2009 Salaries NCM
2009-02 2-9-2009 Public records amendment Ch. 125
2009-03 3-23-2009 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 74
2009-04 3-9-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-05 3-9-2009 Bond amendment NCM
2009-06 Not adopted
2009-07 3-23-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2009-08 Street vacation Tabled
2009-09 3-23-2009 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 167
2009-10 4-13-2009 Driveways Ch. 45
2009-11 4-13-2009 Fees amendment Chs. 74; 136; 140;
155, Art. I; 159;
190
2009-12 3-23-2009 Street improvement NCM
2009-13 4-13-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2009-14 4-27-2009 Bond NCM
2009-15 5-11-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-16 5-11-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-17 5-11-2009 Storm sewer system:
refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 148, Art. IV
2009-18 5-11-2009 Storm sewer system:
retrofitting of private
storm drain inlets
Ch. 148, Art. III
2009-19 6-8-2009 Capital budget
amendment (various park
improvements)
NCM
2009-20 6-8-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2009-21 6-8-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3, footnote
only
2009-22 6-8-2009 Street vacation NCM
2009-23 6-22-2009 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:801
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-24 6-22-2009 Acceptance of deed of
dedication for open space
NCM
2009-25 6-22-2009 Acceptance of deed of
dedication for roadway
purposes
NCM
2009-26 7-13-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-27 Not introduced
2009-28 6-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2009-29 Not introduced
2009-30 Not introduced
2009-31 8-10-2009 Solid waste: recycling Ch. 144, Art. I
2009-32 9-28-2009 Loitering repealer Ch. 86, reference
only
2009-33 9-28-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 107
2009-34 10-26-2009 Soil erosion amendment Ch. 136
2009-35 12-14-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2010-01 2-8-2010 Salaries NCM
2010-02 2-22-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2010-03 3-29-2010 Animal regulations
amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I
2010-04 4-26-2010 Bond NCM
2010-05 4-26-2010 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 131; 190
2010-06 6-14-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2010-07 5-10-2010 Bond NCM
2010-08 6-14-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2010-09 9-13-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 96
2010-10 11-29-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2010-11 10-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2010-12 11-8-2010 Cable television franchise Ch. A234
2011-01 4-25-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2011-02 4-25-2011 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:802
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-03 5-9-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-04 5-9-2011 Authorization for
improvements
NCM
2011-05 5-23-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2011-06 6-13-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2011-07 6-27-2011 Fire prevention:
administration and
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Code
amendment
Ch. 51, Art. III
2011-08 7-11-2011 Fire prevention: Code
adoption and
administration
amendment;
administration and
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Code
amendment
Ch. 51, Arts. I and
III
2011-09 7-11-2011 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 55
2011-10 8-8-2011 Building construction Ch. 30
2011-11 9-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2011-12 12-12-2011 Salaries NCM
2011-13 1-23-2012 Fire prevention: Fire
Department amendment
Ch. 51, Art. II
2012-01 2-13-2012 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 63
2012-02 3-12-2012 Property maintenance Ch. 68
2012-03 3-26-2012 Software purchase NCM
2012-04 5-14-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-05 5-14-2012 Sewer flusher purchase NCM
2012-06 5-14-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2012-07 6-11-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-08 Not introduced
2012-09 9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:803
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-10 10-22-2012 Land use procedures
amendment; site plan
review amendment
Chs. 74; 131
2012-11 11-26-2012 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 115
2012-12 12-10-2012 Equipment purchase NCM
2013-01 2-11-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-02 2-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2013-03 4-8-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3013-04 6-24-2013 Purchase of FTR recording
system
NCM
2013-05 6-24-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2013-06 7-22-2013 Radio system upgrade NCM
2013-07 8-26-2013 Replacement of 911
telephone recording
system
NCM
2013-08 8-26-2013 Replacement of Police
Department weapons and
accessories
NCM
2013-09 8-26-2013 Purchase of dump truck
for DPW
NCM
2013-10 8-26-2013 Road improvements NCM
2013-11 9-9-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
2013-12 10-28-2013 Road improvements
funding amendment
NCM
2013-13 10-28-2013 Purchase of bucket
attachment for DPW
NCM
2013-14 11-25-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2013-15 12-9-2013 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 103
2014-01 2-10-2014 Salaries NCM
2014-02 3-10-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-03 6-23-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2014-04 4-28-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2014-05 6-23-2014 Demolition of unsafe
structure
NCM
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:804
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-06 7-28-2014 Purchase of dump truck
for DPW
NCM
2014-07 7-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2014-08 8-25-2014 Purchase of Police
Department and court
equipment
NCM
2014-09 11-10-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2014-10 11-24-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2014-11 12-22-2014 Purchase of court
furnishings
NCM
2015-01 2-9-2015 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 119
2015-02 2-23-2015 Bond NCM
2015-03 2-23-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow and ice
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. V
2015-04 3-9-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2015-05 4-13-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-06 4-13-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-07 4-27-2015 Special assessment for
Forest Lakes Dam
Rehabilitation Project
NCM
2015-08 6-8-2015 Purchase of asphalt roller NCM
2015-09 7-13-2015 Purchase of dump truck NCM
2015-10 7-13-2015 Retail food establishments:
sidewalk cafes
Ch. 59, Art. III
2015-11 8-10-2015 Funding for the cost of
rechassis of the 2003
Ford/Horton ambulance
NCM
2015-12 9-28-2015 Purchase of natural gas
generators
NCM
2015-13 10-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2015-14 11-9-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:805
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-15 12-14-2015 Purchase of additional
equipment for installation
on fire truck
NCM
2016-01 2-8-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
2016-02 4-11-2016 Authorization of loan
assessment
NCM
2016-03 4-11-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-04 4-25-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2016-05 5-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 10
2016-06 5-9-2016 Purchase of Ford
Expedition SSV 4X4
command vehicle
NCM
2016-07 6-13-2016 Renovation to the lower
level of the barn
NCM
2016-08 6-27-2016 Purchase of DPW
equipment
NCM
2016-09 6-27-2016 Resurfacing of floor in
DPW garage
NCM
2016-10 7-11-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2016-11 9-12-2016 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 51
2016-12 9-26-2016 Public records amendment Ch. 125
2016-13
2016-14 10-24-2016 Animals: regulations
amendment; wildlife
feeding amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I; Ch.
20, Art. II
2016-15 10-24-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2016-16 11-14-2016 Part-time salary guidelines NCM
2016-17 12-12-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
2016-18 12-12-2016 Purchase of DPW truck NCM
2017-01 3-13-2017 Temporary construction
easement acquisition
NCM
2017-02 2-27-2017 Salaries NCM
2017-03 2-27-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:806
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-04 4-10-2017 Abandoned property
amendment
Ch. 122
2017-05 4-10-2017 Purchase of natural gas
generators
NCM
2017-06 4-24-2017 Funding for police SUVs NCM
2017-07 9-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-08 9-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-09 9-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-10 9-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-11 10-23-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-12 9-11-2017 Animals: regulations
amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I
2017-13 9-25-2017 Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual
amendment
See Ch. 115
2017-14 10-23-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 190
2017-15 11-13-2017 Funding for mobile video
recording system
NCM
2017-16 11-13-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 198
2017-17 11-27-2017 Littering amendment Ch. 82
2018-01 3-12-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment; Peace
and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 103; Ch. 107
2018-02 3-12-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-03 3-12-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-04 3-12-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 3
2018-05 4-23-2018 Abandoned Property
Amendment
Ch. 122
2018-06 4-23-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment; Peace
and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 103; Ch. 107
2018-07 6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 190
2018-08 7-23-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Restrictions
Ch. 111, Art. IV
2018-09 Not Adopted
§ DL-1 WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT § DL-1
A237:807
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-10 9-10-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 68
2018-11 9-10-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Restrictions Amendment
Ch. 111, Art. IV
2018-12 9-10-2018 Alcoholic Beverages:
Licensing and Control
Amendment
Ch. 12, Art. I
2018-13 11-26-2018 Animals: Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I
§ DL-1 ANDOVER CODE § DL-1
A237:808

ZONING
190 Attachment 6
Table 5, Schedule of General Zoning Regulations for Andover Township (§ 190-34)
[Amended 9-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05; 11-29-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10;
4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
Zone District
Area
(square feet)
Width
(feet)
Principal Building Accessory
Building Gross
Density
(units
per acre)
Maximum
Structure
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(percent)
Minimum
Floor
Area
(feet)
Maximum
Height
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Each
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) (stories) (feet)
R-3.0 (Conv.) 130,700 300 50 - 701
50 50 20 20 N/A 20% N/A 2,000 2½ 35
R-3.0 (Avgd.) 65,350 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 3 20% N/A 2,000 2½ 35
R-2.5 (Conv.) 109,000 200 50 - 701
50 50 20 20 N/A 20% N/A 2,000 2½ 35
R-2.5 (Avgd.) 54,500 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 2.5 20% N/A 2,000 2½ 35
R-2.0 (Conv.) 87,000 200 50 - 701
40 30 20 20 N/A 15% N/A 1,500 2½ 35
R-2.0 (Avgd.) 43,560 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 2 20% N/A 1,500 2½ 35
R-1.0 43,560 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 N/A 20% N/A 1,250 2½ 35
R-0.5 20,000 120 40 20 15 10 8 N/A 20% N/A 1,000 2½ 35
MFR 5 acres As indicated in § 190-41
SR2
5 acres3 As indicated in § 190-37
ML 20 acres As indicated in § 190-38
Nonresidential Districts
CB 20,000 100 40 - 1004
50 20 20 20 N/A 20% 60% N/A 2½ 35
HC 60,000 200 40 - 1004
50* 20* 20* 20* N/A 20% 60% N/A 2½ 35
I 130,000 250 70 - 1004
50 30 30 30 N/A 25% 60% N/A 2½ 35
PCD 25 acres 500 As indicated in § 190-39
GI The standards for lot area, lot width, principal and accessory buildings and structures, and impervious coverage and height shall be the same
standards applicable to the principal, accessory, and conditional uses in the I Industrial Zone district, except for the conditional use category of
"concrete and asphalt product and production facilities" and the accessory uses applicable to same which shall be regulated by the standards set
forth in § 190-55.2 of this chapter.
C/I The standards for lot area, lot width, principal and accessory buildings and structures, and impervious coverage and height shall be the same
standards applicable to the principal, accessory, and conditional uses in the I-Industrial Zone District.
Airport Hazard Overlay Zones5
R-0.5/A 20,000 120 50 - 701
20 15 10 8 N/A 20% N/A 1,000 2½ 35
R-1.0/A-1 43,560 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 `5 N/A 20% N/A 1,250 2½ 35
R-1.0/A-2 43,560 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 N/A 20% N/A 1,250 2½ 35
190 Attachment 6:1 03 - 01 - 2012
ANDOVER CODE
Zone District
Area
(square feet)
Width
(feet)
Principal Building Accessory
Building Gross
Density
(units
per acre)
Maximum
Structure
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface
Coverage
(percent)
Minimum
Floor
Area
(feet)
Maximum
Height
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Each
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) (stories) (feet)
Airport Hazard Overlay Zones5 (Cont’d)
R-1.5/A-1 65,000 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 N/A 20% N/A 1,250 2½ 35
R-1.5/A-2 65,000 200 50 - 701
30 25 20 15 N/A 20% N/A 1,250 2½ 35
B/A 20,000 100 40 - 1004
50 20 20 20 N/A 20% N/A 2,500 2½ 35
BPO/R/A 60,000 200 40 - 1004
50* 20* 20* 20* N/A 15% N/A 2,500 2½ 35
CR/A-1 15 acres 250 100* 50 30 30 30 N/A 25% N/A N/A 2½ 35
CR/A-2 15 acres 250 100* 50 30 30 30 N/A 25% N/A N/A 2½ 35
I/A-1 130,000 250 70 - 1004
50 30 30 30 N/A 25% N/A 2,500 2½ 35
I/A-2 130,000 250 70 - 1004
50 30 30 30 N/A 25% N/A 2,500 2½ 35
NOTES:
1 Front yard or building setback footage is determined by road type according to the Master Plan; arterial: 70 feet; primary connector: 60 feet; local secondary
and local minor: 50 feet.
2 Standards are for nursing homes. This zone also permits attached single-family dwellings in accordance with the R-1.0 Zone requirements.
3
3,630 square feet of lot area per bed.
4 Where parking is provided in front yard, one-hundred-foot building setback required. Without front yard parking, seventy-foot building setback is required for
industry and forty-foot for business.
5 All uses must also meet the requirements set forth in § 190-30.
* Parking in more than 50% of the required side and rear yards is prohibited.
190 Attachment 6:2 03 - 01 - 2012