Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [1973 Code § 1-1; New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Aberdeen (2007)" and is herein referred to
as the "Revision" or "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 1-2; New]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP — Clerk shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law by the Township Council.
COUNTY — shall mean County of Monmouth.
DAYS — shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — shall mean an organizational unit of the Township
government established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Township Council.
DEPUTY MAYOR — shall mean the councilman duly elected at the
organizational meeting to act on behalf of the Mayor when the Mayor is not
present.
DIVISION — shall mean an organizational unit of the Township government
within a Department established or designated by ordinance or this
Revision as a Division within a Department.
GOVERNING BODY — shall mean the Township Council of the Township of
Aberdeen, including the Councilman at-large who may also be known as the
Mayor.
LICENSED — shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Revision.
MANAGER — shall mean the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of
the Township.
MAYOR — shall mean the presiding officer at meetings of the Township
Council who is duly elected as "Councilman at-large" at the voters of the
Township.
MONTH — shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean the Township of Aberdeen in the County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey, and any corporate successor thereof.
1:1
OATH — shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OFFICER — shall mean the Director of a Department or of a Division.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL (and the title of an officer or official) — shall be
construed as if the words of the Township of Aberdeen followed it.
ORDINANCE — shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Revision, so long as it shall have been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or
of a part of a building or land.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, natural person, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — shall mean next before and next after
respectively.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
RESOLUTION — shall mean an action expressing the sense or will of
Township Council on a matter of special or temporary interest. It shall
be written and may be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced,
without publication or public hearing.
STREET — shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — shall mean the Township of Aberdeen in the County of
Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — shall mean the Governing Body of
the Township, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
WEEK — shall mean seven (7) consecutive days.
YEAR — shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2 ABERDEEN CODE § 1-3
1:2
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1973 Code § 1-3; New]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal
holiday, that day shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
"And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and," if the sense
requires and indicates such meaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a Statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of this Revision, identified
by a Roman numeral, and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number following a section number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter and/or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1973 Code § 1-4]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1973 Code § 4-12.1; Ord. No. 2-2002;
New]
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at
an amount not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
§ 1-5.3. Violations of Housing or Zoning Codes; Time Permitted to
Abate Condition; Hearing. [New]
If the Township Council chooses to impose a fine in an amount greater
than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars upon an owner for
violations of housing or zoning codes, the Township Council shall provide
a 30-day period in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to
cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for
a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the 30-day period, a fine greater than one thousand two hundred fifty
($1,250.00) dollars may be imposed if a court has not determined otherwise
or, upon reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement
has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-5.4. Powers of the Court. [New]
The court before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance or
Code provision shall have power to impose any fine, term of imprisonment,
a. For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the
Township of Aberdeen unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
connection with the provision violated the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be by one (1) or more of the following:
imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by the
Township Council for the detention of prisoners, for any term not
exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not exceeding two thousand
($2,000.00) dollars; or by a period of community service not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
b. Unlawful Solid Waste Disposal. The Township Council may prescribe
that for the violation of an ordinance or Code provision pertaining to
unlawful solid waste disposal at least a minimum penalty shall be
imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount
not exceeding two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars or a
maximum penalty by a fine not exceeding ten thousand ($10,000.00)
dollars.
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 1-5 ABERDEEN CODE § 1-5.4
1:4
or period of community service not less than the minimum and not
exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or in such ordinance.
§ 1-5.5. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or any ordinance within
one (1) year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the Township Council chooses not to impose an additional fine upon
a person for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance or Code
provision the Township Council may waive the additional fine by ordinance
or resolution.
§ 1-5.6. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted, and
in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefore, be imprisoned in
the County Jail or place of detention provided by the municipality, for any
term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be required to perform community
service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 1-5.7. Separate Violations. [New]
If provided by specific ordinance, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township of
Aberdeen exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.8. Applicability. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE OF CODE BY TOWNSHIP CLERK. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Township Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing "The Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Aberdeen, 2007" required to be filed in the office of the Clerk for the use
of the public. All changes in the Revision and all ordinances adopted by
the Township Council subsequent to the adoption of the Revision, which the
§ 1-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
Township Council shall adopt specifically as a part of this Revision, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Aberdeen Township is governed by the Council-Manager Plan E of
the Optional Municipal Charter Law (N.J. Laws of 1950, Ch. 210, as
amended). See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-82. The Administration Chapter has
been drafted in conformity with the Charter and in many instances
provisions of the Charter law have been restated in the Code. Other
enabling law relevant to this chapter are N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.,
Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board. General authority to regulate
the internal affairs of the Township derives from N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29,
30.
§ 1-6 ABERDEEN CODE § 1-6
1:6
ARTICLE I
Chapter Title; The Township Council
§ 2-1. CHAPTER TITLE. [1973 Code § 2-1]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the Township of Aberdeen.
§ 2-2. TOWNSHIP COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. Organization. [1973 Code § 2-2.1; New]
As provided in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83.1b and N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83.2a, the
Township Council shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be elected
at large by the voters of the Township at the general election and shall
serve for a term of four (4) years, beginning on the first day of January next
following their election.
§ 2-2.2. Powers of Township Council. [1973 Code § 2-2.2]
All powers of the Township and the determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the Township Council pursuant to the Charter.
§ 2-2.3. Meetings. [1973 Code § 2-2.3; Ord. 8-1977; Ord. 8-1984]
The Council shall meet for organization on January 1 or within the first
seven (7) days in January following each general election. The Council
shall meet pursuant to a reorganization resolution read at its regular
Reorganization Meeting setting forth the scheduled meetings and the times
for these meetings for the following year.
§ 2-2.4. Council to Act as Body. [1973 Code § 2-2.4]
The Township Council shall act in all matters as a body and shall deal with
the administrative services of the Township solely through the Township
Manager. No Council member shall seek individually to influence the official
acts of the Township Manager, or any other officer, or direct or request
the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office; or interfere
in any way with the performance by such officers of their duties. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent the Township Council from appointing
committees or commissions of its own members or of citizens to conduct
investigations into the conduct of any officer or department, or any other
matter relating to the welfare of the Township. The Council may delegate
to such committees or commissions such powers of inquiry as it may deem
necessary. Any Council Member violating the provisions of this subsection
shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, be
disqualified as Council Member.
§ 2-2.5. Compensation of Council Members. [1973 Code § 2-2.8;
Ord. 29-1995; Ord. No. 7-2009]
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2.5
1:7
§ 2-2.6. Vacancies on the Council. [1973 Code § 2-2.7; Ord. 29-1995]
Any vacancy which occurs on the Township Council shall be filled pursuant
to the provisions of the Municipal Vacancy Law, N.J.S.A. 40:16A-1 et seq.
§ 2-2.7. Township Council Workshop. [New]
Subject to the provisions of "The Open Public Meeting Act," the Township
Council may meet at any time in executive session for the discussion of
any Township business or to meet with any officer or employee of the
Township or any other person on Township business. No persons other than
those specifically invited by the Township Council shall be authorized to
participate in any such executive session. No official actions shall be taken
during any executive session.
§ 2-2.8. Quorum. [New]
A majority of all the members of the Township Council shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members shall be
necessary to take any action or pass any measure, except as otherwise
provided by law. A bond ordinance shall be adopted by the affirmative vote
of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the full membership of the Governing Body.
N.J.S.A. 40:81-20; N.J.S.A. 40A:2-17(b).
§ 2-3. THE MAYOR.
§ 2-3.1. Selection of Councilman at Large/Mayor.2 [1973 Code
§ 2-2.5; Ord. No. 29-1995]
The referendum that was held in 1987 was approved by the voters of the
Township, and it provided that the position of Councilman at Large/ Mayor
shall be elected directly by the voters for a four (4) year term.
§ 2-3.2. Powers and Duties of the Mayor. [1973 Code § 2-2.6; Ord.
No. 2-2008 § I]
The Mayor shall have only such powers and duties as Mayor as are
expressly vested in this Office by this revision. The Mayor shall preside at all
meetings of the Council and shall have a voice and vote in its proceedings.
a. Any compensation of the members of the Township Council shall be
established annually by a salary ordinance separate and distinct from
the salary ordinance adopted annually by the Township Council
establishing salary ranges for Township employees.
b. Adoption of the salary ordinance establishing a salary range for
members of the Township Council and the compensation thereof shall
require an affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Township
Council.
2. Editor's Note: As provided in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-86b.
§ 2-2.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-3.2
1:8
In the absence of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall call the Council to
order. Upon the arrival of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall immediately
relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before
the Council. All bonds, notes, deeds, contracts and written obligations of the
Township shall be executed on its behalf by the Mayor or, in the event of his
inability to act, the Deputy Mayor. The Mayor shall have the power to make
proclamations and call special meetings as provided by subsection 2-2.3 of
this revision. The Mayor shall have the power to perform marriage or civil
union ceremonies.
§ 2-3.3. Deputy Mayor. [1973 Code § 2-2.5; Ord. No. 29-1995]
At the organizational meeting of the Council following each general
election, the Council shall elect one of their members as Deputy Mayor for
a term of two (2) years. The Deputy Mayor shall be chosen by ballot by
majority vote of all members of the Township Council.
§ 2-4. (RESERVED)
§ 2-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:9

ARTICLE II
The Township Manager
§ 2-5. OFFICE OF THE TOWNSHIP MANAGER.
§ 2-5.1. Appointment and Qualification. [1973 Code § 2-3.1]
The Township Council shall choose a Township Manager solely on the basis
of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to
his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. The Township Manager
shall hold office for an indefinite term and may be removed by a majority
vote of the Council pursuant to the Charter.
§ 2-5.2. Absence or Disability. [1973 Code § 2-3.2]
The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the
Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability.
In the event of his failure to make such a designation, the Council may
by resolution appoint an officer of the Township to perform the duties of
the Manager during such absence or disability, until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.
§ 2-5.3. General Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-3.3]
The Manager shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of
the Township. The Manager shall see that all ordinances, resolutions and
policies of the Council, and all State laws which are subject to enforcement
by Township action are faithfully enforced and executed. The Manager
shall:
a. Represent the Township and assert its proper interests in relation to the
State and other political subdivisions, and with respect to municipal
contracts and franchises.
b. Attend all meetings of the Township Council with the right to take part
in the discussions, but without the right to vote.
c. Keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the Township,
make reports to the Council as requested by it, and at least once a year
make an annual report on administration of the Township government
for the benefit of the Council and the public.
d. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs of the
Township government, and prepare and recommend to the Council
necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet present and
foreseeable needs.
e. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer, employee, Division or
Department of the Township.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.3
1:11
§ 2-5.4. Appointment and Personnel Powers. [1973 Code § 2-3.5]
The Manager shall:
§ 2-5.5. Purchasing Procedures. [1973 Code § 2-3.5; New]
All materials, supplies and equipment, work and labor under contract
required by any department, office or agency of the Township shall be
purchased by or under the direction of the Manager.
f. Perform such other duties as may be required of the Township Manager
by ordinance or resolution of the Township Council.
a. Appoint and remove all department heads and all other officers,
subordinates and assistants other than the Township Clerk, Township
Attorney, Tax Assessor, Class I and Class III members of the Planning
Board, the Board of Adjustment, the Municipal Judge, and Township
representatives on the regional public library board. The Manager may
delegate to the head of a department the power to appoint and remove
subordinates in such department. Pursuant to the Charter, any
provision of general law conferring the appointing power or other
power upon the Mayor or other executive head of the Township shall be
construed as meaning the Township Manager, except that members of
the regional public library board shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Except where otherwise expressly required by the Charter or general
law, department heads and subordinate officers and employees subject
to appointment by the Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite
term subject to suspension or removal by the Manager.
b. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments of the
Township government and be responsible for the maintenance of sound
personnel policies and administrative practices.
c. Approve all bills and vouchers for payment subject to pre-audit and
control as provided herein.
d. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs, and costs of Township services.
e. Establish working, personnel, vacation and sick leave schedules and
appropriate records and reports.
f. Approve or prescribe the internal organization of each department.
g. Assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and duties among
and within departments, subject to the Charter and this revision.
h. Delegate to department heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
a. Purchasing Agent. The Manager may designate an administrative
officer of the Township to serve as Purchasing Agent.
§ 2-5.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-5.5
1:12
b. Purchase Controls. Purchases shall be authorized only upon requisition
of a department head which shall be made to the Manager at such times
and in such form as he may prescribe or approve. All purchases made
and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials or equipment or
contractual services shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the
head of the department against which the appropriation will be charged
and the certification of the Chief Financial Officer that a sufficient
balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor. All such purchase
contracts in excess of seventeen thousand five hundred ($17,500.00)
dollars or twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars with a qualified
Purchasing Official shall conform with applicable requirements of State
Statutes for competitive bidding. Except as the Manager may
specifically authorize in case of emergency, no purchase shall be made
and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the procedures
prescribed by or pursuant to this revision have been followed. The
Manager may, at his option in cases where competitive bidding is not
required, submit a proposed purchase to competitive bidding, open the
bids obtained, and award contracts.
c. Award of Contracts; Execution. Where contracts are by law required to
be awarded by competitive public bidding, the Council may, upon
recommendation of the Manager, award the contract in the manner
prescribed by law. The Mayor or, in the event of the Mayor's absence for
more than three (3) days or his disability or inability to act, the Deputy
Mayor shall execute and sign contracts awarded and authorized
pursuant to the Charter and ordinances, and their respective signatures
shall be attested by the Clerk.
d. Standards and Tests. The Purchasing Agent shall establish and approve
uniform standards for requisitions and purchases; shall control the
delivery of all supplies, materials and equipment and other items
purchased and shall make or cause to be made proper test checks and
inspections thereof. The Purchasing Agent shall ascertain whether the
supplies, materials, equipment and other items purchased comply with
the specifications and shall cause laboratory or other tests to be made
whenever in his opinion it is necessary to determine whether the
materials or supplies furnished are of the quality and standard
required, and shall accept or reject the deliveries in accordance with
the results of his inspection.
e. Storerooms. The Purchasing Agent shall control any general
storerooms or stock rooms which the Council may authorize; may make
transfers of supplies, material and equipment between departments,
officers and agencies; may sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste
supplies, material and equipment; and may make any other sales
authorized by the Council.
f. Claims for Payment. [Added 9-5-2019 by Ord. No. 16-2019]
1. All claims for payment that are less than $5,000 shall require two
authorized signatures for payment, one of which shall be either the
§ 2-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.5
1:13
§ 2-6. TOWNSHIP BUDGET.
§ 2-6.1. Preparation of the Budget. [1973 Code § 2-4.1]
The Township budget shall be prepared by the Manager.
§ 2-6.2. Budget Requests. [1973 Code § 2-4.2; New]
During the month of November in each year, the Township Manager shall
require all department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the
ensuing budget year, and to appear before the Township Manager at public
hearings which shall be held during that month, on the various requests.
§ 2-6.3. Budget Document. [1973 Code § 2-4.3]
Upon the basis of the departmental requests, the budget hearings, his
analysis of the needs and resources of the Township, and such policy guides
as may be prescribed by resolution of the Council, the Manager shall
prepare a recommended budget in the form required by general law for
Township budgets. On or before January 15 in each year, the Manager shall
present to the Council a budget document consisting of:
§ 2-6.4. Budget Message. [1973 Code § 2-4.4; New]
The budget message shall consist of such explanatory comments, exhibits,
and schedules concerning the budget as the Manager may deem desirable,
together with:
Mayor or Township Manager and one of which shall be either the
Township Clerk or the Township Chief Financial Officer.
2. All claims for payment that are $5,000 or more shall require three
authorized signatures for payment by any of the following
authorized signatories: 1) Mayor, 2) Township Manager, 3)
Township Chief Financial Officer or 4) Township Clerk.
a. The recommended budget; and
b. A budget message.
a. An outline of the proposed financial policies for the ensuing budget
year, including explanations of the important features of the budget and
of any major changes in policy.
b. An analysis of revenue and costs, and of work performance
contemplated by the budget so far as appropriate units of measurement
may have been developed and installed.
c. A statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital
projects, relating the amounts required for capital purposes to the
down payments and other expenditures financed from current
§ 2-5.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-6.4
1:14
§ 2-6.5. Budget Operation. [1973 Code § 2-4.5; New]
The Manager shall control the expenditure programs of each department
through the application of work programs and periodic allotments of
budgeted appropriations. No department shall incur any expenditure in
excess of the amount so allotted. Whenever it shall appear to the Manager
that the amount appropriated for any department is in excess of the amount
required to be expended to provide the quantity and quality of services
authorized by the budget, the Manager may, by administrative order with
the approval of the Council, reduce the amount available for expenditure
by any department during the remainder of any year. If at any time during
the budget year the Manager shall ascertain that the Township government
is faced with the probability of incurring a cash deficit for the current
year, he shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several
departments. Upon such reconsideration, the Manager may by
administrative order with the approval of the Council revise budget
allotments so as to forestall, so far as possible, the making of commitments
and expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized during the fiscal
year.
§ 2-7. DEPUTY MANAGER.
§ 2-7.1. Creation of Position, Compensation. [1973 Code § 2-3.6;
Ord. No. 5-1976]
There is hereby created and established the Office of Deputy Manager
whose compensation shall be as provided for in the salary ordinance of the
Township, and who shall be appointed by the Township Manager.
§ 2-7.2. Duties. [1973 Code § 2-3.6; Ord. No. 5-1976]
The Deputy Manager shall be under the authority and supervision of the
Township Manager and shall perform the functions and duties assigned by
the Manager. The Deputy Manager shall perform the duties of the Manager
during the temporary absence or disability of the Manager and until the
Manager shall return or his disability shall cease.
appropriations and to the amount of bonds to be issued during the
budget year.
d. A capital program of proposed capital projects for the budget year and
the next five (5) years, which may be prepared by the Township
Planning Board, together with the Manager's comments thereon and
estimates of cost.
§ 2-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.2
1:15

ARTICLE III
The Municipal Clerk
§ 2-8. OFFICE OF THE MUNICIPAL CLERK.
§ 2-8.1. Appointment and Qualification. [1973 Code § 2-5.1; New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, there shall be an Office of the Clerk, the
head of which shall be the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall be
appointed by the Council and shall prior to the appointment be qualified by
training and experience to perform the duties of this office.
No person shall be appointed as Municipal Clerk unless he or she shall
have a Registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq. The Clerk shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years,
and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by ordinance.
§ 2-8.2. Compensation. [New]
The Municipal Clerk's salary shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-8.3. Clerk of Council and Committees. [1973 Code § 2-5.2]
The Municipal Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and as secretary
of any special legislative committees of the Council appointed pursuant
to the Charter. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council and of
such committees when required by the chairman thereof, and shall keep
the minutes of the proceedings of the Council and of such committees.
The minutes of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the official
presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk.
§ 2-8.4. Ordinances and Resolutions. [1973 Code § 2-5.3]
a. The Municipal Clerk shall engross all ordinances and all resolutions of a
permanent character in books to be provided for that purpose. After
each ordinance he shall also engross and certify the proof of publication
thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and resolution so engrossed
shall be signed by the Mayor and the Municipal Clerk who shall attest
that it was duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed the
recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance or
resolution. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign or
certify as herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any
ordinance which has been duly adopted.
b. At least annually, or more often if necessary, the Municipal Clerk shall
compile all the ordinances which remain in force and effect and shall
cause them to be prepared into a supplement to this revision, and to be
indexed.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.5
1:17
§ 2-8.5. Custodian of Records. [1973 Code § 2-5.4]
The Municipal Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all records,
books and documents of the Township, except those committed by Charter
or ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by the Manager.
The Municipal Clerk shall, upon request and upon the payment of the fees
prescribed therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of the Township,
furnish a certified copy of any such document in his custody, under the
corporate seal of the Township.
§ 2-8.6. Corporate Seal. [1973 Code § 2-5.5]
The Municipal Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Township to
be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or
resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document on
record in his office, or to certify any act or paper which, from the records in
his office, shall appear to have been a public act of the Township or a public
document. He shall not affix the seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to
any other instrument or writing or other paper unless required by law or
ordinance.
§ 2-8.7. Insurance, Surety Bonds and Contracts. [1973 Code § 2-5.6]
The Municipal Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Manager, shall:
§ 2-8.8. Administrative Rules and Regulations; Filing and
Publication. [1973 Code § 2-5.7]
No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency or
authority of the Township, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the Township government or a part thereof, shall
take effect until it is filed with the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk
a. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by
or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which
shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Township or
to protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
formal contracts for work, labor services, supplies, equipment, and
materials to which the Township may be a party.
b. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee, or any other form of security, given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Township.
c. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
d. Report to the Manager annually at such time as the Manager may
require on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety
bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of outstanding
leases; the rent reserved by each, and their respective expiration dates.
§ 2-8.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-8.8
1:18
shall maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations, which
shall be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
§ 2-8.9. Other Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-5.8; New]
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by the Charter and ordinances and subject to the supervision and direction
of the Manager, the Municipal Clerk shall:
§ 2-8.10. through § 2-8.12. (Reserved)
§ 2-8.13. Deputy Clerk. [1973 Code § 2-5.9]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135, there shall be a Deputy Clerk of the
Township appointed by the Council. The Deputy Clerk shall:
a. Perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law and any other law or ordinance.
b. Administer the provisions of the Township ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
c. Issue certificates as to the administration of Land Development within
the Township.
d. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance, or delegated to the
Municipal Clerk by the Manager.
a. Assist the Municipal Clerk in the performance of the Clerk's duties.
b. Whenever the office of Municipal Clerk shall be vacant or unfilled or the
Municipal Clerk shall be absent from the Township or unable to serve
by reason of disability or otherwise, the Deputy Clerk shall have all of
the powers to perform all of the duties vested in the Municipal Clerk.
§ 2-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.13
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Officers of the Township
§ 2-9. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.
§ 2-9.1. Appointment. [1973 Code § 2-6.1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, the Township Attorney shall be appointed
by the Council by a majority vote of its members for the term of one (1)
year or a term consistent with State Statutes from the first day of January of
the year of the appointment and until a successor has been appointed and
qualified. The Township Attorney shall be an attorney at law in the State of
New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Township. In lieu of appointing
an individual attorney, the Council may appoint a firm of attorneys, all
members of which shall be attorneys at law in the State of New Jersey. The
Attorney either shall receive a fixed salary or shall be paid such retainer
as may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council, plus such fees and
charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
§ 2-9.2. Power and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-6.2]
With the prior approval of the Council, the Township Attorney shall have
such powers and perform such duties as are provided for the Office of
Township Attorney by general law or ordinances of the Township. The
Township Attorney shall represent the Township in all judicial and
administrative proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers
or agencies may be a party or have an interest. The Township Attorney
shall give all legal counsel and advice where required by the Manager,
Council or any member thereof and shall in general serve as the legal
advisor to the Council and Manager on all matters of Township business.
In furtherance of such general powers and duties, but without limitation
thereto, the Township Attorney shall:
a. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
b. With the approval of Council, conduct appeals from orders, decisions or
judgments affecting any interest of the Township as the Township
Attorney may in his discretion determine to be necessary or desirable,
or as directed by Council.
c. Subject to the approval of the Township Council, have power to enter
into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which
the Township is involved.
d. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Manager, Council, or any member thereof, with respect to their
official powers and duties and shall perform such duties as may be
necessary to provide legal counsel to the Council and Manager in the
administration of Township affairs.
§ 2-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9.2
1:21
§ 2-9.3. Records and Papers. [1973 Code § 2-6.3]
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and all other materials relating
to the administration of the legal duties of the Township Attorney shall
be and remain the property of the Township. Upon the termination of
his services with the Township, the Township Attorney shall forthwith
surrender to any successor all such property, together with a written
consent to substitution of any successor in all legal actions and proceedings
then pending to which the Township is a party.
§ 2-10. AUDITOR. [1973 Code § 2-22]
An independent Auditor shall be appointed by the Township Council by
a majority vote of its members, for the term as prescribed by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-29 from the first day of January of the year of appointment and until
a successor has been appointed and qualified. The Auditor shall receive
such compensation as may be agreed upon and determined by the Council.
The Auditor shall be a registered municipal accountant of the State of New
Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Township. In lieu of appointing
an individual auditor, the Township Council may appoint a Registered
Municipal Accountant of the State of New Jersey. The Auditor shall make the
annual audit and shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed
by general law, ordinance or rules and regulations of the Division of Local
Government in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey.
The Auditor shall also perform such duties and render such services as may
be prescribed by resolution of the Council.
§ 2-11. through § 2-14. (RESERVED)
e. Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical professional assistants as the Council may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Township.
§ 2-9.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-11
1:22
ARTICLE V
Administrative Organization
§ 2-15. LISTING OF DEPARTMENT AND BOARDS.
§ 2-15.1. Departments and Boards Established. [1973 Code § 2-7.1;
New]
There shall be the following departments and boards in the Township.
a. Departments:
1. Department of Finance;
2. Department of Public Works;
3. Department of Public Safety;
4. Department of Health;
5. Department of Planning, Zoning and Development;
6. Department of Parks and Recreation.
b. The Municipal Court.
c. Boards and Committees:
1. Planning Board;
2. Board of Adjustment;
3. Aberdeen Business Council;
4. Industrial Development Advisory Board;
5. Harbor Advisory Board;
6. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;
7. Senior Citizens Advisory Board;
8. Environmental and Shade Tree Advisory Board;
9. Human Relations Advisory Board;
10. Mass Transit Advisory Board;
11. Cable Television Advisory Committee;
12. Water Department Advisory Board;
13. Emergency Management Advisory Council;
14. Historical Commission of the Township of Aberdeen.
15. Aberdeen Green Team. [Added 10-17-2018 by Ord. No. 25-2018
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-15.1
1:23
§ 2-15.2. Powers and Duties of Department Heads. [1973 Code
§ 2-7.2]
The head of a department subject to the Charter and this revision and the
approval or direction of the Manager shall:
d. Volunteer Organizations:
1. Fire Department;
2. First Aid Squads.
a. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his Department.
b. Direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of the
Department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
c. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
Departmental appropriations.
d. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Manager.
e. Provide such information and reports on the work of the Department as
may be required by the Manager.
f. Exercise such other or different powers of administration supervision
and direction as the Manager may delegate to him.
§ 2-15.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-15.2
1:24
ARTICLE VI
Departments of the Local Government
§ 2-16. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-16.1. Director of Finance; Chief Financial Officer. [1973 Code
§ 2-8.1; New]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance, known as the Chief Financial Officer, who shall be
appointed pursuant to requirements as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, by
the Manager and shall be qualified by training and experience in Township
budgeting, accounting and finance. The Chief Financial Officer of the
Township shall hold a term of four (4) years from the first day in January
in which the Chief Financial Officer is appointed, or as otherwise consistent
with State statute. The Chief Financial Officer shall supervise the work of
the Department and its Divisions; be responsible for the accounting, preauditing,
control, receipt, custody and disbursement of Township revenues
and expenditures and shall also be responsible for all fiscal matters and
financial policies of the Township.
§ 2-16.2. Division of Accounts and Control. [1973 Code § 2-8.2]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Accounts and
Control. Under the supervision and direction of the Director of Finance, the
Division shall:
a. Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including
forms, standards and procedures for all Departments of the Township
Government. Any uniform system of accounts shall include appropriate
provision for such records and reports as may be prescribed or
approved by the Manager for the determination of the cost of
performance of each functional program or activity, measured in such
work units as may be appropriate thereto, and for such data, records
and reports as may be prescribed or approved by the Manager for the
preparation and execution of a budget for the expenditure of public
funds for capital purposes to give effect to general improvement
programs.
b. Maintain and operate the Township's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to sound accounting principles, and in
accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State Division
of Local Government.
c. Audit all receipts and disbursements of the Township Government and
of each of its Departments and pre-audit all bills, claims and demands
against the Township, including payrolls, and require each Department
Head to certify that the materials, supplies or equipment have been
received and accepted as specified and that the services have been duly
rendered.
§ 2-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16.2
1:25
§ 2-16.3. Division of Tax Assessments. [1973 Code § 2-8.3]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Assessments,
the head of which shall be the Township Tax Assessor.
§ 2-16.4. Tax Assessor. [1973 Code § 2-8.3; New]
d. Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are not
exceeded, and maintain such books and records as may be required for
the proper exercise of such budgetary control.
e. Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any Department for conformity with state law, the Charter and
ordinances of the Township, and authorize only such expenditures and
commitments as conform with all the requirements of this chapter.
f. Install, operate and maintain a central payroll system and all social
security, pension and insurance records for personnel of all
Departments.
g. Devise, install and supervise a perpetual inventory of unissued stores of
the Township and install an accounting system whereby the status of
such inventories will be maintained currently. Supervise a physical
inventory periodically. Supervise the making of inventory lists of
furniture and equipment by every officer, department or other agency
having possession of Township owned property. Devise a system of
inventory records to account for all furniture and equipment and
supervise a periodic counting of such furniture and equipment.
h. Submit a monthly report of expenditures and balances to the Township
Council and Manager.
a. Appointment. The Township Council shall provide for the appointment
of a Tax Assessor and such Deputy Tax Assessors consistent with New
Jersey State Statutes. Prior to appointment, the Assessor shall be
qualified by training or experience or a combination thereof in the
valuation and assessment of real and personal property. The Tax
Assessor shall be appointed for a term of four years and shall acquire
tenure as provided by law.
b. Qualifications. The Tax Assessor shall hold the Tax Assessor's
Certificate provided for in N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. Nothing in this
section shall affect adversely the salary or tenure rights acquired
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.31 or any other law.
c. Powers and Duties. The Municipal Tax Assessor shall perform all
functions, duties and services required by law and regulations
promulgated in connection therewith. The Assessor shall, in addition to
regularly scheduled office hours, field work and other responsibilities,
be required to appear before the Monmouth County Board of Taxation,
Division of Taxation, New Jersey Tax Court and such other courts and
administrative agencies of competent jurisdiction to defend all
§ 2-16.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-16.4
1:26
§ 2-16.5. Division of Tax Collections. [1973 Code § 2-8.4]
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Tax
Collections. The head of the Division of Tax Collections shall be the
Township Tax Collector.
§ 2-16.6. Tax Collector. [1973 Code § 2-8.5; New]
municipal assessments of property as certified upon the tax rolls of the
municipality.
In addition, the Assessor shall perform the following duties:
1. Make assessments for benefits of local improvement, and for that
purpose have and exercise the powers and duties of a Board of
Assessment for Local Improvement as provided by law.
2. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of
real property assessed or exempted.
3. Maintain a current tax map of the Township as a public record, and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character
of the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the
facilities of other departments as provided by the code.
d. Hours. The Municipal Tax Assessor shall be required to work the
normal business hours for the Township of Aberdeen.
The Assessor shall put in such additional time in and out of the office as
is required to perform added and omitted assessments, field work and
such other functions required by law.
e. Professional Standards. All work performed by the Assessor shall be
done in a competent and professional manner and in accordance with
the highest ethical standards of the profession.
f. Term of Office and Compensation. The Municipal Tax Assessor shall
serve a term of office of four years from the first day of July next
following his appointment.
Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment by the Township Council as aforesaid for the unexpired
term.
The Mayor and Council shall determine the amount of compensation of
the Assessor by ordinance.
a. Appointment. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq., the Governing
Body, by ordinance, shall appoint the Tax Collector.
b. Term of Office; Vacancies. The Tax Collector shall hold office for a term
of four years from January 1 next following his appointment. Vacancies
§ 2-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16.6
1:27
§ 2-16.7. Division of the Treasury. [1973 Code § 2-8.6; New]
The Division of the Treasury shall operate as follows:
other than those due to expiration of term shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term.
c. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as Tax
Collector unless he or she shall hold a Tax Collector Certificate issued
by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services.
d. Certification Requirements. A Tax Collector certificate shall be obtained
upon qualification and successful completion of the examination given
by the Director of the Division of Local Government Services.
Qualifications for certification shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-145.2. Revocation or suspension of any certificate shall be in
accordance N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.5.
e. Duties. The Tax Collector shall have, perform and exercise all the
functions, powers and duties as are provided by general law and
Township ordinance. The Tax Collector shall;
1. Receive and collect all monies assessed or raised by taxation or
assessment for any purpose.
2. Keep proper records and shall report to the Director at least once a
month all receipts and deposits made by him and shall in such
report account for all monies for which he is responsible.
3. Keep a current record of all tax title liens, advising the Director
promptly as such liens become subject to foreclosure under the law.
4. Enforce the payment of delinquent taxes by the means provided by
law as soon as same become delinquent.
5. Serve as Township Tax Searcher and Township Improvement
Searcher and perform such duties as are prescribed by general law
and Township ordinance. However, the Township Manager may
appoint, in lieu of the Township Tax Collector, any qualified person
to the position of Township Tax Searcher and Township
Improvement Searcher.
f. Compensation. The Tax Collector shall receive compensation as
provided in the annual salary ordinance.
a. Chief Financial Officer. Within the Department of Finance there may be
a Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Chief Financial
Officer.
b. Powers and Duties of the Chief Financial Officer. The Chief Financial
Officer shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and
duties as provided by general law and Township ordinances. The Chief
Financial Officer shall keep and maintain books and records of all
§ 2-16.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-16.7
1:28
§ 2-17. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
financial transactions of the Township in accordance with the standards
and requirements of the Division of Local Government in the
Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey. He shall have
custody of all public monies of the Township and shall make monthly
reports to the Director of Finance of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unexpended appropriations. All monies received
from any source by or on behalf of the Township or any department,
board, office or agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by
Township ordinance shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer who
shall, by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them to
the credit of the Township in the authorized public depositary of the
Township to the credit of the proper account.
c. Disbursements. Disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall
be made by the Chief Financial Officer upon pre-audit and warrant of
the Director of Finance, approved by the Manager; except that
payments from the payroll account shall be made pursuant to
paragraph (d) below. Every warrant shall be in the form of a warrantcheck
payable to the order of the person entitled to receive it, and shall
specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or
appropriation to which it is chargeable. Each warrant-check shall bear
the signatures of the Manager or Acting or Deputy Manager, or the
Mayor or Deputy Mayor and the Chief Financial Officer or Acting Chief
Financial Officer.
d. Payroll Account. There shall be an account to be designated the
Township of Aberdeen Payroll Account, and the Chief Financial Officer,
upon receipt of a warrant or an amount due such payroll account, shall
deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account, charging the
appropriate budgetary accounts therewith. Disbursement from the
payroll account may be made by payroll checks signed by the Chief
Financial Officer alone or someone authorized by the Manager to act in
the Chief Financial Officer's stead upon pre-audit and warrant of the
Director of Finance and approval by the Manager of the entire payroll.
In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Chief Financial Officer
shall, and it shall be his duty to, make proper correction and
appropriate record of such correction.
e. Travel Expenses. Itemized claims supported by receipts where
available should be presented in order to obtain reimbursement for
expenses incurred by local officials where authorized to travel by the
Township. Travel expenses will be reimbursed only in accordance with
the travel regulations of the Township.
§ 2-16.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.1
1:29
§ 2-17.1. Director of Public Works/Engineer. [1973 Code § 2-9.1;
Ord. No. 3-1976]
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director of Public Works/Engineer who shall be appointed by the Township
Manager.
a. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall:
1. Be responsible for all matters relating to the construction,
management, maintenance and operation of the physical
properties of the Township, other than office supplies, furniture
and equipment.
2. Provide mechanical services required by any Department, office or
agency of the Township Government, except as otherwise directed
by the Manager or Council.
b. The Director/Engineer, subject to the Charter and this chapter and in
consultation with the Manager, shall:
1. Be the Administrative Head of the Department.
2. Hire, discipline and dismiss employees of his Department.
3. Promote and demote employees within the Department.
4. Assist the Manager in the preparation and administration of the
operating and capital budgets for the Department.
5. Prepare and present short and long range needs and goals of the
Department.
6. Cooperate and coordinate the work of his Department with all
jurisdictional officials, boards and commissions.
7. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
8. Have all the powers, functions and duties prescribed by general
law.
9. Report regularly to the Manager at the Manager's direction.
10. Maintain records as may be required to control Departmental
receipts, property and personnel, evaluate programs and to provide
information for budgeting, public reporting, planning and financing
of Departmental programs and work schedules.
11. Make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
12. Delegate authority to subordinates or other personnel to perform
any of the duties and responsibilities of his office.
13. Generally be responsible for the proper and efficient conduct of all
public works functions of the Township.
§ 2-17.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-17.2
1:30
§ 2-17.2. Township Engineer. [1973 Code § 2-9.2; Ord. No. 3-1976]
There shall be a Township Engineer who shall be appointed by the Manager.
The Office of Township Engineer may be combined with the Office of the
Director of Public Works. The Engineer shall receive such compensation as
may be agreed upon and determined by the Council. The Township Engineer
shall be a duly licensed civil engineer of the State of New Jersey and shall
perform such duties as are prescribed by general law and ordinance and in
addition shall:
§ 2-17.3. Division of Public Property. [1973 Code § 2-9.3]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Public
Property, the head of which shall be the Shop Foreman. Under the direction
and supervision of the Director of Public Works, the Division of Public
Property shall:
a. Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on
force account or by public contract.
b. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township.
c. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township Departments as needed.
d. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials
relating to the administration of engineering duties of the Township
Engineer shall be and remain the property of the Township. Upon the
termination of his services with the Township, the Township Engineer
shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such property.
e. The Township Manager may appoint a consulting engineer who shall, as
a minimum, have the same qualifications as the Township Engineer. In
lieu of appointing an individual, the manager may appoint a firm of
engineers, each member of which shall be a licensed civil engineer of
the State of New Jersey. The consulting engineer shall perform such
services and shall be paid such fees as may by resolution be agreed to
by the Township Council.
a. Maintain and repair all Township streets, bridges, culverts and drains.
b. Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, culverts and drains; treat
road surfaces and resurface streets and roads according to such
standards and schedules as directed or approved by the Township
Manager.
c. Maintain all Township streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
§ 2-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.3
1:31
§ 2-17.4. Divisions Within Department of Public Works.3 [1973 Code
§ 2-9.4; Ord. 16-1974, S III; Ord. 6-1997; New]
Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the following
divisions under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Works:
§ 2-18. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.4
d. Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers.
e. Operate, maintain and repair Township-owned buildings and
properties, except the Township water plant, and provide custodial and
janitorial services therefor, including office quarters, waterfront
property and all other real estate.
f. Trim, plan, care for and preserve public parks, greens, grounds and
trees in the public way.
g. Control the care, use and disposition of motor vehicles owned by the
Township, other than fire engines, and for this purpose the Division
shall:
1. Operate or supervise the operation of a garage or garages for the
storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of Township-owned
motor vehicles.
2. Supervise any work done by contract for the storage, repair
servicing and maintenance of Township-owned motor vehicles or
equipment.
3. Control the maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the Township
by maintaining individual vehicle records of mileage, costs of
operation and maintenance and replacement schedules.
a. Division of Sanitation and Recycling;
b. Division of Streets and Roads;
c. Division of Buildings and Grounds;
d. Division of Park Maintenance;
e. Division of Water and Sewer;
f. Division of Public Works;
g. Division of Public Property.
3. Editor's Note: See also Chapter XVI, Public Works.
4. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-50, Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 2-17.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-18.1
1:32
§ 2-18.1. Established. [1973 Code § 2-10.1]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety in and for the Township,
the head of which shall be the Director of Public Safety. Unless and until
the Council shall by resolution authorize the appointment of a separate
Director, the Manager shall serve as Director of Public Safety without
additional compensation. The Director, subject to the direction and
supervision of the Manager, shall be responsible for the proper and efficient
conduct of all public safety functions of the Township Government and shall
supervise and direct the work of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 2-18.2. Division of Police Established. [1973 Code § 2-10.2]
There shall be a Division of Police, (hereinafter may be referred to as the
Police Department) in and for the Township, the head of which shall be
the Chief of Police, and which shall be composed of such officers, full-time
Patrolmen and Special Law Enforcement Officers as may be appointed by
the Manager.
§ 2-18.3. Additional Divisions as Needed. [1973 Code § 2-10.3]
Such additional Divisions shall be created as the Township Council shall
determine as being necessary for the public safety and welfare in and for
the Township.
§ 2-19. DIVISION OF POLICE.
§ 2-19.1. Chief of Police; Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-11.1;
New]
The Chief of Police shall:
a. Be the executive head of the Division of Police, subject to the direction
and supervision of the Manager, and shall be responsible for the proper
and efficient operation of the Division and the supervision of its
activities.
b. Be responsible for the observation and enforcement of all laws of the
State and ordinances within the jurisdiction of the Division of Police;
the enforcement of the rules and regulations of the Division of Police,
and shall perform such other duties as shall be prescribed by ordinance
of the Township Council.
c. See that all persons connected with the Division are properly instructed
in their duties and shall give particular attention to the training and
instruction of new members thereof.
d. Have under his control all records and property of the Division of Police
and designate any member of the Division to prepare these reports and
keep the records in such manner as he may prescribe, as well as to take
charge of such property and any other property coming into the custody
of the Division.
§ 2-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.1
1:33
§ 2-19.2. Qualifications of Members of the Police Force. [1973 Code
§ 2-11.2; Ord. No. 1-1998 § 1; New]
Each applicant for a position as an officer or member of the Division of
Police of the Township shall:
e. Furnish the Township Manager complete monthly and yearly reports of
Division of Police matters.
a. Be a citizen of the United States, and a resident of the State of New
Jersey.
b. Be more than twenty-one (21) years of age and less than thirty-five (35)
years of age, as consistent with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127 and New Jersey
Department of Personnel. Qualifications for entry level in the Division of
Police shall be consistent with the rules and regulations of the
Department of Personnel of the State of New Jersey.
c. Be sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police Retirement System of New Jersey that such
person is eligible to membership in the retirement system.
d. Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
e. Be of good moral character and must not have been convicted of any
crime involving moral turpitude.
f. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-68, serve a probationary period
pending his successful completion of the course at the New Jersey State
Municipal Police School.
g. All duly qualified applicants for the position of Aberdeen Township
Police Officer shall be classified in the following classes:
1. Residents of Aberdeen Township;
2. Other residents of Monmouth County;
3. Other residents of the State of New Jersey;
4. All other qualified applicants.
h. All appointments to the position of Aberdeen Township Police Officer
shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a, with all those
in Class I to be appointed first and then those in each succeeding class
in the order listed above.
i. All applicants classified as Class I must be residents of Aberdeen
Township as of the announced closing date of the Civil Service
Examination for the position and must maintain such residency
continuously up to and including the date of appointment.
§ 2-19.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-19.2
1:34
§ 2-19.3. Powers and Duties of Police Force Members. [1973 Code
§ 2-11.3; New]
The rights, privileges, powers and duties of the members of the Police
Force, including temporary officers and Special Law Enforcement Officers,
shall be those prescribed by State Laws governing municipal Police
Departments generally, by the Charter and ordinances and resolutions of
the Township Council.
The Division of Police, through its Chief, shall:
All applicants for the position of Patrol Officer shall make written
application therefor to the Chief of Police and at the same time submit
such proof as shall be requested with respect to the above
qualifications.
a. Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections,
disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages, and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages.
b. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the
use of the streets by vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and
facilitate the convenience of motorists and pedestrians, and to make
and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances
of the Township for such purposes.
c. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township, inspect and observe all
places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
requiring any State or Township license or permit and report thereon to
the appropriate department.
d. Respond to all fire alarms and assist the fire company in the protection
of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order, and in
enforcing observance of the State Uniform Fire Safety Act. The Chief of
the Fire Company may request the Township Manager or the Officer-in-
Charge at the time of any emergency to provide the assistance of the
Police Reserves in emergencies.
e. Furnish assistance upon request to the Township First Aid and Rescue
Squad.
f. Provide for the attendance of its members in Court as necessary for the
prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses, and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of
Federal, State and County governments.
g. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the Police
efficiency of the members of the Division.
§ 2-19.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.3
1:35
§ 2-19.4. Hours of Employment. [1973 Code § 2-11.4; New]
Each member of the Division of Police shall devote his whole time and
services thereto, except as provided in subsection 2-19.5 below. Although
certain hours will be allotted for the performance of regular tours of duty,
officers are considered at all times available for duty and must act promptly
at any time that their services are required, except when on authorized
leave or in the event of disability.
No Police Officer shall be required to be on regular duty for more than
six (6) days a week, but in case of an emergency, the Manager or Chief of
Police shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such
officers during the period of the emergency.
§ 2-19.5. Outside Employment. [1973 Code § 2-11.5]
Each full-time Patrol Officer appointed to the Police Force of the Township
may pursue other employment outside of the duty hours as prescribed by
the Manager and subject to the approval of the Manager.
§ 2-19.6. Removal From Duty. [1973 Code § 2-11.6; New]
The Chief of Police shall have the power to relieve from duty any member
of the Division of Police for the violation of any provision of this section or
any rule governing the Division of Police until such time as complaint and
charge against such member shall have been disposed of by formal hearing
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:47-6.
§ 2-19.7. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [1973 Code § 2-11.7]
The Manager may appoint Special Law Enforcement Officers for a term
not exceeding one (1) year, and revoke such appointments without cause
or hearing. Such Special Law Enforcement Officers shall carry out their
duties and responsibilities under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police
and their powers, rights and duties shall be specifically defined by the
Chief of Police. The powers, rights and duties, however, shall immediately
cease at the expiration of the term for which they were appointed, or upon
revocation of their appointment. Special Officers shall not carry a revolver
or other weapon at any time except as otherwise directed by the Chief of
Police.
No person shall be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement Officer unless
he is a citizen of the United States, is able to read, write and speak
the English language, is physically qualified, of good moral character, and
shall not have been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.
Every such Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be fingerprinted and his
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of the State Police and Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Reports shall be made by the Chief of Police to
h. Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the disposition,
conduct and discipline of the Division.
§ 2-19.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-19.7
1:36
the Township Manager concerning the eligibility and qualifications of any
person proposed to be appointed a Special Law Enforcement Officer
§ 2-19.8. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 2-11.8]
The Township Council shall establish by resolution and may, from time to
time, amend and repeal by resolution such rules and regulations as it may
deem necessary for the government and efficient working of the entire
Division of Police. The rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be posted
by the Police Chief within five (5) days after the adoption thereof in a
prominent place in the Division of Police Headquarters and a copy thereof
delivered to each and every member of the Division within five (5) days after
the adoption of the rules or regulations or any amendment or repeal thereof.
§ 2-19.9. Special Duty Assignments for Police Officers. [Ord. No.
12-2012]
a. Any and all extra duty assignments for Police Personnel shall be
determined and approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. No
Police Officer shall perform special duty assignments for private
entities for compensation other than through the procedure in this
section. The Chief of Police or his designee shall obtain any information
deemed necessary, and use his discretion to determine approval or
denial of the special duty assignment. At the Chief or designee's
discretion, the special duty assignment shall be determined for
approval based on the nature of each individual assignment, and the
Chief or designee may approve any and all necessary equipment for
each assignment.
b. The work to be performed shall be considered "special assignment from
independent contractors" and will not be considered a direct
assignment. The taking of any and all extra duty assignments shall be
on a voluntary basis in accordance with a fair and reasonable system
established and administered by the Chief of Police.
c. Officers engaged in special duty assignments shall be deemed off-duty
and shall conform to all Police Department rules, regulations and
procedures. All such agreements for special duty assignment shall be
contracted for in writing by the completion of a form available from the
Police Department which contracts shall be paid fifteen (15) days from
the date of billing. Interest shall be charged at the rate of twelve (12%)
percent per annum on any amount billed for which payment has not
been made within fifteen (15) days. Delinquent parties shall be liable
for all costs, fees, and attorney fees associated with the collection of
any amount due.
d. All special duty assignments shall be within the Township, unless
specific written approval is given by the Chief to the officer to work
outside the Township, the Chief of Police may contact adjoining
municipal police departments to see if they are willing to perform such
special assignments.
§ 2-19.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.9
1:37
§ 2-20. DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
Editor's Note: Currently the Township is fulfilling this section through
an Interlocal Agreement with a neighboring municipality pursuant to the
Interlocal Services Act.
§ 2-20.1. Creation. [New]
Within the Department of Public Safety, there shall be a Division of
Emergency Management, referred to as the Office of Emergency
Management.
§ 2-20.2. Director of Emergency Management; Deputy Director.
[1973 Code § 2-27.2; Ord. No. 4-1976; New]
There shall be a Director of Emergency Management who shall be
appointed by the Township Manager to serve at his pleasure and a Deputy
Director who shall be appointed by the Director with the approval of the
Township Manager. The Director shall serve as Chairman of the Emergency
Management Council.
e. All payments for special duty assignments shall be made through a
Special Police Fund established by the Municipal Treasurer from which
payment shall be made to the individual Police Officers performing such
service. All payments from the trust fund shall be made to the Police
Officers subject to required deductions and administrative fees to be
retained by the Township to cover administrative costs, overhead, and
out-of-pocket expenses. The Township shall retain a fifteen (15%)
percent administrative fee for each officer and a five (5%) percent
administrative fee for each police vehicle utilized in connection with the
special duty assignment.
f. In the event that the person or entity requesting the special duty
assignment fails to contact the Police Chief at least four (4) hours prior
to the scheduled start time of the job, the person or entity is responsible
to pay the officer the minimum four (4) hours for the special duty
assignment.
g. The Police Chief or his designee shall have the authority to order any
Police Officer engaged in a special duty assignment to respond to an
emergency. The Police Chief or his designee shall also have the right to
order any special duty assignment to be terminated whenever said
assignment creates an unacceptable risk to the health, safety and
welfare of the Police Officer and/or citizens of the Township.
h. The Township shall be responsible to provide all necessary insurance
coverage for the Police Officers as required by law, including but not
limited to workers compensation, public liability, and claims for damage
and personal injury which may arise as a result of the municipality's
performance under the contract.
§ 2-19.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-20.3
1:38
§ 2-20.3. Duties and Functions of Director and Deputy Director.
[1973 Code § 2-27.3; New]
The Director shall be responsible for the planning, activating, coordinating
and the conduct of Emergency Management Advisory Council and supervise
disaster control operations in the Township.
The Deputy shall act in the name of the Director when the Director is unable
to discharge his normal duties and shall assume such other responsibilities
as may be delegated to him by the Director.
§ 2-20.4. Proclamation of Disaster Emergency. [1973 Code § 2-27.4;
Ord. No. 4-1976]
The Director may, when, in his opinion, a disaster has occurred or is
imminent, and with the advice and consent of the Manager and Township
Council, proclaim a state of local disaster emergency. Upon such
proclamation, the Director, in accordance with the regulations promulgated
by the State Office of Emergency Management, shall be empowered to issue
and enforce such orders as may be necessary to implement and carry out
defense or disaster control operations and to protect the health, safety and
resources of the residents of the Township.
§ 2-20.5. Emergency Management Advisory Council. [1973 Code
§ 2-27.1; Ord. No. 4-1976; Ord. No. 21-1998]
There shall be an Emergency Management Advisory Council of the
Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq., which shall be comprised
of the Director, Deputy Director and eight (8) additional members who shall
be appointed by the Township Manager and serve at the pleasure of the
Manager.
One (1) member shall be selected from each of the following:
a. Aberdeen Township Division of Police.
b. Fire District I with the advice and consent of the Board of Fire
Commissioners of District I.
c. Fire District II with the advice and consent of the Board of Fire
Commissioners of District II.
d. Aberdeen Township First Aid Squad with the advice and consent of the
Squad.
e. South Aberdeen Township First Aid Squad with the advice and consent
of the Squad.
f. Department of Public Works.
g. Department of Health.
§ 2-20.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20.6
1:39
§ 2-20.6. Duties of the Emergency Management Advisory Council.
[1973 Code § 2-27.3; Ord. No. 4-1976]
Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Emergency
Management, the Council shall generally assist the Township in establishing
the various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the requirements of all
emergency management and disaster control activities in accordance with
the rules and regulations established by the Governor of the State of New
Jersey, and more specifically:
§ 2-20.7. Community Emergency Response Team (CERT). [Ord. No.
1-2013]
§ 2-21. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, ZONING AND
DEVELOPMENT.
a. Develop plans for emergency operations in accordance with directives
from and approval of the State Director and/or County Coordinator.
b. Supervise local tests and exercises.
c. Coordinate activities of local and County services and allied agencies in
an emergency.
d. Maintain administrative records as may be required.
e. Investigate and apply for State or Federal grants or other aids and
assistance.
f. Take such action as may be appropriate and lawful to plan, enforce,
activate, coordinate and conduct emergency operations within the
Township.
a. Established. There is hereby established in the Township a volunteer
CERT.
b. Members. The CERT shall consist of up to fifty (50) members, all of
whom shall be under the supervision, and respond to the direction of
the Township's Emergency Management Coordinator.
c. Appointment, Qualifications. Members of the CERT shall be appointed
by the Township Council and shall serve terms of one (1) year. CERT
members shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall undergo
mandatory training in areas such as disaster preparedness, disaster fire
suppression, disaster medical operations, light search and rescue
operations, disaster psychology and team organization, and antiterrorism.
Such training shall be organized by the Township and in
accordance with the curriculum established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
d. Continuing Training. CERT members serving multiple terms shall be
required to undergo continuing training as required by the Township.
§ 2-20.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-21.1
1:40
§ 2-21.1. Establishment. [1973 Code § 2-16.1; Ord. No. 28-1981;
Ord. No. 18-1983]
There shall be a Department of Planning, Zoning and Development, the
head of which shall be the Director of Zoning and Development.
§ 2-21.2. Organization. [1973 Code § 2-16.2; Ord. No. 14-1974, § 1;
Ord. No. 28-1981]
The Department of Planning, Zoning and Development, under the
supervision of the Director, shall be organized into two (2) sections: a
Division of Planning, Zoning and Development; and a Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency whose duties and responsibilities are set forth in
full in Chapter XII.
§ 2-21.3. Director. [1973 Code § 2-16.3; Ord. No. 14-1974, § 1; Ord.
No. 28-1981; Ord. No. 18-1983; New]
The Director of Planning, Zoning and Development shall be appointed by
the Manager and shall be qualified on the basis of administrative abilities
and qualifications with special regard to education, training and experience
in land use planning and related governmental affairs or be licensed as a
Construction Official under the Uniform Construction Code. He or she shall
hold or actively pursue a regularly issued New Jersey Professional Planner's
License.
§ 2-21.4. Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-16.4; Ord. No. 28-1981;
Ord. No. 18-1983; New; Ord. No. 9-2014]
The Director of Planning, Zoning and Development, subject to the Charter
and administrative code and approval or direction of the Manager, shall:
a. Supervise the Administrative Zoning Officer as described in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
1. The Zoning Officer will be responsible for all administrative and
legal enforcement of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
b. The Director shall be responsible for the administrative and legal
enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code, Housing Code,
Commercial Properties, Maintenance Code, Demolition Ordinance and
other development ordinances.
1. Either directly or through a planning consultant hired by the
Township, provide the Township with guidance in planning within
the framework of the master plan.
2. Work with a Planning Consultant to the Township Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment, reviewing plans submitted to these Boards
for site improvements, subdivisions, etc. and disseminating
information to applicants and their representatives and advising
and instructing them on Township development requirements. The
§ 2-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-21.4
1:41
§ 2-21.5. Supervisor of Demolition of Buildings. [1973 Code
§ 2-16.5; Ord. No. 28-1981; New]
The Construction Official shall serve as Supervisor of Demolition of
Buildings and shall be charged with the enforcement of such ordinance
heretofore adopted by the Township.
§ 2-22. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
§ 2-22.1. Establishment. [1973 Code § 2-25.1; Ord. No. 16-1974]
There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation, the head of which
shall be the Director. The Director shall be appointed by the Township
Manager and shall be qualified by education, experience and training in the
field of public recreation and parks maintenance. Within the Department,
Zoning Officer shall attend Zoning Board Meetings, as needed.
The Zoning Officer shall prepare or cause to be prepared and
presented, reports and comments on applications before each
Board as required.
3. Prepare or cause to be prepared reports and recommendations on
subdivision applications and site plans and all other assignments,
as requested by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or any
other municipal body.
4. Direct and supervise all department personnel and assist the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment in their prescribed
activities and functions, including the preparation of annual
budgets.
5. Assist the Manager and Planner in the development of long-range
capital improvement programs and with the overall planning of
future land use within the Township.
6. Along with the Planner, make recommendations regarding
subdivision, zoning, and other land use development ordinances
within the Township.
7. In connection with the Manager and Planner, provide the Township
with guidance in planning within the framework of the master plan
and review and make recommendations regarding the master plan.
8. Assist the Manager and Planner in preparing Federal or State
grants as requested by the Manager and administer community
development programs in the Township.
c. Be the administrative head of the Department and delegate authority to
subordinates or other personnel to perform any of the duties and
responsibilities of this office. Hire, discipline and dismiss employees of
this Department.
§ 2-21.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-22.1
1:42
there shall be an Advisory Council on Recreation and Parks constituted and
appointed as hereinafter provided.
§ 2-22.2. Powers and Duties of the Department. [1973 Code
§ 2-25.2; Ord. No. 16-1974; New]
The Department shall:
§ 2-22.3. Powers and Duties of the Director. [1973 Code § 2-25.3;
Ord. No. 16-1974]
The Director of Parks and Recreation, subject to the Charter and
Administrative Code contained herein, and in consultation with the
Manager shall:
a. Provide a year-round program of wholesome recreational activities for
Township residents.
b. Cooperate with other municipal departments, youth organizations,
service clubs and other organizations, in furthering recreational
interests in the Township.
c. Plan, develop and coordinate the use of park and recreational facilities.
d. Plan and operate Township beaches and related facilities, and supervise
the activities of concessionaires at public beaches, parks and recreation
areas, under contract with the Township.
e. Assist the Township Manager in the preparation of the budget and enter
into agreements and understandings with the Regional Board of
Education for joint and cooperative program planning and use of its
facilities.
a. Be the administrative head of the Department.
b. Hire, discipline and dismiss subordinate employees within his
Department, subject to Civil Service Rules and Regulations and
availability of funds in his budget.
c. Promote or demote employees within the Department.
d. Assist the Township Manager in the preparation and administration of
the operating and capital budgets for the Department.
e. Assist the Township Manager in preparing short and long range needs
and goals of the Department.
f. Cooperate and coordinate the work of his Department with all
jurisdictional officials, boards and commissions.
g. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his Department.
h. Make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
§ 2-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22.3
1:43
§ 2-22.4. Charges and Fees. [1973 Code § 2-25.5; Ord. No. 16-1974]
The Director may sponsor, arrange and provide for the giving of indoor
and outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and contests, and may use and
employ public property for such purposes. The Department may charge and
collect for the use of the Township, a reasonable admission fee for each
person entering or using facilities, exhibitions, concerts, games or contests,
provided under this section, except as the Council may otherwise provide
by resolution.
§ 2-22.5. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 2-25.6; Ord. No.
16-1974]
§ 2-22.6. State Parks. [Ord. No. 2-2006 § 25.7]
i. Delegate authority to subordinates or other personnel to perform any of
the duties and responsibilities of his office.
j. Maintain records as may be required to control Departmental receipts,
property and personnel, to evaluate programs, and to provide
information for budgeting, public reporting, planning and financing of
park and recreational programs.
k. Prepare a monthly report on his Departmental activities for submission
to the Manager.
l. Prepare and maintain a roster of qualified seasonal and part-time parks
and recreation employees, for the benefit of the Manager.
m. Prepare a Parks and Recreational Policy Manual as a part of the
Township standard procedure system.
a. The Department may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
conduct of all persons while on or using such public property devoted to
public park or recreational uses through its policy manual and the
standard procedure system of the Township. Any person who shall
violate any such rules, regulations or procedures shall be adjudged to
be a disorderly person.
b. The custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed for the
Department shall, while on duty and for the purpose of preserving order
and the observance of the rules, regulations and procedures of the
Department, have the power and authority of Special Law Enforcement
Officers5 of the Township.
a. All State Parks, recreation areas and open space reservations included
within the State Park System located within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Township shall be governed by the provisions of this
section and the rules and regulations governing the use of State Parks
as adopted by the State of New Jersey and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:2-1 et
5. Editor's Note: See subsection 2-47.9, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
§ 2-22.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-22.6
1:44
§ 2-22.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2-2006 § 25.8]
§ 2-23. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.6
§ 2-23.1. Director of Health; Duties of Department. [1973 Code
§ 2-12; New]
There shall be a Department of Health, the head of which shall be the
Director of Health who shall be appointed by the Township Manager. The
Department shall have the functions, powers and duties of a Municipal
Health Officer or Department of Health as prescribed by general law and
ordinance, including the enforcement of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 2-23.2. Registrar of Vital Statistics. [1973 Code § 2-14; New]
There shall be a Registrar of Vital Statistics within the Department of
Health, who shall be appointed by the Township Manager. The Registrar
shall have charge of the administrative duties involved in obtaining reports
of and recording births, marriages and deaths in the Township, together
with such related work as may be required in accordance with general law
and ordinances of the Township.
§ 2-24. through § 2-26. (RESERVED)
seq. to the extent that said regulations are applicable to said parks, as
amended and supplemented from time to time.
b. Fines and penalties for convictions of violations of the State Park rules
and regulations shall be those set out in the most recent schedule of
fines for violation of rules and regulations governing use of State Parks
as adopted by the State of New Jersey. Where no specific fine or penalty
for a violation of any particular rule or regulation has been established
by the State of New Jersey, the general penalties for violations of this
section shall apply.
a. Maximum Penalty. For violation of any provision of this section, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be as provided by law.
b. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser
penalty including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all may be
appropriate for a particular case or violation.
6. Editor's Note: The Department of Health shall be permitted to function under an
Interlocal Agreement with a neighboring municipality. Refer also to Chapter XI, Health.
§ 2-22.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24
1:45

ARTICLE VII
Other Officers and Employees
§ 2-27. TOWNSHIP OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-27.1. Township Physician. [1973 Code § 2-13]
There shall be a Township Physician of the Township to be appointed by the
Township Manager, who shall be a person duly licensed by the State Board
of Medical Examiners of New Jersey to practice medicine within the State
and who shall perform all medical services required to be performed by or
on behalf of the Township, including the Police Department thereof.
§ 2-27.2. Air Pollution Control Officer. [1973 Code § 2-18]
There shall be an Air Pollution Officer who shall be known as the Township
Air Pollution Control Officer and who shall be charged with the enforcement
of the air pollution control ordinance.
§ 2-27.3. Township Historian.7 [1973 Code § 2-31.1; Ord. No.
2-1993]
There is hereby created the position of Historian of the Township of
Aberdeen pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10A1-1 et seq. The Historian shall be
appointed by the Township Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Township Council, without compensation.
7. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-32 Historical Commission.
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27.3
1:47

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Court
§ 2-28. MUNICIPAL COURT OF ABERDEEN TOWNSHIP.
§ 2-28.1. Powers. [1973 Code § 2-19.1]
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 264 of the 1948 laws of New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented, to be known as the Municipal Court of Aberdeen Township,
Monmouth County. The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear
the impress of the name of the Court.
The Court shall be held in the Township Hall or such other place as the
Township Council shall designate, and shall exercise all of the functions,
powers and jurisdiction conferred upon municipal courts by the provisions
of Chapter 264, New Jersey Laws of 1948, as amended or supplemented, or
any other law.
§ 2-28.2. Municipal Judge; Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 2-19.2]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by the Township
Council, who shall serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of
appointment and until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have and possess the qualifications,
and shall have, possess and exercise all of the functions, duties, powers
and jurisdictions conferred by Chapter 264, New Jersey Laws of 1948, as
amended or supplemented, or by general law or ordinance.
§ 2-28.3. Court Administrator. [1973 Code § 2-19.3]
There shall be a Court Administrator who shall be appointed by the
Township Manager and who shall perform such functions and duties as may
be prescribed for him by law, the rules applicable to Municipal Courts, and
by the Judge of the Municipal Court. His or her duties shall include but not
be limited to:
a. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
b. Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
c. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
d. Attending Court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing court documents, preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
e. Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency
and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
§ 2-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28.3
1:49
§ 2-28.4. Township Prosecutor. [1973 Code § 2-19.4]
There shall be a Township Prosecutor appointed by the Township Council
who shall serve for a term of one (1) year from January 1 of the year of his
appointment and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified.
§ 2-28.5. Township Public Defender. [1973 Code § 2-19.5; Ord. No.
5-1994; Ord. No. 2-1998]
f. Interviewing persons on informal Police Court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
requiring court appearances in this regard; maintaining and classifying
records and files.
a. He shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey but need not be a resident
of the Township.
b. The prosecutor shall represent the State of New Jersey through the
members of the Police Department of the Township on all matters
prosecuted in the Municipal Court in the Township as may be required
by the Police Department, Judge of the Municipal Court, Township
Manager or the Township Council. In addition, he shall give all legal
counsel and advice when required by the aforesaid persons or agencies
in connection with such matters prosecuted in the Township Court. The
prosecutor shall have such other powers and perform such other duties
as may be provided for the Office of the Municipal Prosecutor by
general law or Township ordinance.
a. Appointment. There shall be a Township Public Defender, appointed by
the Township Council, who shall serve for a term of one (1) year from
January 1 of the year of his appointment and until a successor is
qualified. He shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey but
need not be a resident of the Township.
b. The Municipal Public Defender shall have and possess the
qualifications, and shall have, possess and exercise all of the functions,
duties, powers and jurisdictions of a Public Defender as provided by
general law and ordinance and shall appear in the Aberdeen Township
Municipal Court at such time and in such matters as designated by the
Municipal Judge. A person applying for a Municipal Public Defender or
Court-approved Counsel shall pay an application fee of not more than
two hundred ($200.00) dollars but only in an amount necessary to pay
the costs of Municipal Public Defender Services, subject to waiver by
the Municipal Court and/or the Municipal Court Judge in accordance
with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court. The Municipal
Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific
period of time not to exceed four (4) months. The Public Defender
however shall not represent any person in the Township Municipal
Court unless that person signs a reimbursement agreement agreeing to
reimburse the Township for the costs incurred by the Public Defender
§ 2-28.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-28.5
1:50
and the costs shall be determined by a duly adopted resolution of the
Township Council.
§ 2-28.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28.5
1:51

ARTICLE IX
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-29. PLANNING BOARD. [1973 Code § 2-20]
There shall be a Planning Board established pursuant to and with such
powers as are set forth in Chapter XXV, Section 25-27.
§ 2-30. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. [1973 Code § 2-20A]
There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment established pursuant to and
with such powers as are set forth in Chapter XXV, Section 25-27
§ 2-31. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL.8
§ 2-32. HISTORICAL COMMISSION OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
ABERDEEN.
§ 2-32.1. Historical Commission Created.9 [1973 Code §§ 2-31.3,
2-32; Ord. No. 2-1993; Ord. No. 18-1997]
There is hereby created the Historical Commission of the Township of
Aberdeen. There shall be no less than three (3) and up to nine (9) members
of this Commission, including the Township Historian, who shall serve as
the Chairperson of the Commission. The members of the Commission shall
be appointed by the Township Council for one year terms, and shall serve
without compensation.
Powers and Responsibilities. The Historian, acting in conjunction with the
Commission, shall have the following powers and responsibilities:
a. To carry out an historical program, including but not restricted to
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to the
history of the local unit. The Historian shall store such materials in such
manner as to insure their preservation, and shall notify the Township
Historical Commission, the State Archivist, New Jersey Historical
Commission, County Historian and Township Council of any materials
which shall be acquired for preservation. Upon leaving the position, the
Historian shall turn over all materials and records and reports into the
possession of the successor, if then appointed, or to the Township
Manager on behalf of the Township Council until a successor shall be
appointed.
b. The Historian shall make an annual report to the Township Manager
and Township Council stating all the work performed and accomplished
during that year. The Historian shall transmit a copy of such report to
the New Jersey Historical Commission. The New Jersey Historical
Commission may advise each County Historian and Municipal Historian
8. Editor's Note: See DIVISION OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, Section 2-20.
9. See Subsection 2-27.3 for the creation of the position of Township Historian.
§ 2-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-32.1
1:53
§ 2-33. through § 2-46. (RESERVED)
§ 2-47. ADVISORY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
§ 2-47.1. Aberdeen Business Council. [1973 Code § 2-21.1; Ord. No.
15-1992; Ord. No. 2-1995]
of general guidelines along which their historical program may be
implemented.
c. The Historian may research, write and cause to have published a
municipal history, and may recommend appropriate historical materials
for publication.
d. The Historian may assist a landmark commission, as well as advise the
Township Council, concerning the acquisition, administration, use and
disposition of any landmark, or historic site, including such places
included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places. Such advice
may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section, Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy.
e. The Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration, including the
erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
a. Creation; Members. There shall be an advisory board known as the
Aberdeen Business Council consisting of nine (9) members appointed
by the Township Manager for terms ending January 31 of each year. The
chairperson of the Aberdeen Business Council is to be selected by a
majority of the committee members thereafter. All vacancies shall be
promptly filled by appointment by the Township Manager for the
remainder of the unexpired term. A member of the Township Council
shall serve as an ex-officio member of this Aberdeen Business Council.
b. Duties. The Aberdeen Business Council shall:
1. Inquire into, survey and publicize the extent, advantages and utility
of vacant land in the Township designated by the master plan as
suitable for commercial or industrial development;
2. Study and analyze the various business and industry located in the
Township with a view to ascertaining the opportunity for
expansion;
3. Advertise the advantages and opportunities, and the availability of
real estate in the Township, and encourage and accomplish
commercial development within the Township;
4. Serve as a liaison between the Township Council and the business
community to address issues of mutual concern;
§ 2-32.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-47.1
1:54
§ 2-47.2. Harbor Advisory Board. [1973 Code § 2-21.2]
§ 2-47.3. Environmental and Shade Tree Advisory Board. [1973
Code § 2-21.4; Ord. No. 1-1981; Ord. No. 2-1992]
5. Review proposed State and Federal regulations for their potential
impact upon the business community, and to advise the Township
Council accordingly;
6. Inquire into the availability of State and Federal grants to
encourage economic growth in the Township; and
7. To perform any other functions as specifically requested by the
Township Council.
a. Creation; Members. There shall be a Harbor and Waterfront Advisory
Board known as the Harbor Advisory Board of the Township of
Aberdeen, consisting of five (5) persons appointed by the Manager.
Members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. The members
shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.
b. Powers and Duties. The Harbor Advisory Board shall have the power to
advise the Manager concerning the condition of the waterways within
the territorial limits of the Township, including all obstructions,
permanent anchorages, conditions of pollution and the condition of all
wharves, piers and docks.
a. Creation; Members. There shall be an Environmental and Shade Tree
Advisory Board known as the Environmental and Shade Tree Advisory
Board of the Township of Aberdeen. The Board shall be composed of
five (5) persons and two (2) alternates, who shall be appointed by the
Township Council for terms ending January 31 of each year, the
Chairman of which is to be elected by a majority of the members thereof
each year. The Board shall also consist of two (2) non-voting advisory
positions, which shall be open to students enrolled in Matawan-
Aberdeen Regional High School who shall be appointed by the
Township Council to terms ending January 31 of each year.
b. Duties and Functions. The Environmental and Shade Tree Advisory
Board's duties and functions shall be as follows:
1. Study, review and determine the existing quality of the air and
waterways in the Township.
2. On behalf of the Township Council, receive and investigate
allegations of air or water pollution in the Township; advise the
Council of any findings and offer recommendations.
3. Study, review and determine the desirability of a Township
reclamation-recycling program; advise the Council of its findings
and recommendations; administer such a program if the Council so
determines.
§ 2-47.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47.3
1:55
§ 2-47.4. Human Relations Advisory Board. [1973 Code § 2-21.5]
There shall be a Human Relations Advisory Board known as the Human
Relations Advisory Board of the Township of Aberdeen consisting of not
more than twelve (12) members appointed by the Township Council for
terms ending January 31 of each year, the Chairman of which is to be
elected by a majority of the members thereof each year.
§ 2-47.5. Mass Transit Advisory Board. [1973 Code § 2-21.6]
4. Provide comments to the Planning Board regarding the
environmental impact of proposed projects and developments
within the Township.
5. Study ways to improve the quality of the physical environment
within the Township; advise the council of its findings and
recommendations.
6. Perform any other studies or functions as directed by the Township
Council.
7. The Board shall have the following additional duties and functions;
(a) To advise and make recommendations to the Planning Board
concerning shade trees.
(b) To advise the Township Manager concerning:
(1) The regulation, planting and care of shade and ornamental
trees, shrubbery now located or which may hereafter be
planted in any public highway or parkway, including the
planting, trimming and spraying, care and protection
thereof.
(2) The regulation and control of the use of the ground
surrounding the same so far as may be necessary for the
proper growth, care and protection.
(3) Moving or requiring the removal of any tree or part
thereof dangerous to public safety.
The Environmental and Shade Tree Advisory Board shall
annually file a written report with the Township Council
relating the functions and activities of the Environmental
and Shade Tree Advisory Board for the previous year.
a. Creation; Members. There shall be a Mass Transit and Parking Advisory
Board known as the Mass Transit Advisory Board of the Township of
Aberdeen consisting of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the
Township Council for terms ending January 31 of each year, the
Chairman of which is to be elected by a majority of the members thereof
each year.
§ 2-47.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-47.5
1:56
§ 2-47.6. Senior Citizen Advisory Board. [1973 Code § 2-21.7; Ord.
No. 10-1986; Ord. No. 5-1990]
There shall be a Senior Citizen Advisory Board known as the Senior Citizen
Advisory Board of the Township of Aberdeen, consisting of seven (7) persons
appointed by the Manager, with advice and consent of the Township
Council, for a one (1) year term ending January 31 of each year. The Senior
Citizen Advisory Board shall review and determine the services affecting
senior citizens within the Township of Aberdeen and report to the Township
Manager any findings and offer recommendations.
§ 2-47.7. Cable Television Advisory Committee. [1973 Code § 2-21.8;
Ord. No. 5-1991]
There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Committee of the Township of
Aberdeen consisting of five (5) persons appointed by the Township Manager,
with advice and consent of the Township Council, for a two (2) year term
ending January 31st of every second year. The Cable Television Advisory
Committee shall investigate the past and present cable television
performance and plan for the future cable related needs of the community
reporting to the Township Manager and the Township Council so that they
may negotiate for the best contract of services for cable television for the
Township of Aberdeen.
§ 2-47.8. Water Department Advisory Board. [1973 Code § 2-21.9;
Ord. No. 5-1992]
b. Duties and Functions. The Mass Transit Advisory Board's duties and
functions shall be as follows:
1. Study, review and determine the existing transit and parking
situations in the Township.
2. Study ways to improve the quality of transit and parking services
and facilities and advise the Township Council of its findings and
recommendations.
3. Process applications, permits and fees for Township parking
facilities.
4. Perform any other studies or functions as directed by the Township
Council.
The Mass Transit Advisory Board shall annually file a written report
with the Township Council relating the functions and activities of
the Mass Transit Advisory Board for the previous year.
a. Creation; Members. There shall be a Water Department Advisory Board
known as the Water Department Advisory Board of the Township of
Aberdeen, consisting of ten (10) members who shall be appointed by
the Township Manager for terms ending January 31st of each year, the
Chairperson of which shall be elected by a majority of the members
§ 2-47.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47.8
1:57
§ 2-47.9. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.10 [1973 Code
§ 2-25.4; Ord. No. 16-1974; Ord. No. 9-1986; Ord. No. 10-2002]
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of the Township,
consisting of fifteen (15) members appointed by the Manager. Of the initial
appointees, three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of one year,
three for a term of two (2) years, three for a term of three (3) years, three
(3) for a term of four (4) years, and three (3) for a term of five (5) years. At
the expiration of each of the current terms, the new member or members
shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. The members shall serve
until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified. The Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board shall advise the Director of the Department
of Parks and Recreation concerning the parks and recreation programs and
areas in the Township.
§ 2-47.10. Aberdeen Green Team. [Added 10-17-2018 by Ord. No.
25-2018]
thereof each year. The members shall be residents in the service area
of the Township Water Department. A member of the Township Council
who resides in the service area shall also serve as an ex officio member
of the Water Department Advisory Board.
b. Duties and Functions. The Water Department Advisory Board's duties
and functions shall be as follows:
1. To study, review and determine the existing quality of service
provided by the Township's Water Department.
2. On behalf of the Township Council, to study and analyze the longterm
viability of the operations and maintenance of the water
system.
3. To perform any other studies or functions as requested by the
Township Council.
4. The Water Department Advisory Board shall annually file a written
report with the Township Council summarizing the activities of the
Board for the previous year.
a. The Aberdeen Green Team be and is hereby established as an advisory
committee to the Aberdeen Township Council.
b. The general purposes for the Green Team shall include but not be
limited to the following:
1. Manage Aberdeen's participation in the Sustainable Jersey
program;
10.Editor's Note: See also Section 2-22, Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 2-47.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-47.10
1:58
§ 2-48. through § 2-49. (RESERVED)
2. Encourage the Township staff to pursue sustainable practices
where possible and implement the Township Council's
environmental goals;
3. At the recommendation of the Township Council, work with existing
groups within the Township whose actions affect environmental
issues to eliminate duplication and assure that important tasks are
covered;
4. Provide suggestions for further research and action to the
Township Council;
5. At the direction of the Township Council, provide advice and
suggestions to the Township Planning Board and/or Zoning Board
of Adjustment to assure that environmental issues are considered
in their deliberations and actions;
6. Solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community;
7. Promote the causes of sustainability within the Township.
c. The Aberdeen Township Council shall appoint five Township residents
to serve as the Green Team. In addition, the Township Council shall
appoint two alternate members to the Green Team who shall be
designated as Alternate 1 and Alternate 2. The Green Team shall elect
from among its members a Chair and Vice Chair. Initially, two members
shall be appointed to a three-year term ending on December 31, 2021,
two members to a two-year term ending on December 31, 2020, and
one member to a one-year term ending December 31, 2019. Alternate 1
and Alternate 2 shall each serve for a one-year term ending December
31, 2019. Thereafter, all member terms shall be for three years and all
alternate members terms shall be for one year. Additionally, a member
of the Township Council and the Township Manager shall serve as ex
officio members of the Green Team. Ex officio members shall not vote.
The Green Team shall select Township volunteers to work on Green
Team projects. The names of the Green Team volunteers shall
periodically be submitted to the Township and the Green Team
Committee reports, minutes, etc., shall also be submitted to the
Township Council.
d. The Green Team shall meet monthly. Additional meetings of the Green
Team may be scheduled by the Chair at his/her discretion.
§ 2-47.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-48
1:59

ARTICLE X
Volunteer Fire Department and First Aid Squads
§ 2-50. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-50.1. Applicants for Positions in the Township Volunteer Fire
Department. [1973 Code §§ 2-24A.1—2-24A.6; Ord. 12-1993]
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
MEMBERSHIP IN A VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANY — shall mean
membership in a Volunteer Fire Company organized pursuant to Title
15A of the New Jersey Statutes; membership in a Volunteer Fire
Company or similar organization constituted in a Fire District pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70.1; membership in a Junior Firefighter's Auxiliary
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95; or nonpaid membership in
a part-paid Fire Department or Force established pursuant to Chapter
14 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
b. Purpose. This section is intended to consider the respective volunteer
fire companies operating in the Township of Aberdeen as an Authorized
Agency as the term is defined by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.
c. Contents of Application. Any person desiring membership in a
Volunteer Fire Company shall complete in duplicate, filing the same
with the Volunteer Fire Company, an application the form of which may
be prescribed by the Volunteer Fire Company, but which shall contain
the following information about the applicant:
1. Name.
2. Home address.
3. Birth date.
4. Social security number.
5. Driver's license number.
6. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1;
(a) Aggravated arson, or
(b) Arson, or
(c) Failure to control or report dangerous fire, or
(d) Directly or indirectly pays or accepts any form of consideration
for the purpose of starting a fire or explosion.
7. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3, False Public Alarms.
8. Any conviction of a crime or disorderly persons violation.
§ 2-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-50.1
1:61
§ 2-51. VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES FOR MEMBERS OF FIRE
COMPANIES AND FIRST AID SQUADS. [1973 Code § 2-32]
9. Such other information as the Volunteer Fire Company deems
relevant to the application, provided none of such information is
prohibited by law.
The application provided by the Volunteer Fire Department shall
include a separate provision, to be signed by the applicant, which
states that the applicant acknowledges and approves of an
investigation into any criminal record the applicant may have as a
prerequisite to being approved for membership in a Volunteer Fire
Department operating in the Township.
d. Processing of Application. Following the filing of such application the
Volunteer Fire Company shall transmit one of the applications to the
Chief of Police of the Township of Aberdeen, who shall conduct an
investigation to ascertain the truth of the statements made by the
applicant in the application, as well as any such other investigation of
the applicant's background as the Chief deems necessary for the
protection of the public good. If as the result of such investigation the
applicant is found to have been convicted of a violation of N.J.S.A.
2C:17-1 a, b, c, and/or d, or N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3, or any other crime or
disorderly persons violation, or any other information that would
indicate the applicant may be a threat to the health, safety or welfare of
the community, the Chief of Police shall report such information and
particulars thereof to the Volunteer Fire Company.
e. Fingerprinting of Applicant. In connection with the investigation, the
applicant shall submit to fingerprinting, and the Chief of Police is
authorized to submit applicant's fingerprint card and receive State
criminal history record information from the Division of State Police/
State Bureau of Identification for use in considering the suitability of all
applicants covered under this section.
f. Time Limit for Investigation. The above investigation by the Chief of
Police shall be completed within sixty (60) business days of receipt of
the application and the fingerprinting of applicant.
a. Qualification for Benefits. This section shall be and is limited solely to
residents of the Township of Aberdeen who are volunteers in the Fire
Companies established in Fire Districts No. 1 and No. 2 and First Aid
Squads and are certified to be "members in good standing" by the Chief
Executive Officer of the respective Volunteer Fire Companies or First
Aid squads as required hereafter.
b. Member in Good Standing.
1. A "member in good standing" is hereby defined as an active
member or active life member volunteer who has served at least
one year of continuous service in his respective company or squad
§ 2-50.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-51
1:62
§ 2-52. through § 2-54. (RESERVED)
or has been certified, in writing, by the Chief Executive Officer
of his respective company or squad to have served the required
percentage of activity or participation to qualify as a bona fide
member of such organization;
2. The certification shall be signed by the Chief Executive Officer and,
notarized accordingly, shall be filed in the office of the Township
Clerk as a public record;
3. "Member in good standing" certification shall be filed with the
Township Clerk annually and shall be provided to the Clerk
between January 1 and January 15 of each year. A new certification
must be filed each year and as of January 15 of each year the
certification from the preceding year shall be null and void.
c. Benefits. A member in good standing as defined herein shall be entitled
to certain benefits within the Township of Aberdeen as follows:
1. Exemption from payment up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars per
year for Township of Aberdeen fees for certain activities, licenses,
permits and rentals, provided the fee is for the personal and
nonprofit use of the member in good standing or a member of his
immediate family residing in the same household. The fees
included are as follows:
(a) Fees for use of municipal buildings;
(b) Fees for recreation department activities and application fees
for recreation programs;
(c) Construction permits for work on the residence of the member
in good standing;
(d) License fees for activities of a personal and nonprofit nature,
which fees are payable to and deposited solely by the Township
of Aberdeen.
d. Exclusion. This section shall not apply to any fee which goes in whole or
in part to any other governmental or private agency or entity. This
section shall not apply to any fine, penalty or related charge incurred by
any person.
e. Immediate Family. This means the member in good standing, his or her
spouse and all children under twenty-one (21) years of age who are
unmarried and permanently occupying the same residence as the
member in good standing within the Township of Aberdeen.
§ 2-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-52
1:63

ARTICLE XI
Contracts and Agreements
§ 2-55. COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENT. [1973 Code § 2-30 ;
Ord. No. 6-1991]
The Township of Aberdeen, as a "participating contracting unit," is
authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the County
of Monmouth, as the "lead agency," for the conduct of certain functions
relating to the purchase of selected work, materials and/or supplies for their
respective jurisdictions.
§ 2-56. AWARD OF CONTRACTS FOR REDEVELOPMENT WORK TO
CERTAIN CONTRIBUTORS.
§ 2-56.1. Prohibition on Awarding Contracts for Redevelopment
Work to Certain Contributors. [Ord. No. 10-2007 § 9A]
a. Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative
Pricing Ordinance of the Township of Aberdeen.
b. Authorization. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(15), the
Township of Aberdeen, as a participating contracting unit, is hereby
authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with the
County of Monmouth, as the lead agency, and other participating
contracting units within the County of Monmouth for the purchase of
selected work, materials and/or supplies.
c. Compliance. The lead agency shall be responsible for complying with
the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq.), and all other
provisions of the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey, as to the
bidding, award and execution of master contracts on behalf of itself and
any participating contracting units, as well as for purchases made by
the lead agency for its own needs under the master contract. Each
respective participating contracting unit which chooses to purchase
under a master contract shall be responsible to enter into a separate
contract with the vendor, to certify the availability of funds, to issue
purchase orders, to accept delivery and to make payment for those
items purchased by that participating contracting unit for its own
needs.
a. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with Federal, State or local law,
the Township of Aberdeen and any of its departments, instrumentalities
or purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract with any private party for the planning, replanning,
construction or undertaking of any project or redevelopment work,
including the acquisition or leasing of any public property in
conjunction with the redevelopment of any area within the Township of
Aberdeen pursuant to the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., (hereinafter "redevelopment
work"), if that redeveloper has solicited or made any contribution of
§ 2-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-56.1
1:65
money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions,
during the applicable time period as defined below, to: (a) a campaign
committee of any Aberdeen Township candidate or holder of public
office within the Township of Aberdeen having responsibility for the
awarding of such contracts or to any Aberdeen Township political
campaign committee, or to (b) any Township of Aberdeen or Monmouth
County Party Committee, or to (c) any political action committee
(hereinafter "PAC") that regularly engages in the promotion and/or
support of Aberdeen Township municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders. For purposes of this section, the "applicable time period"
shall be defined as the time period between the date that the property
which is the subject of the redevelopment project has been declared by
the Governing Body to be an area in need of redevelopment pursuant
to and in accordance with the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law
and the date of the awarding of the contract, or the twelve (12) months
prior to awarding the contract, whichever is the shorter.
b. No redeveloper who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations for,
or agrees to any contract or agreement with the Township of Aberdeen
or any of its departments or instrumentalities for the rendition of
redevelopment work shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution of
money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to:
(a) a campaign committee of any Aberdeen Township candidate or
holder of public office within the Township of Aberdeen having
responsibility for the awarding of such contracts or to any Aberdeen
Township political campaign committee, or to (b) any Township of
Aberdeen or Monmouth County Party Committee, or to (c) any PAC that
regularly engages in the promotion and/or support of Aberdeen
Township municipal candidates or municipal officeholders, between the
time of first communication between that redeveloper and the Township
of Aberdeen regarding a specific agreement for redevelopment work
and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of any
proposal, or the completion of all matters specified in the contract or
agreement.
c. For purposes of this section, a "redeveloper" subject to the restrictions
set forth in paragraphs a. and b. above means: (a) an individual,
including the individual's spouse, if any, and any child/children living at
home, a person, firm, corporation, professional corporation,
partnership, organization, or association seeking or obtaining
redevelopment work as defined above; (b) all principals who own one
(1%) percent or more of the equity or ownership or income interests in
the person or entity defined in (a) above and their spouses and any
child/children living at home; (c) all the partners and/or officers of such
an entity, in the aggregate, and their spouses and any child/children
living at home; and (d) any affiliates or subsidiaries directly controlled
by the redeveloper.
§ 2-56.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-56.1
1:66
§ 2-56.2. Contribution Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
10-2007 § 9B]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to any Aberdeen Township candidate
for Mayor or Township Council or Aberdeen Township political campaign
committee shall be deemed a violation of this section; nor shall an
agreement for property, goods or services of any kind whatsoever be
disqualified thereby if that contribution or agreement was made by the
redeveloper prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 2-56.3. Contribution Statement by Redeveloper. [Ord. No. 10-2007
§ 9C]
§ 2-56.4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 10-2007 § 9D]
d. For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
responsibility for the award of the contract under the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law shall be:
(1) The Aberdeen Township Council if the contract requires approval
or appropriation from the Council or a public officer who is
responsible for the award of a contract if that public officer is
appointed by the Council; or
(2) The Mayor of the Township of Aberdeen if the contract requires the
approval of the Mayor or a public officer who is responsible for the
award of contract if that public officer is appointed by the Mayor;
or
(3) Both of the above.
a. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to any redeveloper, the
Township of Aberdeen or any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the redeveloper that the redeveloper has not made any
contribution in violation of subsection 2-56.1 of this section.
b. The redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of
this section that may occur during the negotiation or duration of a
contract. The certification required under this subsection shall be made
prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the Township of
Aberdeen and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
a. All redevelopment contracts, leases or other undertakings shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of such agreements to violate
subsection 2-56.1b above, or to knowingly conceal or misrepresent
contributions given or received or to make or solicit contributions
through any intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
§ 2-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-56.4
1:67
§ 2-56.5. Right of Free Speech to Prevail. [Ord. No. 10-2007 § 10]
Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to impair in any way the right
of such private parties or redevelopers secured by the First Amendment
of the Constitution of the United States and further secured by Article 1,
Paragraph 6 of the Constitution of the State of New Jersey to exercise its
right to freedom of speech and its right to speak and write and publish its
sentiments on all subjects.
§ 2-57. through § 2-63. (RESERVED)
b. Any redeveloper, as defined in subsection 2-56.1c above, who knowingly
fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this section or who
knowingly makes or solicits contributions through any intermediaries
for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution shall be disqualified from eligibility for future
redevelopment contracts for a period of four (4) calendar years from
the date of the violation.
§ 2-56.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-57
1:68
ARTICLE XII
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-64. TORT CLAIMS ACT NOTICE FORM.
§ 2-64.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 13-2006, Preamble]
The New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:8-6, authorizes a public entity,
such as the Township of Aberdeen, to adopt a tort claim notice form to
be completed by claimants seeking to file a claim as required by the Tort
Claims Act, and the Township of Aberdeen is a public entity covered by the
provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
§ 2-64.2. Adoption of Tort Claims Act Notice Form. [Ord. No.
13-2006 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-65. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-65.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 10-2008 Preamble]
The State Legislature recently adopted Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007
(N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) to create the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program to provide retirement benefits to various county and municipal
officials. N.J.S. 43:15C-2 requires the Governing Body of each County,
municipality and other local entity to adopt, as appropriate, either a
resolution or ordinance to determine the positions that are substantially
similar in nature to the advice and consent of the Senate for appointments
by the Governor of the State, pursuant to guidelines or policy that shall be
established by the Local Finance Board in the Department of Community
Affairs, and for which officials appointed to such positions shall be eligible
for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program,
subject to the provisions of law. The Governing Body of the Township of
Aberdeen has considered the guidelines issued by the Local Finance Board
and ordains the following.
§ 2-65.2. Eligible Positions; Participation Required. [Ord. No.
10-2008 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
a. The attached Tort Claims Act Notice form shall be and is hereby
adopted as the official tort claim notice form for the Township of
Aberdeen.
b. All persons making claims against the Township of Aberdeen, its
officers, employees, agencies or departments, pursuant to the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq. are required to complete
the form adopted by this section as a condition of compliance with the
New Jersey Claims Act notice requirements.
§ 2-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.2
1:69
§ 2-65.3. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 10-2008 § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
§ 2-65.4. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 10-2008 § 3]
This program shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-66. through § 2-67. (RESERVED)
a. Township Manager
b. Director of Parks and Recreation, Municipal Court Administrator
c. Prosecutor
d. Judge
a. Tax Collector/Utility Collector
b. Chief Financial Officer
c. Construction Official
d. Tax Assessor
e. Township Clerk
f. Director of Public Works
g. Fire Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electric Subcode
Official, Housing Inspector
§ 2-65.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-66
1:70
ARTICLE XIII
Fees for Municipal Services
§ 2-68. FEES FOR CERTIFICATION AND COPIES OF MUNICIPAL
RECORDS.
§ 2-68.1. Services of Township Clerk. [1973 Code § 2-26.1; Ord. No.
9-1975, § 1; Ord. No. 8-1995]
For the services hereinafter mentioned, the Township Clerk shall charge the
following fees:
§ 2-68.2. Fees for Vital Statistics. [1973 Code § 5-8.1; Ord. No.
26-1992; Ord. No. 46-2005 §§ 1—4]
a. Certified copies of vital statistics records
including, but not limited to, death certificates,
marriage certificates and birth certificates
$10.00 per certificate
b. Preparing and/or processing correction $10.00
c. Burial permit $5.00
d. Disinterment permit $5.00
§ 2-68.3. Services of Police Department. [1973 Code § 2-26.2; Ord.
No. 9-1975; Ord. No. 16-1975; Ord. No. 11-1994; Ord. No. 8-1995;
Ord. No. 49-2005 § 2; Ord. No. 16-2009]
For the services hereinafter mentioned, the Police Department shall charge
the following fees:
a. For certifying any public record such as an ordinance, resolution,
minutes and other public documents, $0.75 per page for the first page
to tenth page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to twentieth page
and $0.25 per page for all pages over 20.
b. Furnishing any copy, by photostating or otherwise of any public record,
$0.75 per page for the first page to tenth page; $0.50 per page for the
eleventh page to twentieth page and $0.25 per page for all pages over
20, or for any fractional part thereof.
c. For furnishing any ordinance in booklet form, such as the zoning
ordinance or the building code, or any other code, the amount to be
charged for such ordinance in booklet form shall be the amount printed
on such booklet as the charge thereof. In the event such booklet sets
forth no charge, the charge for the same shall be the minimum of $5.00.
a. For the request of any copy of reports furnished other than in person,
an additional fee of up to $5.00 for the first three (3) pages and $1.00
per page thereafter may be added to cover the administrative costs of
the report.
§ 2-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-68.3
1:71
§ 2-68.4. Services of Tax Collector. [1973 Code § 2-26.3; Ord. No.
9-1975, § 3; Ord. No. 8-1995]
The Collector of Taxes and Water Accounts shall charge, for the issuance of
a copy of a tax bill or water bill, $0.75 per page for the first page to tenth
page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to twentieth page and $0.25 per
page for all pages over 20.
§ 2-68.5. Services of the Court Administrator. [1973 Code § 2-26.4;
Ord. No. 9-1975, § 4; Ord. No. 8-1995]
For the services hereinafter mentioned, the Court Administrator shall
charge the following fees:
§ 2-68.6. Services of Planning and Zoning Board Secretaries. [1973
Code § 2-26.5; Ord. No. 9-1975; Ord No. 14-1995]
For the services hereinafter mentioned, the secretaries of the Planning and
Zoning Board shall charge the following fees:
b. For any other public record, the sum will be $0.75 per page for the first
page to tenth page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to twentieth
page and $0.25 per page for all pages over 20.
c. For furnishing photographs, $10.00 for the first photograph and $10.00
for each additional photograph or print.
d. For furnishing mobile digital video, a fee of $5.00 dollars per copy of a
digital video.
e. Where record archives must be searched manually, the Township will
charge a fee in addition to the reproduction fee, as set forth above in
paragraphs a. through d. of this subsection of $11.00 per hour to search
and gather the requested documents.
a. For certifying any public documents such as a complaint, a summons, a
warrant or any other pleading or legal document, $0.75 per page for the
first page to tenth page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to
twentieth page and $0.25 per page for all pages over 20.
b. For copying any complaint, summons, warrant or any other pleading or
public document, $0.75 per page for the first page to tenth page, $0.50
per page for the eleventh page to twentieth page and $0.25 per page for
all pages over 20 or fractional part thereof.
a. For certifying any public record such as an ordinance, resolution,
minutes and other public documents, $0.75 per page for the first page
to tenth page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to twentieth page
and $0.25 per page for all pages over 20.
b. Furnishing any copy, by photostating or otherwise of any public record,
$0.75 per page for the first page to tenth page; $0.50 per page for the
§ 2-68.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 2-68.6
1:72
§ 2-68.7. Services of Others. [1973 Code § 2-26.6; Ord. No. 9-1975;
Ord. No. 28-1976; Ord. No. 26-1982; Ord. No. 15-1983; Ord. No
14-1995]
For the services hereinafter mentioned, the secretary of any other board,
agency or commission of the Township shall charge the following fees:
§ 2-68.8. Clarification. [1973 Code § 2-26.7; Ord. No. 9-1975]
Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the above-named officers
to certify or issue any copy of any record unless such records are public
records.
§ 2-68.9. Disposition of Fees. [1973 Code § 2-26.8; Ord. No. 9-1975]
All sums collected under the provisions of this section shall be considered
the funds of the Township and shall be paid by the respective officers or
departments to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township within fortyeight
(48) hours of receipt thereof. By the fifth day of each month, each
department head or other responsible employee shall file a written report
to the Township Manager in accordance with the standard procedures as
issued by the Township Manager.
eleventh page to twentieth page and $0.25 per page for all pages over
20, or for any fractional part thereof.
a. For certifying any public record, the sum will be $0.75 per page for the
first page to tenth page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to
twentieth page and $0.25 per page for all pages over 20.
b. For furnishing any copy of any public record, by photostating or
otherwise, the sum will be $0.75 per page for the first page to tenth
page, $0.50 per page for the eleventh page to twentieth page and $0.25
per page for all pages over 20.
c. For furnishing Certificate of Occupancy Compliance letter by the
Director of Zoning and Development ten ($10.00) dollars.
§ 2-68.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-68.9
1:73

ARTICLE XIV
Official Township Colors
§ 2-69. TOWNSHIP COLORS. [Ord. No. 15-2012]
The Township hereby adopts the colors maroon and steel as the official
Township colors. Such colors will be displayed and incorporated at
Township events of the Township Council's choosing.
§ 2-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-69
1:75
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: For regulations requiring the removal of grass, weeds
and debris, and the maintenance of sidewalks and curbs, see Chapter
XIII, Property Maintenance. For regulations on the height of brush
and hedges at intersections, see Chapter XIX, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 3-1. NOISE REGULATIONS.
§ 3-1.1. Noise Prohibited. [1973 Code § 4-2.1]
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does or is likely to annoy,
disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others.
§ 3-1.2. Definition of Noise. [1973 Code § 4-2.2; Ord. No. 8-2011 § 1,
2]
Without intending to limit the generality of subsection 3-1.1, the following
acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
a. Radios; Televisions; Phonographs. The playing, use or operation of any
radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which
the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The
operation of such a set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., so that it is clearly
audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle
in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
b. Yelling; Shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, motel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
c. Animals; Birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity; but nothing herein contained is intended to apply
to a dog pound or kennel licensed in accordance with Chapter V.
d. Horns. The sounding of a horn or warning device on an automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when required by law, or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a
§ 2-69 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-1.2
1:76
§ 3-1.3. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 4-2.3]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to:
warning of impending danger to persons driving other vehicles or
to persons on the street. No person shall sound a horn or warning
device on an automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which emits
an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for an unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
e. Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of a steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises.
f. Defect in Vehicle or Load. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair or so loaded that it creates loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
g. Construction or Repair. The carrying on of excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work other than between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., the carrying on of construction, repair or
alteration work by a homeowner on his own dwelling or property, other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., the carrying on of
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work by
anyone on Saturday and Sunday, other than between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of
public health or safety, the Manager may grant a permit for excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration work for a period not to
exceed three days, by the terms of which permit such work may be
carried on between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
h. Schools; Courts; Houses of Worship; Hospitals. The creation of
excessive noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of learning,
house of worship or court while in use or adjacent to a hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such a street indicating that it is a
school, hospital or court street.
i. Landscaping. The carrying on of law mowing, grass trimming, leaf
blowing, or any landscaping work that requires the use of motorized
equipment other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
from Monday to Friday and the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
Saturday and Sunday.
The above enumeration is intended to give typical illustrations of
prohibited noise and shall not be construed as exclusive.
a. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers by houses of worship
engaged in religious activities.
§ 3-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.3
1:77
§ 3-1.4. Sound Trucks. [1973 Code § 4-2.4]
Sound trucks may be operated in accordance with the following regulations
upon the issuance of a permit by the Manager for each occasion and each
location:
§ 3-2. LITTER CONTROL.
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-15.1; Ord. No. 25-1982; Ord. No.
20-2005 § II]
As used in this section:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — shall mean a litter storage and
collection receptacle as required by Township regulations.
GARBAGE — shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other law or garden waste, newspapers,
b. Activities of municipal departments in the performance of their duties,
drills or public demonstrations.
c. Activities in public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under
permission or authority of the Manager.
d. The playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or in the open
air, where duly authorized.
a. Sound trucks shall not be operated in residential zones in the Township
before 9:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m.
b. Sound trucks shall not be operated in commercial zones in the
Township before 9:00 a.m. and after 9:00 p.m.
c. Moving sound trucks shall keep to the extreme right hand side of the
road and shall proceed at a speed of not less than ten (10) miles per
hour.
d. Stationary sound trucks are prohibited in all residential zones in the
Township, but may be operated in commercial zones during the hours
referred to above.
e. For the purposes of this section "residential zones" shall mean the
zones so designated in the zoning ordinance of the Township and
"commercial zones" shall mean and include all parts of the Township
other than residential zones.
§ 3-1.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-2.1
1:78
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
PARK — shall mean a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation
center or any other public area in the Township owned, or used by the
Township and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PRIVATE PREMISES — shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, parking lots
open to the public, parking areas open to the public, alleys or other public
ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and public buildings.
REFUSE — shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, other abandoned personal property and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets,
pamphlets, wrappers, handbills, newspapers, and any other printed or
nonprinted paper material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
leaves, wood, glass and other similar materials.
§ 3-2.2. Depositing in Public Places Prohibited; Exceptions. [1973
Code § 4-15.2; Ord. No. 25-1982]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Township except in public receptacles duly
authorized and provided by the Township, authorized private receptacles
for collection or in areas officially designated as Township dumping areas;
provided, that all such authorized deposits shall be made in the manner and
to the extent otherwise permitted by other ordinances or state law. Where
public receptacles are not provided, all such litter, refuse or rubbish shall
be carried away from the public place by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
§ 3-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.3
1:79
§ 3-2.3. Depositing in Bodies of Water Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 4-15.3; Ord. No. 25-1982]
No person shall throw or deposit litter, refuse or rubbish in any fountain,
pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in a public place or elsewhere
within the Township.
§ 3-2.4. Depositing on Occupied Private Property. [1973 Code
§ 4-15.4; Ord. 25-1982]
No person shall throw or deposit litter, refuse or rubbish on any occupied
private property within the Township, whether owned by such person or
not; except, that the owner or person in control of private property may
maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that
litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property.
§ 3-2.5. Depositing on Open or Vacant Private Property. [1973 Code
§ 4-15.5; Ord. No. 25-1982]
No person shall throw or deposit litter, refuse or rubbish on any open or
vacant private property within the Township whether owned by such person
or not.
§ 3-2.6. Placement in Public or Private Receptacles. [1973 Code
§ 4-15.6; Ord. No. 25-1982; Ord. No. 20-2005 § III]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than in a litter
receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
§ 3-2.7. Sweeping Litter, Refuse or Rubbish. [1973 Code § 4-15.7;
Ord. No. 25-1982]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter, refuse or rubbish from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks, entrance
walks, parking lots and parking areas in front of or upon their premises
free of litter, refuse or rubbish. Nothing herein recited shall prevent the
sweeping of leaves into the street during the periods officially designated or
announced by the Township Manager as periods for the collection of such
leaves.
§ 3-2.8. Merchants' Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter, Refuse or
Rubbish. [1973 Code § 4-15.8; Ord. No. 25-1982]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Township the
accumulation of litter, refuse or rubbish from any building or lot or from
§ 3-2.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-2.8
1:80
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalks, entrance walks, parking lots and parking
areas in front of or upon their premises free of litter, refuse or rubbish.
Nothing herein recited shall prevent the sweeping of leaves into the street
during the periods officially designated or announced by the Township
Manager as periods for the collection of such leaves.
§ 3-2.9. Litter, Refuse or Rubbish Thrown by Persons in Vehicles.
[1973 Code § 4-15.9; Ord. No. 25-1982; Ord. No. 20-2005 § III]
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle
or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or both, of the
motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated this section.
§ 3-2.10. Prohibiting the Deposit of Snow, Ice, Brush in Streets.
[1973 Code § 4-15.10; Ord. No. 25-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant in the removal of snow or ice or
in the cutting and removing of vegetation, brush or tree growth, to deposit
the same or cause the same to be deposited between the curb lines of the
public street.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit snow or ice, whether removed
from any driveway, parking area, sidewalk area or any privately-owned
property upon any street within the Township.
§ 3-2.11. Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter, Refuse or
Rubbish. [1973 Code § 4-15.11; Ord. No. 25-1982]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter, refuse or rubbish; provided, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter, refuse or rubbish in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 3-2.12. Truck Loads Causing Litter. [1973 Code § 4-15.12; Ord.
No. 25-1982]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, or
other public place.
No litter, garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be spilled from any truck on any
street or other public place in the Township and if such spillage occurs, the
driver shall clean up the same immediately. If the spillage is not so cleaned
up, the driver or owner or both shall be deemed to be in violation of this
section.
§ 3-2.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.13
1:81
§ 3-2.13. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. No. 20-2005 § IV]
This section shall be enforced by the Aberdeen Police Department and Code
Enforcement Official. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred
($100.00) dollars per day with a maximum fine not to exceed one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars per day.
§ 3-3. DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND NEWSPAPERS.
§ 3-3.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-3.1]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — shall mean any printed or written matter,
any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature:
a. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing; or
b. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
c. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
d. Which, while containing reading matter, other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain
of any person or person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
NEWSPAPER — shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as
defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with Federal Statute
or regulation, or a newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer as provided by law; or, in addition thereto, shall mean and
include any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less
than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — shall mean any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, papers, booklet or any other printed matter or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not
included in the definition of commercial handbill or newspaper.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OR PREMISES — shall mean any property not
defined as a public place.
§ 3-2.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-3.1
1:82
§ 3-3.2. Distributing Handbills in Public Places. [1973 Code § 4-3.2]
No person shall hand out, distribute, throw, deposit or deliver any
commercial or noncommercial handbill or newspaper in or on any public
place within the Township provided that it shall not be unlawful on any
street, sidewalk, or other public place within the Township for the person to
hand out or distribute to the receiver thereof any handbill or newspaper to
any person willing to accept it.
§ 3-3.3. Placing Handbills on Vehicles. [1973 Code § 4-3.3]
No person shall throw, attach or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill or newspaper in or on any vehicle, or any part thereof, provided
that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute to the receiver thereof a handbill or newspaper to any occupant
of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 3-3.4. Distributing Handbills on Private Premises. [1973 Code
§ 4-3.4]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill or newspaper in or on any private premises which are temporarily
or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
No person shall throw, deposit, distribute or deliver any commercial or
noncommercial handbill or newspaper on any private premises if requested
by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words
"No Trespassing" or "No Peddlers or Agents", such notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or
have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left on
their premises.
No person shall throw, deposit, distribute or deliver any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant or other person then present in or on such private premises. It is
provided that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as
provided in the paragraph above, such persons, unless requested by anyone
upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill
in or on such inhabited private premises by attaching same to a permanent
structure in a manner as to secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted
about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, provided
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, alleys
or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
VEHICLE — shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.4
1:83
that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by Federal postal law or
regulations.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be
placed on private premises in a manner as to secure or prevent them from
being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places, provided, however that mailboxes may not be used when so
prohibited by Federal postal law or regulations.
§ 3-3.5. Responsibility of Handbill Distributors. [1973 Code § 4-3.5;
Ord. No. 25-1975]
No person engaged in the business of distributing commercial or
noncommercial handbills shall cause or knowingly permit the provisions of
this section to be violated. Whenever it shall appear that commercial or
noncommercial handbills have been distributed in violation of the provisions
of this section and it can be determined from identification of the materials
so distributed that the undertaking to distribute was by a particular
business through its principals, agents or employees, it shall be presumed
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that such business knowingly
permitted such materials to be distributed in violation of this section.
§ 3-4. DECLARATION OF A STATE OF EMERGENCY.11
§ 3-4.1. Determination of State of Emergency. [1973 Code § 4-8.1;
New]
When in the judgment of the Manager, after consultation with the Council
and in conjunction with the Director of Emergency Management, a civil
emergency or the threat of same is deemed to exist, the Manager shall by
proclamation determine such an emergency to exist and immediately post
notice thereof in at least five (5) conspicuous places within the Township.
§ 3-4.2. Emergency Powers. [1973 Code § 4-8.2]
Upon the Manager's determination upon consultation with the Council and
in conjunction with the Director of Emergency Management and declaration
of a state of emergency, the Manager is authorized to exercise the following
powers; provided, however, that any such powers shall not continue to be in
force and effect for a longer period than forty-eight (48) hours unless, at the
expiration of such period of time, a resolution of the Council is duly adopted
extending the duration of the civil emergency:
a. Order a general curfew applicable to such portion of the Township or
age group within the Township as deemed advisable to be applicable
during such hours of the day and night as is necessary for the
protection of the public safety and welfare.
11.Editor's Note: See also Section 2-20, Division of Emergency Management.
§ 3-3.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-4.2
1:84
§ 3-4.3. Notice. [1973 Code § 4-8.3]
Wherever practicable, a copy of the proclamation shall be posted in a
prominent place at or near the various premises affected by the emergency
powers, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the owners or occupants
of the premises or any responsible person in charge thereof. In no event,
however, shall the failure to post such notice or deliver a copy thereof
render the exercise of such powers ineffective or invalid.
§ 3-5. INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
b. Order that all persons licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Law who dispense alcoholic beverages at retail, wholesale or for onpremises
consumption, as well as private groups or portions thereof
where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted, shall close
their establishments and cease operation of their businesses during the
hours or periods deemed necessary under the emergency.
c. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline, or other liquid flammable or combustible products, and order
the closing of all gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief
activity of which is the selling, distributing and dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products, or to limit the sale or distribution
of such gasoline and like products directly into the tanks of motor
vehicles.
d. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever, and order that all such establishments or portions thereof
which engage in the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of
firearms or ammunition shall close and cease such activity.
e. Order that no person, other than the State Police, National Guard, local
Police authorities, or any other person as may be authorized by the
council, shall carry, hold or possess, in any motor vehicle, carriage,
motorcycle or other vehicle, or carry on or about his clothes or person
or otherwise in his possession, or have in his control, alcoholic
beverages, narcotics, firearms, explosives or flammable materials of
any kind during the emergency, except as may be specifically
authorized.
f. Order that the State Police, National Guard and Township Police take
any and all measures required to quell disturbances and outbreaks of
violence, to secure areas within the Township, to prevent and deter
actual or threatened harm to persons or property, to prevent looting,
and generally take all action necessary to implement and effectuate
these regulations, as well as the Statutes of this State and all
ordinances of the Township.
§ 3-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.1
1:85
§ 3-5.1. Definition. [1973 Code § 4-6.1; Ord. No. 7-1985]
As used in this section:
ABANDONED — shall mean and include any motor vehicle which:
§ 3-5.2. Abandonment and Storage Prohibited. [1973 § 4-6.2; Ord.
No. 7-1985]
It is unlawful for any person to abandon or permit the abandonment of any
motor vehicle, junk automobile, or junk automobile body out of doors upon
any public or private lands in the Township or between the right-of-way lines
of any public right-of-way therein. Nor shall a person place, keep or store,
except as permitted by the Township ordinance any motor vehicle, junk
automobile or junk automobile body out of doors on any public or private
property within the Township except that:
An owner or the occupant of land may keep, maintain or temporarily store
a single motor vehicle upon private property for a period of ninety (90)
days for purposes of sale of the same or its noncommercial repair or
restoration or improvement, upon application made to the office of the
a. Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law;
b. Has been continuously parked in any public property and lands or on
any private property and lands for a period of seven (7) days;
c. Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic but on property
other than a street, highway, bridge and tunnels, and the driver or
person owning, or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it shall not obstruct traffic;
d. Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative for a period of seven (7) days; and
e. Is found without one (1) or more tires.
INOPERABLE — shall mean incapable of being legally driven or moved
on the public highways of the State of New Jersey.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE OR JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — shall mean any
motor vehicle which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or
which is wholly unfit, without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use in
highway transportation or which has been discarded for use as a motor
vehicle or otherwise abandoned.
MOTOR VEHICLE — shall mean and be defined as any motor vehicle,
omnibus, road tractor, truck, truck-tractor, or other vehicle and shall
have the meaning as ascribed to the foregoing words as contained and
defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, et seq.
OPERABLE — shall mean capable of being legally driven or moved upon
the public highways of the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-5.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-5.2
1:86
Township Manager and receipt of a permit therefor. The application shall
require the name and address of the owner of the vehicle; the address of
the location where the vehicle is to be kept and stored during the period;
a description of the vehicle, including its make, model, color and vehicle
identification number; and a statement as to the purpose for which the
storage of the vehicle is requested. Upon receipt of a properly completed
and executed application, the office of the Township Manager shall issue a
permit, without fee or charge, for a period of ninety (90) days. No applicant
can obtain more than one permit or extension thereof within a one-year
period from the date of the expiration of the last permit. Nothing contained
in the provision for the temporary storage of a vehicle shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting the commercial sale or repair of vehicles in any
area not approved for the same under the Municipal Code of the Township
of Aberdeen. A request for an extension or renewal of the permit authorized
by this section for additional periods of ninety (90) days or less shall be
authorized at the discretion of the person charged by the Office of the
Township Manager with the issuance of the permits upon a showing by the
applicant that the work being performed upon the vehicle is being diligently
pursued.
§ 3-5.3. Presumption. [1973 § 4-6.3; Ord. No. 7-1985]
If any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body shall be
abandoned on public or private lands for seven (7) days or more, it shall be
presumed that the owner or tenant in possession of the land has abandoned
it there or permitted or suffered it to be abandoned thereon.
§ 3-5.4. Exclusion. [1973 Code § 4-6.4; Ord. No. 7-1985]
a. Nothing contained in this section shall be determined to prohibit the
placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any such motor vehicle in a
garage or other building within the Township.
b. Owners of antique or historic motor vehicles which are classified as
such under State Statute are exempt from the provisions of this section
with regard to private lands. Any person who possesses, owns or
maintains such excluded vehicle shall obtain from the Office of the
Township Manager an exempt certificate which shall indicate that the
motor vehicle in question comes under this exclusion. The certificate
shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. Such exempt
certificate shall be displayed on the windshield or other prominent
place of the motor vehicle in question so that it is readily observable. No
fee shall be charged for the issuance of an exempt certificate.
c. Motor vehicles operated in organization sanctioned races are exempt
from the provisions of this section with regard to private lands. Each
such vehicle shall be registered once each year during the month of
January, or when the vehicle is acquired with the Office of the Township
Manager. There shall not be more than two (2) such vehicles so kept on
private lands.
§ 3-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5.5
1:87
§ 3-5.5. Penalties. [1973 Code § 4-6.5; Ord. No. 7-1985]
§ 3-6. MOPEDS, MOTORCYCLES, MOTORIZED SPORT BIKES AND
SNOWMOBILES.
§ 3-6.1. Preamble. [1973 Code § 4-13.1; Ord. No. 25-1981]
The unregulated operation of certain vehicles used for transportation and/
or sport and herein described, constitutes a hazard to public and private
property and constitutes to its operators and to third parties, a hazard to
life and limb and further, under certain circumstances, constitutes a public
nuisance to the detriment of the citizens of the Township.
§ 3-6.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-13.2; Ord. No. 25-1981 § 1]
As used in this section:
MOTORCYCLE — shall mean any two wheeled motor propelled apparatus
licensed by the State of New Jersey, Department of Motor Vehicles for
operation upon the public highways.
MOTORIZED SPORTBIKE — shall mean:
a. In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 1-5 of this Code, a
continuance of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of
this section shall be deemed a nuisance and the Township of Aberdeen
shall have the right to apply to the courts of this State for injunctive
relief or other relief.
b. The imposition of a penalty for any violation of this section shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable
time. Each ten (10) days that the prohibitive conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
a. Any two (2) three (3) or four (4) wheeled bicycle or similar apparatus
motor propelled or having a helper motor and commonly referred to
among other designations as moped, mini-bike, go-cart, all terrain
vehicles (ATV), trailbike or the like, which by its nature is not
authorized to be licensed by the State of New Jersey, Department of
Motor Vehicles, for use upon the public highways notwithstanding the
fact that licensing of the same in some instances may not be required
for operation upon the public highways.
b. Snowmobiles and any similar sport vehicle which is motor propelled
and traverses the terrain by means of treads, tracks or the like, all as
contrasted to wheels.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — shall mean all lands in the Township not above
defined as public property or part of road system which is contained in
the definitions of "Public Property."
§ 3-5.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-6.2
1:88
§ 3-6.3. Unlawful Acts. [1973 Code § 4-13.3; Ord. No. 25-1981 § 2]
It shall be unlawful:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — shall mean lands owned or leased by the
Township of Aberdeen, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Jersey, County of Monmouth and State of New Jersey, Matawan-
Aberdeen Regional Board of Education or any other equivalent public
body but specifically excluding from this definition any roadways used
for public transportation and being part of the accepted road systems
of the State of New Jersey, Department of Transportation, Township of
Aberdeen or County of Monmouth.
UNLICENSED OPERATOR — shall mean the operator of any
motorcycle, who does not hold a special license issued by the State of
New Jersey, Department of Motor Vehicles, permitting the operation of
a motorcycle on the public highways, or the operator of any motorized
sportbike who is in violation of subsection 3-6.3, paragraph b, this
section.
a. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle upon public or private
property during the period of one hour after sunset to one hour before
sunrise but the within prohibition shall not be applicable to:
1. Snowmobiles and like vehicles defined under subsection 3-6.2.
2. Motorcycles entering or existing on public roads, over private
property, over driveways provided for said purpose of ingress and
egress.
b. For a motorized sportbike to be operated on public or private property
other than the property of the family of which the operator is a residing
member by any operator under the age of seventeen (17) years.
c. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property other than with the written consent of all of the owners of the
property.
d. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle upon public or private
property other than in accordance with the general regulations set
forth in subsection 3-6.4.
e. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property in such a way as to harass, worry, or disturb farm animals,
domestic livestock or wildlife or further to destroy or damage crops or
cropland.
f. To operate a motorized sportbike or motorcycle on public or private
property without the same being in proper operating condition which is
hereby defined as the presence of all original operating equipment
specified therefor by the original manufacturer with the same in
operating condition at least equal to the manufacturer's requirements
for the proper operation thereof or the equivalent thereof.
§ 3-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6.3
1:89
§ 3-6.4. General Regulations. [1973 Code § 4-13.4; Ord. No. 25-1981
§ 3]
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of a motorized
sportbike or motorcycle operated on public or private property other than
on the property of the family of which the operator is a member.
§ 3-6.5. Impoundment. [1973 Code § 4-13.5; Ord. No. 25-1981 § 4;
New]
It shall be the duty of any Police Officer to:
g. For an unlicensed operator to operate a motorcycle on public or private
property other than the property of the family of which the operator is a
residing member.
a. The operator of a motorized sportbike or motorcycle shall wear a
helmet, together with goggles or face shields, such as is approved
therefor by the State of New Jersey, Department of Transportation.
b. No person operating a motorized sportbike or motorcycle shall engage
in fancy or trick riding or ride without maintaining full control of such
motorized sportbike or motorcycle or to remove both hands from the
handlebar.
c. No person operating a motorized sportbike or motorcycle shall carry
any other person thereon except in a place designated therefor and
equipped therefor as part of original manufacture for said purpose and
in no event shall a rider be carried on the handlebar thereof.
a. Impound any motorized sportbike or motorcycle operated on public or
private property alleged to be in violation of this section either by virtue
of its operation and use, or by virtue of its operation by an unlicensed
operator and;
b. Impound any motorized sportbike or motorcycle operating on the public
roadways in violation of any then applicable State Statute or any
regulation validly promulgated by any State agency having jurisdiction.
The period of impoundment shall be from the date of the alleged
violation until the disposition of the alleged offense by such court of
competent jurisdiction as shall hear the same, and the owner thereof
shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage constituting
impoundment, the usual and customary fees permitted by statute,
which charge for impoundment shall in no event exceed thirty (30)
consecutive calendar days provided that the operator shall be deemed
guilty of the alleged offense. The expense of impoundment shall be in
addition to any other fine or penalty levied or collected under the terms
of this section.
§ 3-6.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-6.6
1:90
§ 3-6.6. Penalties. [1973 Code § 4-13.6; Ord. No. 25-1981 § 5; New]
For any violation of this section, the offender shall be liable for a penalty
established in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 3-7. CURFEW FOR MINORS.
§ 3-7.1. Findings and Declarations. [1973 Code § 4-1.1; Ord. No.
13-1994]
The Township Council is in agreement with the New Jersey State
Legislature in finding and declaring that children who are left unsupervised
during overnight hours may be exposed to the most detrimental influences
of our society; that the allure of the drug countered culture, the potential
for involvement in criminal activity and other potential threats to the health,
safety and general welfare of children justify governmental action in
furtherance of the protection of one of the most fragile and easily influenced
segments of our society.
The Township Council is also in agreement with the findings of the New
Jersey State Legislature that it is in the best interest of society to encourage
family unity; to encourage the family unit to provide for the care, protection,
wholesome mental and physical development of our children; and to
encourage the supervision of children by their parents and/or legal
guardians and to encourage communication between parents and their
children.
The Township Council is in further agreement that because of the
vulnerability of children, their inability to make critical decisions in an
informed and mature manner, and the importance of the parental role in
child rearing, that it was appropriate for the New Jersey State Legislature
to adopt N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52, which authorizes municipalities in this State to
adopt ordinances to protect children from the dangers of the streets and to
encourage the deepening of family relationship.
The Township Council further finds and declares that there has been a
breakdown in the supervision normally provided by certain parents and/or
legal guardians for juveniles under his age of eighteen (18) years, resulting
in juveniles being involved in certain types of unacceptable behavior,
including certain criminal activities involving controlled dangerous
substances, their possession and/or distribution, as well as acts of
vandalism, noisy and rowdy behavior, and harassment of residents.
The Township Council further finds and declares that these offensive
activities committed by juveniles are not easily controlled by existing laws
or ordinances because the activities can be concealed whenever Police
Officers are present, and that the establishment of a reasonable curfew in
this community will result in maintaining a free and unobstructed access to
the streets and public places while enabling the Police to act reasonably and
fairly to prevent the violation of laws and municipal ordinances by juveniles.
§ 3-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.1
1:91
The Township Council further finds and declares that a curfew meets a very
real local need, and that curfew ordinances have been adopted in other
municipalities in the Bayshore as well as through the State of New Jersey in
order to address the problem of juvenile delinquency.
The Township Council further finds and declares that a curfew is
particularly appropriate in view of the basic residential nature of this
community and the sense of the community that there is a proper time for
the cessation of outdoor activities by juveniles. This sense of the community
is reflected in the curfew hours declared in this section, which takes into
consideration the increased likelihood for criminal activities during the
overnight hours and the detrimental affect that the exposure to such
activities would have upon juveniles in our community.
The Township Council further finds and declares that as parental control
increases there is a likelihood that juvenile delinquency will decrease; that
there is a need for a curfew for juveniles in the Township of Aberdeen;
and that the establishment of a curfew with penalties applicable not only to
juveniles but to their parents and legal guardians as well, will reinforce the
primary authority and responsibility of parents and/or legal guardians over
juveniles in their care and custody.
§ 3-7.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-1.2; Ord. No. 13-1994]
As used in this section:
CURFEW HOURS — shall mean the following: (a) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following
day; (b) 12:01 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday, until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
EMERGENCY — shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or
the resulting state, including those circumstances which call for immediate
action in response to a threat to public health and safety. This term shall
be understood to include, but not be limited to, a fire, a natural disaster,
an automobile accident, or any other situation requiring immediate action
to prevent serious bodily harm, injury or loss of life. "Serious Bodily Injury"
shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
GUARDIAN — shall mean:
JUVENILE OR MINOR — shall mean any person under the age of eighteen
(18) or, in equivalent phrasing used herein, any person seventeen (17) years
of age or younger.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
a.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
b.
§ 3-7.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-7.2
1:92
KNOWINGLY — shall mean and include knowledge or information which a
parent or legal guardian should reasonably be expected to have concerning
the whereabouts of a minor in the legal custody of a parent or guardian. It
is intended to include and require neglectful or careless parents to maintain
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall be no defense to a violation of this section that a
parent was indifferent to the activities or conduct of whereabouts of such a
minor or juvenile.
OPERATOR — shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation operating, managing, or conducting business in any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association
or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT — shall mean any person having legal custody of a juvenile or a
minor as follows:
PUBLIC PLACE OR ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean any place as to which
the public has access, including but not limited to a public street, sidewalk,
bridge, plaza, park, recreation area, shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure, or area, or common areas of schools, hospitals,
apartment houses, office buildings, or transport facilities.
REMAIN — shall mean to:
TIME OF NIGHT — as referred to for the purposes of this section shall
be based upon the prevailing standards of time, whether Eastern Standard
Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour
by the public in the Township of Aberdeen, with prima facie proof in the
time then observed in the administrative offices of the Township and the
Township Police Station.
YEAR OF AGE — shall mean and continue from one birthday, such as the
17th to, but not including the day of, the next such as the 18th birthday,
making it clear that a minor or juvenile who is seventeen (17) or less years
of age is herein treated as an equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen
a. As a natural or adopted;
b. As a legal guardian;
c. As a person who stands in loco parentis;
d. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of Court; or
An individual who is acting in the place of the parent or is responsible
for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
e.
a. Linger or stay; or
To fail to leave a public place or establishment when requested to do so
by a Police Officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of
the establishment or premises.
b.
§ 3-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.2
1:93
(18) years of age". Similarly, fifteen (15) or less years of age means "under
sixteen (16) years of age".
§ 3-7.3. Offenses. [1973 Code § 4-1.3; Ord. No. 13-1994]
§ 3-7.4. Defenses. [1973 Code § 4-1.4; Ord. No. 13-1994]
a. A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the Township during
curfew hours.
b. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
Township during curfew hours.
c. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment or public
place commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
a. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 3-7.3 that the minor
was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
2. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop for the purpose of responding to a
medical problem or emergency as defined in this section;
3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
4. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
5. Involved in an emergency;
6. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of next-door neighbor if the neighbor has not filed a
complaint with the Police Department about the minor's presence;
7. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the Township of Aberdeen, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other
cultural, social or recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the Township of Aberdeen, a civil organization or
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
8. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or
§ 3-7.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-7.4
1:94
§ 3-7.5. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 4-1.5; Ord. No. 13-1994]
9. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with law.
b. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 3-7.3 that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment or public place promptly
notified the Division of Police that a minor was present on the premises
of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
a. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a Police
Officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
establishment or public place. The Officer shall not issue a citation or
make an arrest under this section unless the Officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response from the
minor or juvenile and other circumstances, no defense under
subsection 3-7.4 is present.
b. If a Police Officer reasonably believes that juvenile is on the streets in
violation of this section, the Officer shall notify the juvenile that he or
she is in violation of the curfew ordinance and shall ask the juvenile or
minor to provide to the officer his or her name, address, and telephone
number and how to contact a parent or guardian. In determining the
age of the juvenile and in the absence of evidence such as a driver's
license or copy of a birth certificate, a Police Officer shall be authorized
to use his or her best judgment in determining the age of the minor or
juvenile.
c. If the Officer determines that a person is in violation of this section, the
minor or juvenile shall be taken into custody. The parent or guardian
shall then be notified by any authorized member of the Aberdeen
Division of Police to come to the Police Department to take custody of
the minor or juvenile. When the parent or guardian arrives to take
custody of the minor or juvenile, they shall be given written notice by an
authorized member of the Aberdeen Division of Police, which sets forth
the nature of the alleged violation, and which also includes a copy of
this ordinance in its entirety. A copy of this notice shall also be kept on
file with the Municipal Court Administrator of the Township of
Aberdeen, for the purpose of providing evidence of failure by the parent
or guardian to observe the provisions of this section in the event of any
subsequent citation for an alleged violation of this section.
d. In the event a parent or guardian cannot be located, then the juvenile or
minor may be released to the appropriate juvenile authorities or to an
adult relative, neighbor or other adult who will, on behalf of a parent or
guardian, assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian. A copy of the notice
described in paragraph c. shall be given to the minor, and another copy
shall be sent to the parent or guardian by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
§ 3-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.5
1:95
§ 3-7.6. Penalties. [1973 Code § 4-1.6; Ord. No. 13-1994]
§ 3-8. BICYCLES.
§ 3-8.1. Definition. [1973 Code § 4-11.1]
As used in this section:
BICYCLE — shall mean a device having two (2) wheels, connected by a
frame of metal or wood, and arranged to be propelled by human power. The
term "bicycle" as used in this section does not include children's tricycles.
§ 3-8.2. Regulations. [1973 Code § 4-11.2]
The following regulations shall apply:
e. The Police Department shall issue written warnings in lieu of a
summons for an alleged first violation of this section. An additional copy
of this warning shall be kept on file with the Municipal Court
Administrator for the purpose of providing evidence of failure by the
minor, as well as the parent or guardian, to observe the provisions of
this section in the event of any subsequent citation for an alleged
violation of this section. No written warning shall be issued for any
subsequent alleged violation of this section.
a. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued or permitted.
b. A first offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed
one hundred ($100.00) dollars and may also include community service
of up to fifteen (15) hours to the Township.
c. A second offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed
five hundred ($500.00) dollars, and may also include community service
of up to thirty (30) hours to the Township.
d. A third or subsequent offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine
not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars and may also include
community service of up to forty-five (45) hours to the Township.
a. Every person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate the bicycle
with due regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles lawfully
upon the streets, parkways and public places, as well as for his own
safety, and shall at all times and under all conditions yield the right-ofway
to pedestrians on the streets, parkways, highways, public places
and on the crosswalks.
b. Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with all vehicle traffic
laws which apply to bicycles, and all vehicle traffic signs and signals
erected for the regulation of traffic.
§ 3-7.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-8.2
1:96
§ 3-8.3. Violation and Penalties. [1973 Code § 4-11.3]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be for the
first offense, reprimanded in writing by the Division of Police addressed to
the parents or guardian of the offender, if a minor, stating the nature of the
violations. On the second offense or each subsequent offense, the offender
will be issued a summons.
§ 3-9. PEERING INTO OCCUPIED DWELLING PLACES
PROHIBITED. [1973 Code § 4-16; Ord. No. 1-1988]
No person shall trespass on private property and surreptitiously or
sneakingly invade the privacy of another by peering into the windows or
other openings of dwelling places located thereon for no lawful purpose.
§ 3-10. DISPOSITION OF LOST AND FOUND ARTICLES OR
PROPERTIES.
c. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred (500) feet to the front. In addition, a red reflector shall be
mounted on the rear which shall be visible from fifty (50) feet to three
hundred (300) feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
d. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal, audible for a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with
nor shall any person use upon a bicycle a siren or whistle.
e. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
f. A person propelling or riding on a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall be
ride with his feet removed from the pedals, or with both hands removed
from the handlebars. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
g. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to
any vehicle upon a roadway and no operator of any vehicle shall
knowingly allow any person upon any bicycle to attach the same or
himself to the vehicle.
h. Before turning or changing the direction of any bicycle upon any street,
or public place, it shall be the duty of the bicycle rider to give a signal,
by the extension of the hand to indicate the direction it is the intention
to proceed.
§ 3-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10.1
1:97
§ 3-10.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-17.1; Ord. No. 20-1994]
The following terms, phrases and words used in and for the purpose of this
section are as stated in part in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157(b) Police-Municipalities
and shall be deemed to have the following meaning:
§ 3-11. PROHIBITING THE USE OF PORTABLE OIL/KEROSENE
HEATING DEVICES.
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 19-1; Ord. No. 27-1982]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — shall mean any building or structure whether used as a
dwelling or otherwise, except for single family, regardless of their size and
regardless of the purpose for which such building or structure is used.
§ 3-11.2. Prohibition. [1973 Code § 19-2; Ord. No. 27-1982]
No person shall use, keep for use, or store and maintain for use in any
building or portion of a building a portable oil/kerosene heating device. For
the purpose of this section, a portable oil/kerosene heating device is defined
as any heater, stove or appliance designed for heating space in buildings,
using or designed for using kerosene, liquid fuel or other flammable liquid,
which is neither flue nor chimney connected, and which is not permanently
affixed to any part of a structure and which is capable of being moved or
upset.
§ 3-11.3. Penalty. [1973 Code § 19-3; Ord. No. 27-1982; New]
Any person who violates this section shall be liable, upon conviction, for the
penalty provided in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 3-12. FIREARMS.
§ 3-12.1. Restrictions; State Law. [1973 Code § 4-10.1]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 23:4-16 no person shall cast an arrow or
discharge any firearm upon or across any State, County, or municipal road
or highway, and no person, except the owner or lessee of the property and
persons specifically authorized by him in writing shall, for the purpose of
hunting, taking or killing any bird or animal, have in his possession a loaded
gun while within four hundred fifty (450) feet of any occupied dwelling or
a. Stolen or found article or property which was turned over to the
Division of Police by other than a Police Officer shall be disposed by the
following means:
1. After one hundred eighty (180) days to be turned over to the
rightful owner of the property or article or be turned over to a
person or organization who has made a claim to any such property
or article.
§ 3-10.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-12.1
1:98
school playground in this State. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 23:4-24, no
person shall hunt with any weapon or carry a gun on Sunday. This shall not
prevent farm land owners, lessees actually occupying or farming the land,
members of their immediate families, or their farm employees from hunting
and destroying at any time and in any manner crows, woodchuck, fox and
vermin on that land.
§ 3-12.2. Discharge of Firearms. [1973 Code § 4-10.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or other weapon
within the limits of the Township, except as specified in subsection 3-12.3.
§ 3-12.3. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 4-10.3]
The following exceptions shall apply:
§ 3-13. PROHIBITING THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES. [1973 Code § 6-8]
§ 3-14. PROHIBITING UNDERAGE DRINKING ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
§ 3-14.1. Prohibitions, Exceptions, Penalties. [Ord. No. 17-2000 § I]
a. Any person hunting in conformance with State Law and regulation.
b. Any person legally firing at a rifle range.
c. Any member of the Aberdeen Division of Police or any other State,
County or municipal law enforcement officer, or any other person
authorized by the Statutes of New Jersey to carry firearms when the
firearms shall be used in the performance of official duties.
a. It shall be unlawful to consume, offer to another for consumption or to
possess in an opened container any alcoholic beverage on any public
street, sidewalk, avenue, alley, highway or other thoroughfare, or on
any public park or beach or on any public or private road or in any
motor vehicle within the Township of Aberdeen.
b. It shall be presumed that any person consuming or offering to another
person for consumption or possessing in an open container any
alcoholic beverage on any private road within the Township of
Aberdeen other than a residence, that such person does not have the
consent of the owner of the road to engage in such activity.
c. Notwithstanding anything hereinabove to the contrary, upon first
obtaining a certificate of exemption from the Director of Parks and
Recreation any person, group of persons or corporation, profit, or
nonprofit may be permitted to consume or possess alcoholic beverages
for a specific event or activity at a specific time and location within a
park, playground or recreational area.
§ 3-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14.1
1:99
a. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses without legal authority or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished
by a fine of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for a first offense and
three hundred fifty ($350.00) dollars for any subsequent offense.
b. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the Municipal Court
may suspend or postpone for six (6) months the driving privileges of the
defendant. Upon conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall forward
a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant
to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than seventeen (17) years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six (6) months after
the person reaches the age of seventeen (17) years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by the State, the Court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in
the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the Court.
The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of
a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted is not a New Jersey resident, the Court shall
suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident driving privilege
of the person based on the age of the person and submit to the Division
the required report. The Court shall not collect the license of a
nonresident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report
by the Court, the Division shall notify the appropriate officials in the
licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
c. 1. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an underaged person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony, or rite, or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-14.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-14.1
1:100
§ 3-15. OPERATION OF MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.12 [Ord.
No. 15-2000 § I; New]
Mobile food establishments shall be permitted to operate solely in the area
in and about the Aberdeen-Matawan Train Station, which is controlled by
the Township of Aberdeen and/or New Jersey Transit, between the hours
of 5:00 a.m. and 10:30 a.m. A person or entity conducting a mobile food
establishment shall be required to secure a permit issued by the Aberdeen
Township Department of Health in accordance with the fee schedule
established in subsection 11-2.5.
§ 3-16. (RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Section 3-16, Sex Offender Residency Prohibition,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No.
29-2005, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 11-2008.
§ 3-17. RESTRICTION ON THE PLACEMENT OF SOLID WASTE
RECEPTACLES.13 [Ord. No. 1-2006 §§ 3, 4]
2. As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian
of the underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court
appointment.
RELATIVE — shall mean the underaged person's grandparent, aunt
or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
d. Nothing in this section shall prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages
by any such person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a County
vocational school or post secondary educational institution; however,
nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
a. Prohibited Conduct. All solid waste receptacles shall not be placed on
the curbside prior to 4:00 p.m. of the day prior to the pick up. All solid
waste receptacles shall be removed from the site of pickup to the rear
or side yard or such other place as the same are customarily maintained
by the owner or as agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of each dwelling,
house or other premises by 4:00 p.m. the day after pickup. This shall
apply to all residential and commercial solid waste disposals, including
that of recycling.
12.Editor's Note: See also Section 16-2, Garbage Collection District.
13.Editor's Note: See also Section 16-2, Garbage Collection District.
§ 3-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17
1:101
§ 3-17.1. Refuse Containers/Dumpsters. [Ord. No. 10-2011 §§ 1—6]
b. Enforcement and Penalties. This section shall be enforced by the
Aberdeen Police Department and Code Enforcement Official. Any
person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per
day with a maximum fine not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollars per day.
a. The purpose of this subsection is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at
all times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise
discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Aberdeen and/or the waters of the State so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
1. Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by Township of Aberdeen or other public body, and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
2. Person shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
3. Refuse container shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters,
trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
4. Stormwater shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by
snow removal equipment.
5. Waters of the State shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 3-17 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-17.1
1:102
§ 3-18. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-18.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 1]
The Township of Aberdeen (the "Township"), as a body corporate and politic
organized under the laws of the State of New Jersey and situated in
Monmouth County, intends to amend the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Aberdeen to adopt a map depicting the location and boundaries
of drug-free school zones and making an official finding and record of the
location and boundaries of such zones.
§ 3-18.2. Adoption of Map. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 2]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (C.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about December
11, 1987 and revised on or about October, 2008 by David Samuel, P.E. of
CME, Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality of
property which is used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on
or within one thousand (1,000) feet of such school property.
c. Prohibited Conduct. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased,
or operated, a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such
container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse
from spilling out or overflowing.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise
uses a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such container or
dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or
solids to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Aberdeen.
1. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
2. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
3. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
4. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
5. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
e. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Township of Aberdeen.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this subsection shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred
($100.00) dollars per day with a maximum fine not to exceed one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per day.
§ 3-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18.3
1:103
§ 3-18.3. Map to Constitute Official Findings. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 3]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-18.2 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
one thousand (1,000) feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary
or secondary school or school board which is used for school purposes until
such time, if any, that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of school property
and Drug-Free School Zones.
§ 3-18.4. Change in Boundaries. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 4]
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-18.5. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 5]
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
3-18.2 of this section and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the
map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and of this section shall be provided
without cost to the County Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County
Prosecutor.
§ 3-18.6. Additional Determinations. [Ord. No. 15-2008 § 6]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-18.1 of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
§ 3-18.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-18.6
1:104
§ 3-19. PEACE AND GOOD ORDER.
§ 3-19.1. Interference with Retail or Wholesale Business Practices.
[Ord. No. 13-2012]
No person shall purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any
retail or wholesale business operation, function or activity, nor shall any
person purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any retail or
wholesale business owner, employee, agent or personnel acting in the
furtherance of the interests of that business, with the intent to prevent,
undermine or otherwise obstruct the lawful retail or wholesale practices
of that business. This section does not apply to conduct considered lawful
competitive economic practices.
§ 3-20. SMOKING PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC AREAS.
[Added 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. 8-2019]
§ 3-20.1. Preamble.
The following are the purposes of this section:
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one
thousand feet of such school property.
b. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of October,
2008;
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-18.1 of this section. The failure of the
map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
a. The United States Surgeon General has determined that there is no safe
level of exposure to secondhand smoke and that nonsmoking Americans
§ 3-18.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20.1
1:105
§ 3-20.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo
or pipe.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — The Aberdeen Township Municipal Building
located at 1 Aberdeen Square, Aberdeen, New Jersey.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes all public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields publicly owned or leased by the Township and
all property owned or leased by the Township upon which the public is
invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather
for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities,
including, but not limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other matter or substance
which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked, or the
inhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking device.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Aberdeen.
§ 3-20.3. Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places; Signs.
exposed to secondhand smoke in public places are at significantly
increased risk of heart disease and lung cancer (See U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, the Health Consequences of Involuntary
Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: a report of the Surgeon General, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, 2006); and
b. Smoking is the leading cause of death in the United States and the
United State Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
determined that reduction of the death and disease caused by tobacco
use and exposure to secondhand smoke is one of the six top national
healthcare priorities.
c. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, the Township of Aberdeen is given the
authority to adopt ordinances for the public health, safety and welfare
of the Township, its citizens, residents and guests; and
d. The New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63) specifically
authorizes local restrictions on smoking "equivalent to, or greater than"
those provided in the NJSFAA for purposes of "protecting public
health."
§ 3-20.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 3-20.3
1:106
§ 3-20.4. Enforcement.
Whenever the Township Manager, Director of the Recreation Department
or his or her designee or park personnel or any law enforcement personnel
observes or reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this section,
he or she may issue a summons and complaint to the violator. The complaint
shall be written and served on the violator. Citizens of the Township may
also bring private complaints for violations of this section.
§ 3-20.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $250 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense
and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. Any municipal employee found in
violation of this chapter may also be subject to discipline in accordance with
the provisions of the Township's policies and procedures.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: The general power to license and prescribe license
fees is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, 2. Licensing is also a part of the
general police power granted by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, 30.
§ 4-1. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF
LICENSES.
a. Smoking shall be prohibited in all parks and recreational facilities as
defined herein. "No smoking" signs or the international no-smoking
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross
section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at
entrances to parks and recreational facilities and within each area
where smoking is prohibited by this section. The signs shall be clearly
visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrast
in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The
sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
b. Smoking shall be prohibited within a fifty-foot radius of the front
entrance of the Municipal Building and all parks and recreational
facilities. "No smoking" signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be
clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at the thirty-five-foot
perimeter of the front entrance of all parks and recreational facilities
where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The signs shall be clearly
visible to the public and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrast
in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited therein. The
sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 3-20.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.1
1:107
§ 4-1.1. Purposes. [1973 Code § 5-1.1]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued by
the Township, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog licenses and taxicab
licenses, and except as may be specified or otherwise provided elsewhere in
this chapter.
§ 4-1.2. Applications and Fee. [1973 Code § 5-1.2]
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and
shall be made to or through the Township Clerk upon forms provided
by him. Applications shall contain the information specified by resolution
of the Township Council and may include the following along with other
information deemed necessary or specifically called for by ordinance:
§ 4-1.3. Investigation of Applicants. [1973 Code § 5-1.3]
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a Police Officer
designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
a. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
b. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
c. If a vehicle is to be used, its description including the license number.
d. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
e. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
f. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
g. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
h. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
i. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this subsection supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this subsection
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
§ 4-1.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-1.3
1:108
of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct the licensed activity he considers necessary for the
protection of the public. He shall communicate his findings in writing to
the Township Clerk within a reasonable time after the application has
been filed. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability
or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or the products, services or
activity are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove the application and
the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license and shall so notify the applicant.
Otherwise, the Township Clerk shall issue the license immediately, provided
the required license fees have been paid, except in cases where approval
of the Council is required. In the case of an application for a solicitor's,
peddler's, or canvasser's license, the license may be issued immediately
subject to the investigation. In the event of the refusal of the issuance of
a license, the applicant may appeal to the Council for hearing. The appeal
must be filed, in writing, with the Township Clerk within fourteen (14) days
after notification of the refusal. The Council shall hold its hearing within ten
(10) days thereafter, and its decision shall be final.
§ 4-1.4. Contents of License. [1973 Code § 5-1.4]
Licenses shall be in a form which the Council shall prescribe by resolution,
and shall contain the following information:
§ 4-1.5. License Record. [1973 Code § 5-1.5]
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
Council and shall contain the same information as is required by subsection
4-1.4 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of the
fee paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the
date of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a new license
or a renewal, and any other information which the Council may require by
resolution.
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
c. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
d. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
e. The expiration date of the license.
f. Any other appropriate information which the Council may require by
resolution.
§ 4-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.6
1:109
§ 4-1.6. Display of License. [1973 Code § 5-1.6]
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any Police Officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
§ 4-1.7. Transferability. [1973 Code § 5-1.7]
Except as otherwise provided, a license shall apply only to the person
to whom it was issued and shall not be transferable to another person.
Licenses may be transferred from place to place, in cases where the
licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, but only with the approval
of the Council by resolution. The fee for the transfer of a license from place
to place shall be five ($5.00) dollars.
§ 4-1.8. Expiration Date, Renewal, Proration of Fees. [1973 Code
§ 5-1.8]
§ 4-1.9. Revocation of License, Causes. [1973 Code § 5-1.9]
Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
manager after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
a. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for the
renewal of licenses shall be made not later than December 1 of the year
of issue.
b. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month, except as
otherwise provided for in this chapter. Any period of time greater than
one-half a month shall be considered as a full month for this purpose.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
c. A violation of any provision of this chapter.
d. Conviction of the license for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
e. Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself or his
agents or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
f. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter,
§ 4-1.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-1.9
1:110
§ 4-1.10. Notice of Hearing. [1973 Code § 5-1.10]
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 4-1.11. Hearing, Determination. [1973 Code § 5-1.11]
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his own expense. The Manager shall revoke or suspend
the license if he is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the
licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 4-1.12. Reinstatement of Revoked Licenses. [1973 Code § 5-1.12]
The Manager may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied as provided in this section if after hearing he is satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation
or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose license has been
revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall
be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
§ 4-1.13. Appeal. [1973 Code § 5-1.13]
Any licensee may appeal from a determination by the Manager to revoke
a license or to refuse to reinstate a revoked license within ten (10) days
of such determination by the Manager. The appeal shall be made to the
Township Council. The Township Council shall specify a time and place for
the hearing of the appeal giving reasonable notice thereof to the licensee.
Unless otherwise agreed by the Council and the licensee, all appeals shall
be de novo.
§ 4-1.14. Power to Make Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code
§ 5-1.14]
The Council may by resolution make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of administering
the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective. No regulation
shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter
and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or
greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed
by any provision of this chapter.
such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
is such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 4-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.15
1:111
§ 4-1.15. Property Taxes to be Paid as Condition for Licensing.
[1973 Code § 5-14; Ord. No. 13-1990]
a. Payment Required.
1. Proof of Payment Required Prior to the Issuance or Renewal of
Licenses or Permits. As a condition for the issuance or renewal of
any license or permit issued by or requiring the approval of the
Township, the owner-applicant shall either provide proof that there
are no delinquent property taxes or assessments on the property or
pay all delinquent taxes or assessments on the property wherein
the business or activity for which the license or permit is sought or
wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
2. Payment of Property Taxes and Assessments as a Condition for
Receiving Licenses or Permits. Prior to the issuance of licenses and
permits by the various departments or agencies of the Township,
the department shall ascertain from the office of the Tax Collector
that all taxes and assessments have been paid to a current basis for
the property on which the activity or business in question is to take
place. In the event that property taxes or assessments are unpaid
to a current basis, no licenses or permits shall be issued until all
such payments have been made by the property owner.
b. Suspensions of Licenses or Permits and Restoration. Whenever a
property owner has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at
least three consecutive quarters, the Township may, upon notice to the
licensee and property owner, revoke or suspend any license or permit
until the payment of the delinquent taxes and assessments is made.
Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments, the license or
permit shall be restored.
c. Applicability. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to or
include any alcoholic beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. The provisions of this subsection shall
apply to all other licenses and permits issued by or requiring approval
of the Township, including but not limited to:
1. Permit required pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code;
2. Soil removal permits;
3. Tree removal permits;
4. Junk dealers' licenses;
5. Certificates of occupancy;
6. Food establishment licenses;
7. Pound or dog pound licenses;
8. Amusement licenses;
§ 4-1.15 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-1.15
1:112
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS, HAWKERS AND VENDORS.
§ 4-2.1. Definition. [1973 Code § 5-2.1]
As used in this section:
PEDDLER — shall mean any person, whether a resident of the Township
or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type
of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, food, ice cream, fruit ices, soda water, garden
farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. Hawkers, hucksters and
vendors are included.
§ 4-2.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 5-2.2; Ord. No. 12-2013 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler
within the corporate limits of the Township without first obtaining a license.
9. Nursing home licenses.
a. Application. An application for license shall be made to the Township
Clerk. The application must be completed in accordance with the
application instructions and be verified by oath or affirmation. There
shall be a fee of one-hundred ($100.00) dollars for each application
submitted to the Township Clerk.
b. Investigation. The Chief of Police or a Police Officer designated by the
Chief shall investigate each applicant. A report containing the results of
the investigation shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk. There shall
be an investigation fee paid to the Township Clerk prior to the issuance
of the license to cover the cost of the investigation of the applicant by
the Police Department.
The Township Clerk or the Township Manager shall deny a license to an
applicant who:
1. In the ten (10) years preceding the date of the application, has been
convicted of a crime or of any offense involving moral turpitude.
2. Has submitted an application containing materially false
statements.
3. Has previously been subject to the revocation of a license under
this chapter.
c. Issuance of License. The Township Clerk or the Township Manager may
grant or deny the license based upon a review of the application. All
licenses will expire on December 31 of the year in which it was granted
regardless of when during that year the license was issued.
§ 4-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.2
1:113
§ 4-2.3. Fees. [1973 Code § 5-2.3]
The license fee for a peddler shall be ten ($10.00) dollars per year. The
license fee for a renewal license shall be five ($5.00) dollars per year. These
fees are for the purpose of raising revenues. No portion of the fee shall be
prorated for any part of the year.
§ 4-2.4. Use of Streets. [1973 Code § 5-2.4]
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location, nor shall be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operation might
impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of a Police Officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
§ 4-2.5. Time Restrictions. [1973 Code § 5-2.5; Ord. No. 12-2013
§ 1]
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m.
or later than 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and no soliciting or
canvassing activities may be conducted on Sundays or legal holidays.
§ 4-2.6. Duty of Police to Enforce. [1973 Code § 5-2.6]
It shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the Township to require any
person seen peddling, and who is not known by such Officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his peddler's license and to enforce the provisions of
this section against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 4-2.7. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 5-2.7]
This section shall not be construed to include:
d. Revocation of License. The Township Clerk or the Township Manager
shall revoke the license of any licensee who fails or refuses to observe
the rules, regulations and terms of this chapter or any other chapter of
the Township Ordinances. Upon receipt of any complaint regarding the
conduct of a licensee, the Township Clerk or the Township Manager
may suspend the license and may revoke the license after giving the
licensee an opportunity to be heard.
a. The delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or other necessary and
perishable articles of food or merchandise of the type commonly
delivered on a house to house basis at intervals of less than one (1)
week.
b. Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to Federal,
State or local laws.
c. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
§ 4-2.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-2.7
1:114
§ 4-2.8. Inspection of Equipment. [1973 Code § 5-2.8]
The equipment used or employed by peddlers of ice cream, foods,
beverages, confections and other related commodities shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary manner and be subject to the inspection of the
Department of Health or its authorized agents. Any violation found and not
immediately corrected shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
§ 4-2.9. Regulations for Peddlers. [Ord. No. 12-2013 § 3]
Persons granted licenses as solicitors or canvassers shall obey the following
regulations:
§ 4-2.10. "No Knock List." [Ord. No. 12-2013 § 3]
The Township shall maintain a "No Knock List," a copy of which shall be
provided to all peddlers required to be licensed pursuant to Section 4-2,
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. The Township Clerk
shall charge a fee for a copy of the "No Knock List," in accordance with
the Open Public Records Act. Residents may register their address with
the Township Clerk for placement on the "No Knock List," indicating that
such resident does not want persons so licensed to approach the registered
home and/or seek personal contact with the occupants of the registered
home. Once the resident's address has been added by the Township Clerk
to the "No Knock List," the resident shall be permitted to post a "No Knock"
sign by the front entrance of his or her home to advise the peddler. The
license, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
subsections of this section.
a. The peddler shall conduct himself/herself in a polite and courteous
manner.
b. "No Soliciting" or "No Knock" signs placed on a resident's property
shall be strictly adhered to by the peddler.
c. The peddler shall not conduct any selling or delivery activities on
properties identified on the Township's "No Knock List."
d. The Township shall issue to each peddler a badge displaying the words
"Licensed Peddler," the period for which the license is issued, and the
license number. The badge shall have a space for the insertion of a
photograph one and one-half by two (1 1/2 x 2) inches in size. Two (2)
photographs of this size shall be provided to the Township by the
applicant and there shall be a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars to
cover the cost of this badge. Each peddler is required to have a badge.
The badge shall be worn constantly and conspicuously on the front of
the peddler's outer garment at all times while conducting selling or
delivering activities within the Township. Each peddler shall also carry
a copy of their license with them at all times while conducting selling or
delivering activities within the Township.
§ 4-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.10
1:115
"No Knock List" shall be provided by the Township Clerk to the Police
Department for enforcement and may be posted in public places. It shall
be unlawful for any licensed peddler to approach a registered home and/
or seek personal contact with the occupants therein if the resident has
registered their address on the "No Knock List" or posted a "No Knock"
sign. Registration on the "No Knock List" shall expire five (5) calendar years
following the end of the calendar year of registration, unless renewed by
notifying the Township Clerk.
§ 4-2.11. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 12-2013 § 3]
Any person or peddler violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 4-3. SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
§ 4-3.1. Definition. [1973 Code § 5-3.1]
As used in this section:
SOLICITOR — shall mean a person, also known as a canvasser, whether
resident of the Township or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house or from street to street, to take or attempt to take orders
for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed
in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of the sale, and whether or not he accepts an advance
payment for the goods.
§ 4-3.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 5-2.8; Ord. No. 11-2013 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business
within the Township without first obtaining a license.
a. Application. An application for license shall be made to the Township
Clerk. The application must be completed in accordance with the
application instructions and be verified by oath or affirmation. There
shall be a fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each application
submitted to the Township Clerk.
b. Investigation. The Chief of Police or a Police Officer designated by the
Chief shall investigate each applicant. A report containing the results of
the investigation shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk. There shall
be an investigation fee paid to the Township Clerk prior to the issuance
of the license to cover the cost of the investigation of the applicant by
the Police Department.
The Township Clerk or the Township Manager shall deny a license to an
applicant who:
§ 4-2.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-3.2
1:116
§ 4-3.3. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 5-3.3]
This section shall not be construed to include:
§ 4-3.4. Application. [1973 Code § 5-3.4]
In addition to the information required by Section 4-1.2, the application for
a solicitor's license shall indicate the place where the goods or property
proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured
or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the
application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery.
§ 4-3.5. Fees. [1973 Code § 5-3.5; Ord. No. 47-2005 § 2]
The fee for a solicitor's or canvasser's license shall be one hundred
($100.00) dollars. There shall be no reduced fee for a yearly renewal.
1. In the ten (10) years preceding the date of the application, has been
convicted of a crime or of any offense involving moral turpitude.
2. Has submitted an application containing materially false
statements.
3. Has previously been subject to the revocation of a license under
this chapter.
c. Issuance of License. The Township Clerk or the Township Manager may
grant or deny the license based upon a review of the application. All
licenses will expire on December 31 of the year in which it was granted
regardless of when during that year the license was issued.
d. Revocation of License. The Township Clerk or the Township Manager
shall revoke the license of any licensee who fails or refuses to observe
the rules, regulations and terms of this chapter or any other chapter of
the Township Ordinances. Upon receipt of any complaint regarding the
conduct of a licensee, the Township Clerk or the Township Manager
may suspend the license and may revoke the license after giving the
licensee an opportunity to be heard.
a. Any person who has obtained a charitable solicitor's permit in
accordance with Section 4-4.
b. Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to Federal,
State or local laws.
c. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
license, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
subsections of this section.
§ 4-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.6
1:117
§ 4-3.6. Duty of Police to Enforce. [1973 Code § 5-3.6]
It shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the Township to require any
person seen soliciting, and who is not known by such officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his solicitor's license and to enforce the provisions of
this section against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 4-3.7. Time Restrictions. [1973 Code § 5-3.7; Ord. No. 18-2003;
Ord. No. 11-2013]
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m.
or later than 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and no soliciting or
canvassing activities may be conducted on Sundays or legal holidays.
§ 4-3.8. Regulations for Solicitors. [Ord. No. 11-2013 § 3]
Persons granted licenses as solicitors or canvassers shall obey the following
regulations:
§ 4-3.9. "No Knock List." [Ord. No. 11-2013 § 3]
The Township shall maintain a "No Knock List," a copy of which shall be
provided to all solicitors or canvassers required to be licensed pursuant
to Section 4-3, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5. The
Township Clerk shall charge a fee for a copy of the "No Knock List,"
in accordance with the Open Public Records Act. Residents may register
their name and address with the Township Clerk for placement on the
"No Knock List," indicating that such resident does not want persons so
licensed to approach the registered home and/or seek personal contact with
a. The solicitor or canvasser shall conduct himself/herself in a polite and
courteous manner.
b. "No Soliciting" or "No Knock" signs placed on a resident's property
shall be strictly adhered to by the solicitor or canvasser.
c. The solicitor or canvasser shall not conduct any soliciting or canvassing
activities on properties identified on the Township's No Knock List.
d. The Township shall issue to each solicitor or canvasser a badge
displaying the words "Licensed Solicitor," the period for which the
license is issued, and the license number. The badge shall have a space
for the insertion of a photograph one and one-half by two (1 1/2 x 2)
inches in size. Two (2) photographs of this size shall be provided to the
Township by the applicant and there shall be a fee of twenty-five
($25.00) dollars to cover the cost of this badge. Each solicitor or
canvasser is required to have a badge. The badge shall be worn
constantly and conspicuously on the front of the solicitor or canvasser's
outer garment at all times while conducting soliciting or canvassing
activities within the Township. Each solicitor or canvasser shall also
carry a copy of their license with them at all times while conducting
soliciting or canvassing activities within the Township.
§ 4-3.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-3.9
1:118
the occupants of the registered home. Once the resident's name has been
added by the Township Clerk to the "No Knock List," the resident shall be
permitted to post a "No Knock" sign by the front entrance of his or her
home to advise the solicitor and canvasser. The "No Knock List" shall be
provided by the Township Clerk to the Police Department for enforcement
and may be posted in public places. It shall be unlawful for any licensed
solicitor or canvasser to approach a registered home and/or seek personal
contact with the occupants therein if the resident has registered on the "No
Knock List" or posted a "No Knock" sign. Registration on the "No Knock
List" shall expire five (5) calendar years following the end of the calendar
year of registration, unless renewed by notifying the Township Clerk.
§ 4-3.10. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 11-2013 § 3]
Any person, solicitor or canvasser violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 4-4. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.
§ 4-4.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 5-4.1]
As used in this section:
CHARITABLE AND PHILANTHROPIC — shall mean and include patriotic,
religious, eleemosynary, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal
associations, societies and the like.
CONTRIBUTION — shall mean and include the giving of alms, food, clothes,
money subscriptions, pledges or property of any nature or kind.
PERSON OR ORGANIZATION — shall mean any individual, firm,
copartnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class or league.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION — shall mean the request, directly or
indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, and other things
of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable
and philanthropic purpose as defined in this section. Solicitation shall be
deemed to be complete when made, whether or not the person making the
same receives any contribution.
§ 4-4.2. Permit Required; Exemption. [1973 Code § 5-4.2]
No person or organization shall solicit charitable and philanthropic
contributions within the Township without first obtaining a permit
authorizing such public solicitations; provided, however, that the provisions
of this section shall not apply to any established person or organization
authorized and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the
solicitations by such person or organization are conducted among the
members thereof or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or
§ 4-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.2
1:119
contributions at the regular assembly or meetings of any such person or
organization.
§ 4-4.3. Application for Permit. [1973 Code § 5-4.3]
Application for a permit to make a public solicitation of funds by charitable
and philanthropic organizations shall be made to the Township Clerk upon
forms provided by the Township.
In addition to the application required by subsection 4-1.2, the application
herein required shall contain the following information:
§ 4-4.4. Investigation and Approval of Application. [1973 Code
§ 5-4.4]
The investigation required under subsection 4-1.3 shall be limited to that
sufficient for the Chief of Police to make a determination that the person or
organization is bona fide. Upon making such a determination, the Chief of
Police shall approve the application and notify the Township Clerk.
a. The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made and the estimated
amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby.
b. A specific statement showing the need for the solicitation.
c. The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of
conducting the solicitation.
d. The names and addresses of all persons making the proposed
solicitation.
e. A brief outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitation.
f. The time and dates when such solicitations shall be made, giving
preferred dates and alternate dates for the beginning and ending of
such solicitation.
g. The amount of any wages, fees, commissions or expenses to be paid to
any person or organization for conducting such solicitation and the
names and addresses of all such persons.
h. A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable and
philanthropic work conducted by the applicant within the Township.
i. A statement to the effect that if the permit is approved, it will not be
used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the proposed
solicitation by the Township or by any of its officers or departments.
If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit
granted thereunder, there is any change in fact, policy or method that
would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall
notify the Township Clerk in writing within twenty-four (24) hours after
such change.
§ 4-4.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-4.5
1:120
§ 4-4.5. Approval; Disapproval of Application. [1973 Code § 5-4.5]
If the application is approved, the Township Clerk shall immediately notify
the applicant and issue the permit without charge. If the application is
disapproved, notification stating the reasons for such disapproval shall
immediately be sent to the applicant by the Township Clerk.
§ 4-4.6. Calendar of Solicitations. [1973 Code § 5-4.6]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to keep a current calendar of
approved solicitations to be conducted within the Township.
The Township Clerk shall have the right to propose alternate dates for
a solicitation if the requested dates should unfairly conflict with other
solicitations being conducted within the Township.
§ 4-4.7. Fee. [1973 Code § 5-4.7]
There shall be no fee payable to the Township for any charitable and
philanthropic solicitation permit.
§ 4-4.8. Time Limit. [1973 Code § 5-4.8]
No permit may grant the right to solicit for a period longer than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
§ 4-4.9. Written Receipts Required. [1973 Code § 5-4.9]
Any person or organization receiving money or any other thing for a value
of one ($1.00) dollar or more from any contributor under a solicitation made
pursuant to this section shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed
by the solicitor showing the date and the amount received; provided that
this subsection shall not apply to any contribution collected by means of a
closed box or receptacle used in solicitation where the use thereof has been
approved by the Township Council, where it is impractical to determine the
amount of each contribution.
§ 4-4.10. Regulation of Hours of Solicitation. [1973 Code § 5-4.10;
New]
No solicitations conducted under the authority of this section shall take
place before 9:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m.
§ 4-5. JUNK YARDS; JUNK SHOPS; USED GOODS.
§ 4-5.1. Purpose. [1973 Code § 5-5.1]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the conduct of places of business
where used goods and chattels are stored, sold or displayed, junk yards,
junk shops, motor vehicle junk yards and shops, and to impose license fees
for revenue upon all persons engaged therein.
§ 4-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.2
1:121
§ 4-5.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 5-5.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association and
principal or agent thereof to perform any act included within the provisions
of this section without first obtaining a license as herein provided for and
paying the license fee prescribed therefor.
§ 4-5.3. Definitions. [1973 Code § 5-5.3]
As used in this section:
JUNK YARD AND JUNK SHOP — shall mean and describe any business or
place of storage or deposit of two (2) or more unregistered vehicles, unfit
for use for highway transportation; or where used parts of motor vehicles
or materials which have been parts of any motor vehicle; or the place where
junk of any kind or description may be maintained or dealt in.
USED GOODS AND CHATTELS — shall mean and describe all articles of
personal property which shall not be new or unused except motor vehicles
or parts thereof.
§ 4-5.4. Application for License. [1973 Code § 5-5.4]
Any person desiring a license shall file with the Township Clerk an
application for license for the conduct of any business for the sale, display,
or storage of used goods and chattels, junk yards, junk shops, motor vehicle
yards and shops as provided in this chapter. The information required on
the application shall be as provided in subsection 4-1.2.
§ 4-5.5. Fee; Expiration; Transferability; Display. [1973 Code § 5-5.5;
Ord. No. 48-2005 § 2]
The license fee shall be fifty ($50.00) dollars annually. The license shall
not be transferable from the person to whom issued to any other person
or from place to place. The license shall be conspicuously displayed upon
the premises for which such license is issued. The license shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which issued.
§ 4-5.6. Regulations. [1973 Code § 5-5.6; Ord. No. 19-1974]
The following regulations shall apply.
a. No license for any junk yard shall be given or renewed unless the junk
yard is fenced in by a fence not less than six (6) feet in height so as to
conceal the junk. The fence shall be of wooden construction and shall
bear no advertising matter thereon except the name under which the
business may be operated.
b. All used goods and chattels as defined in this section shall at all time be
housed within a permanent building and shall not be permitted upon
any of the streets, sidewalks, in front of, along either side of, or on top
of any such building.
§ 4-5.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-5.6
1:122
§ 4-6. GAMES OF CHANCE PERMITTED ON SUNDAYS.
§ 4-6.1. Public Referendum. [1973 Code § 5-6.1]
The Bingo Licensing Law and the Raffles Licensing Law were adopted at
public referendum in the Township on April 20, 1954.
The provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law and Raffles Licensing Law
prohibit the operation of games of chance conducted under any license
issued under either or both laws on Sunday unless it shall be otherwise
provided in the license issued for the holding, operating, and conducting
thereof, pursuant to the provisions of an ordinance duly adopted by the
Governing Body of the municipality issuing the license, specifically
authorizing the conduct of the games of chance on Sunday.
§ 4-6.2. Sunday. [1973 Code § 5-6.2]
Games of chance may be conducted under any license issued under the
Bingo Licensing Law and the Raffles Licensing Law on Sunday.
Each of the licenses heretofore or hereafter issued in pursuance to either
or both of the aforesaid laws, shall provide therein that the operation of the
games of chance is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this subsection.
§ 4-7. CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND TRAVELING SHOWS.
§ 4-7.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 5-7.1; Ord. No. 45-2005 § 2]
No person shall conduct a circus, carnival, traveling show or exhibition of
any sort without first obtaining a license from the Township Clerk. The fee
for such license shall be two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per day.
§ 4-7.2. Application Requirements. [1973 Code § 5-7.2]
In addition to the information required by subsection 4-1.2, the applicant
shall furnish an exact description of the entertainments, acts, games,
amusements, attractions or exhibitions which will be offered together with
the price to be charged for general admission and each separate admission
to any amusement or activity.
§ 4-8. (RESERVED)
§ 4-9. (RESERVED)14
§ 4-10. COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRY AND DRY CLEANING
MACHINES.
c. No junk shall, at any time, be permitted upon any of the streets or
sidewalks of the Township.
14.Editor's Note: Registration of Contractors was deleted by Ord. No. 40-2005.
§ 4-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.1
1:123
§ 4-10.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 5-10.1; Ord. No. 19-1978;
Ord. No. 5-1997]
Coin-operated launderette, laundromats and dry cleaning machines shall be
licensed in accordance with Section 4-1.
§ 4-10.2. Fees. [1973 Code § 5-10.2; Ord. No. 19-1978; Ord. No.
5-1997; Ord. No. 50-2005 § 2]
The owner and/or lessee of each such premises where the machines are
situated shall pay an annual license fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars
per year. The fee for each laundry machine and each dry cleaning machine
shall be twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per year.
§ 4-10.3. Hours of Operation. [1973 Code § 5-10.3; Ord. No.
19-1978; Ord. No. 5-1997]
The premises where the machines are situated may be operated twenty-four
(24) hours per day if a full time attendance is present between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Otherwise, the premises shall be closed by 11:00
p.m. and shall not open before 7:00 a.m.
§ 4-11. COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES. [1973 Code § 5-11;
Ord. No. 3-1979; Ord. No. 28-1992]
Coin-operated vending machines shall be licensed in accordance with
Section 4-1. Every person conducting the business of selling to the general
public soft drinks or other beverages, or any other goods, wares or other
tangible property, with the exception of candy, by the use of vending
machines shall pay a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for each machine.
Excluded from the within provision are machines used by private clubs
or organizations where the sales are limited to members of the clubs or
organizations.
§ 4-12. REQUIREMENTS TO PARTICIPATE IN AUTOMOBILE TOW
TRUCKS AND WRECKERS ROTATING CALL LIST.
§ 4-12.1. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 5-12.1; Ord. No. 2-1978;
amended 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 19-2015]
No person shall participate in the police towing rotation within the
Township without first obtaining the necessary permit as hereinafter
provided from the Township Clerk. A maximum of five permits will be issued
per year, which will be based on prior service, facilities and equipment
inspections.
§ 4-10.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-12.2
1:124
§ 4-12.2. Application. [1973 Code § 5-12.2; Ord. No. 2-1978]
Applications for permits issued under this regulation shall be made upon
forms made available by the Township Clerk. The applications shall include,
among other things, the following information:
§ 4-12.3. Filing Date. [1973 Code § 5-12.3; Ord. No. 2-1978]
Applications shall be submitted prior to December 1 annually for processing
prior to January 1 of the following year.
All permits issued under this section shall expire on December 31 annually.
§ 4-12.4. Permit Fee. [1973 Code § 5-12.4; Ord. No. 2-1978]
Upon filing, each application shall be accompanied by a one hundred
($100.00) dollar permit fee. If the application is rejected, one-half of the
fee shall be returned to the applicant. The renewal fees shall also be one
hundred ($100.00) dollars and prorated on the same basis if rejected.
§ 4-12.5. Investigation. [1973 Code § 5-12.5; Ord. No. 2-1978]
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application, the Chief of Police
shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed
business operation and shall make or have made an inspection of the
vehicles. All applicants and/or operators shall be fingerprinted and a permit
shall not be issued to a person convicted of a crime of moral turpitude.
The Chief of Police may delegate the inspection of the vehicle to a person
or persons, who shall make such an inspection and who shall report to
the Chief of Police whether the wreckers are in a thoroughly safe and
sanitary condition and comply with the requirements and standards of
this section, as given herein. Upon completion of the investigation and
inspection, the Chief of Police shall either refuse to approve the application
a. The description by make, model, license number, year, vehicle
identification number and color of all wreckers for which permits are
requested, together with the principal location at which the wreckers
will be maintained.
b. The block and lot number and mailing address of the garage in which
the applicant has space available for properly accommodating and
protecting all towed motor vehicles setting forth the number of motor
vehicles which can safely be stored upon the premises at any one time.
c. A letter from the Land Use Officer of the Township verifying that the
storage of motor vehicles is a permitted use upon the premises where
the garage is located.
d. Certificate of insurance as hereinafter required.
e. Names and addresses of all owners.
f. Names and addresses of all operators to be used in the business.
§ 4-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12.5
1:125
or shall approve the application in accordance with the standards given
herein, and shall inform the Township Clerk of his decision.
§ 4-12.6. Conditions of Approval. [1973 Code § 5-12.6; Ord. No.
2-1978]
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the
following requirements have been met by the applicant:
§ 4-12.7. Insurance Policies. [1973 Code § 5-12.7; Ord. No. 2-1978]
Each permittee shall obtain the following policies of insurance naming the
Township as an additional insured:
§ 4-12.8. Identification Permit. [1973 Code § 5-12.8; Ord. No.
2-1978]
The Township Clerk shall issue to the person owning an approved wrecker,
a permit, in such form as may be set by the Township Clerk, which shall
be at all times displayed on the passenger side of the rear window of each
wrecker. The permit shall bear the name of the owner, the rate of charges,
and a notice that in case of any complaint, the complainant may notify the
Township Clerk, giving the license number of the wrecker. The card shall
a. The insurance policies as required have been procured and supplied.
b. The applicant and proposed operators shall be qualified to operate the
wrecker and conduct a wrecker service in the Township. Permit holders
shall be required to keep the Police Department informed of any
changes in names or addresses of their operators.
c. The requirements of this section and all other laws, statutes, and
ordinances have been met.
d. The vehicles have been properly licensed and conform to the State
motor vehicle laws.
e. The wrecker or tow truck shall meet the required minimum standards,
set forth herein.
a. Garage Keeper's Policy. A garage keeper's legal liability policy covering
fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of fifty thousand
($50,000.00) dollars and collision coverage subject to two hundred
($200.00) dollars deductible.
b. Garage Liability Policy. A garage liability policy covering the operation
of the applicant's equipment or vehicles for any bodily injury or
property damage in the minimum amount of $100,000/$300,000 bodily
injury and $100,000 property damage.
Each policy required herein shall contain an endorsement providing
thirty (30) days notice to the Township in the event of cancellation.
§ 4-12.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-12.8
1:126
also have the signature of the Township Clerk, the date of inspection of the
wrecker and the signature of the person making the inspection.
§ 4-12.9. Inspection. [1973 Code § 5-12.9; Ord. No. 2-1978]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules and
regulations for the inspection and operation of wreckers and for the design,
construction, maintenance and conditions for the safe conduct of a wrecker
business, in accordance with the standards outlined in this regulation.
The Chief, or his designee, shall maintain due vigilance over all wreckers
to see that they are kept in safe condition for transporting and hauling
disabled vehicles and shall have the right at all times to inspect all licensed
wreckers. If at any time the Chief of Police or his designee shall find
the equipment inadequate or unsafe, he shall have the power to demand
immediate correction; if not corrected to the satisfaction of the Chief, or
his designee, he shall have the power to revoke or suspend the permit.
The Chief of Police is also hereby authorized and empowered to establish
from time to time such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent
herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary in carrying out the provisions
of this section.
§ 4-12.10. Record of Owners and Operators. [1973 Code § 5-12.10;
Ord. No. 2-1978]
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of names of all persons owning or
operating wreckers and the date and complete record of inspection made of
them and shall provide the Township Clerk with a copy of such records.
§ 4-12.11. Rates. [1973 Code § 5-12.11; Ord. No. 2-1978; Ord. No.
26-1994; Ord. No. 2-1999; Ord. No. 3-2003 § 1; Ord. No. 4-2010;
amended 4-19-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
a. Charges for transportation, hauling or service of disabled motor
vehicles by an approved wrecker or operator of any approved wrecker
shall not exceed the following rates:
1. For conveying any passenger automobiles within the Township, a
maximum fee of $105 exclusive of tax. Station wagons, vans, pickup
trucks and panel trucks up to 1 1/2 tons shall be considered the
same as passenger automobiles for the purpose of determining
rates. For conveying any motor vehicle having a gross vehicle
weight ("GVW") between 10,000 pounds to 30,000 pounds, a
maximum fee of $150 exclusive of tax. For conveying a motor
vehicle with a GVW between 30,000 pounds and 80,000 pounds, a
maximum fee of $250 exclusive of tax.
2. If flatbed service is used for towing, an additional $30 will be
charged. If an additional heavy-duty wrecker is used for towing an
additional $250 will be charged. If additional manpower is
required, there shall be an additional charge of $75 per person. If
roadside assistance is required there shall be a charge of $45.
§ 4-12.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12.11
1:127
§ 4-12.12. Records and Impoundment Rules. [1973 Code § 5-12.12;
Ord. No. 2-1978]
3. For every day of dead storage, which shall not begin until after the
first 12 hours of storage, the charge will be $30 per day for a
passenger vehicle having a GVW under 10,000 pounds; $50 per day
for a vehicle with a GVW between 10,000 pounds and 30,000
pounds; and $75 per day for a vehicle with a GVW between 30,000
pounds and 80,000 pounds.
4. The following additional fees may be imposed related to the storage
of vehicles: a) a yard fee of $50, b) an administrative fee of $30, c)
an after-hours release fee of $35, and d) a no-key charge of $80.
5. Waiting time for wreckers; a flat rate of $45 per half-hour will be
charged. Winching/recovery time shall be charged at $130 for the
first half hour and $150 per half hour thereafter. Waiting time and/
or winching time charges shall not begin until 1/2 hour after the
time of arrival of the wrecker at the scene and shall be prorated
into quarter hours. Waiting time and winching time shall not be
individually charged for the same period. The charge for cleanup at
the scene will be a flat fee of $40.
6. The charge for towing of police vehicles and/or tire changes will be
$25.
b. Every owner of a wrecker shall give the owner of the vehicle a written
receipt for the fee paid. Copies of receipts shall be maintained by the
owner of the wrecker for two years and available for inspection by
authorized Township Officials.
c. The Township Council shall review this section every other year.
a. All companies on the towing list shall maintain a record regarding all
vehicles impounded or towed at the request of the Police Department.
This record shall be made available to any Police Officer for inspection
upon request and shall contain the following information:
1. The date, time, location, and name of the wrecker driver who towed
the vehicle at the Department's request.
2. The name of the Police Officer who requested the vehicle be
impounded.
3. The physical location of the vehicle after being towed.
4. Identification of the impounded vehicle including make, year,
model, color, vehicle identification number, license number, and
name of registered owner if known.
b. A vehicle impounded by the Police shall not be released without a
written order from the Police Department. A written record shall be
kept or maintained by the towing service indicating the name of person
§ 4-12.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-12.12
1:128
§ 4-12.13. Rotating Call List. [1973 Code § 5-12.13; Ord. No.
2-1978; Ord. No. 26-1994]
§ 4-13. (RESERVED)
§ 4-14. LICENSING OF AMUSEMENT PARKS AND AMUSEMENT
GAMES.
§ 4-14.1. Designation of Amusement Park. [1973 Code § 5-15.1;
Ord. No. 19-1996; Ord. No. 3-1997]
It is hereby determined, decided and declared there exists within the
Township a recognized amusement park, as defined under N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1,
located on the property designated as lot 1/1 in block 227/231 as shown on
the official tax map of the Township of Aberdeen with a common address of
111 Highway 35 South, Cliffwood, New Jersey, and which is the current site
of the establishment known as "Fun Time America". An amusement arcade
may be permitted as a conditional use at a recognized amusement park.
§ 4-14.2. License Required to Operate Games. [1973 Code § 5-15.2;
Ord. No. 19-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate within this municipality
any amusement game or games as the amusement games are of skill or
chance, or both, and whether the amusement game or games are placed
and operated with or without numbers, symbols or figures without having
first obtained a proper license from the Township Council. The license shall
be issued subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing
Law, N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq. and the Revised Amusement Games Regulations
releasing the vehicle, the type of proof of ownership presented, and the
name of the person receiving such vehicle.
The towing company shall obtain proper proof of ownership and
identification prior to the release of any vehicle. Release of any vehicle
to an unauthorized person by the towing company shall result in
liability against such company.
a. Wreckers performing towing service under these regulations shall
perform on a rotating basis. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
establish a system of rotation in the assignment of wreckers in the area.
Wreckers shall be assigned from the rotating list only. No person shall
respond to the scene of an accident except upon notification by the
officer in charge of Police headquarters or upon request of the driver or
owner of the disabled vehicle.
b. Additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of wreckers as
may be promulgated hereunder by the Chief of Police shall take effect
immediately after service of a copy thereof to all permit holders for
wreckers in the Township, which may be made by addressing same to
the permit holders by mail at their last known addresses.
§ 4-12.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14.2
1:129
promulgated by the Office of Amusement Games Control, Department of
Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-14.3. Application for License. [1973 Code § 5-15.3; Ord. No.
19-1996]
Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Township Clerk a
written application in duplicate therefor. The application must be in the
form prescribed by the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control and
must comply with all of the requirements as specifically set forth in N.J.S.A.
5:8-102 and any amendments and supplements thereto and any additional
requirements as may be promulgated by the Amusement Games Control
Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-14.4. Fingerprinting; Fees; Employees' Identification Cards.
[1973 Code § 5-15.4; Ord. 19-1996]
§ 4-14.5. Issuance of License; Certificate, Display. [1973 Code
§ 5-15.5; Ord. No. 19-1996]
a. The Township Council may require any applicant or shareholder,
director or officer of any applicant corporation to be fingerprinted as a
condition to the issuance of the license or employment by a license.
b. Any fees for fingerprinting or any other investigation shall be paid for
by the applicant.
c. Each employee of the licensee shall be issued as identification card.
a. Upon proof of compliance with all applicable requirements, the
Township Council shall authorize the issuance of a license by
resolution, the license to be effective for a term of one year
commencing with date of issuance and terminating on December 31 of
each year. The resolution shall specifically recite that the premises to be
licensed are located in a recognized amusement park in the
municipality. A certified copy of the resolution shall be transmitted,
together with a copy of the application and license certificate issued, to
the Commissioner of Games Control.
b. License Certificate.
1. Each license certificate shall be issued is triplicate, the original to
be delivered to the applicant, with one copy to the Commissioner,
as aforesaid, and the additional copy to be retained by the
Township Clerk.
2. Each license shall indicate (a) the name of the licensee; (b) the
address of the licensed premises; (c) the name or description of the
kind of game licensed; (d) the amount of fee paid; and (e) a
statement of the dates between which and the hours between
which such game may be conducted.
§ 4-14.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-14.5
1:130
§ 4-14.6. Hearing Prior to Refusal of License; Amendments; State
License. [1973 Code § 5-15.6; Ord. No. 19-1996]
§ 4-14.7. Control and Supervision. [1973 Code § 5-15.7; Ord. No.
19-1996]
c. Each license shall be conspicuously displayed at the place or places
where the game is to be conducted at all times during the conduct
thereof.
d. The Township expressly reserves the right to license amusement games
other than the ones described herein and to establish fees therefor for
use in the area designated in accordance with the requirements set
forth in this section. The game hereinafter licensed shall be
incorporated herein by reference thereto.
a. No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused by the
Township Council until after a hearing is held on due notice to the
applicant, at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the
qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
b. Any license issued under this section may be amended, upon
application made to the Township Council, if the subject matter of the
proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in
the original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if
any, as would have been payable if it had been so included.
c. No license issued pursuant to this section shall become operative
unless and until the licensee named therein shall have procured a State
license from the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
a. The Township Council shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all amusement games held, operated or conducted under such
license with all the powers authorized or granted to it under the
Amusement Games Licensing Law and all amendments and
supplements thereto.
b. The Chief of Police may inspect or cause to be inspected any place or
building in which amusement games or services are operating.
c. Amusement games and devices shall be kept and placed in plain view of
any person or persons who may frequent and be in any place or place of
business where such devices or games are used and licensed.
d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or license any
gambling device or game not specifically permitted by the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
e. No gambling between participants in any amusement games or the
users of any amusement devices shall be permitted at any time.
§ 4-14.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14.8
1:131
§ 4-14.8. Forfeiture of License for Certain Acts. [1973 Code
§ 5-15.8; Ord. No. 19-1996]
Any person, who shall make any false statement in any application for such
license, or shall fail to keep such adequate and proper books and records
as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding,
operating or conducting of amusement games under such license, or shall
falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate
to any transaction connected with the holding, operating and conducting
of any amusement game under any such license, or shall violate any of the
provisions of this section of the Amusement Games Licensing Law, N.J.S.A.
5:8-78 et seq., or of any of the terms of such license, shall be a disorderly
person and if convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering any other
penalties which may be improved forfeit any license issued to it under this
section.
§ 4-14.9. Separate Licenses Required; Fees. [1973 Code § 5-15.9;
Ord. No. 19-1996]
a. There shall be issued to an applicant who shall qualify a separate
license, for each place at which the licensee is authorized to hold,
operate and conduct such amusement games. The annual license fee for
each such place shall be the sum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
b. A separate license shall be issued for each kind of amusement game
authorized to be held, operated and conducted on the licensed premises
by the licensee. All amusement games certified by the New Jersey State
Legalized Gaming Commission shall be permitted to be operated at the
licensed premises. There shall be a ten ($10.00) dollar license fee for
each license issued under each of the following certifications as
provided in N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9. The certifications are as follows:
1. Certification No. 1. Throw games wherein a single player upon
payment of fees is furnished a number of balls, hoops, darts or
other objects, or uses his own coins to be hand thrown or propelled
at, into or upon targets, with prizes awarded according to results
achieved;
2. Certification No. 2. Arcade games wherein a single player upon
payment of a fee is permitted to play a machine or device to obtain
a prize or attain a score upon the base of which a prize is awarded;
3. Certification No. 3. Non-draw raffle games wherein a single player
upon payment of fee is permitted to make a blind selection of the
object from a number of objects, the object selected being the prize
won or indicating the prize won;
4. Certification No. 4. Competitive games wherein several players
upon payment of a fee are permitted to compete against each other
for a prize to be awarded to the player who first achieves the
required result;
§ 4-14.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-14.9
1:132
§ 4-14.10. Definitions. [1973 Code § 5-15.10; Ord. No. 19-1996; Ord.
No. 3-1997]
As used in this section:
5. Certification No. 5. A game of chance incorporating: (i) a laydown
board marked in segments bearing numbers, names or symbols
whereon the player or players place the entry fee as an indication
of choice of expected winner; (ii) electrical push button switches or
similar devices approved by the commissioner at each segment on
the board which enable any player to start or deactivate the game;
(iii) a moving indicator powered and driven by an electric motor
which may be activated and deactivated by any player by means of
the switches provided; and (iv) an arrangement of numbers, names
or symbols corresponding to those on the laydown board to one of
which the moving indicator points when it stops after exhausting its
momentum following deactivation of the motor provided, however,
the mechanism may not incorporate any clutch, break or timing
device except a timing device which renders all of the stops which
is inoperative for a short period of time after any starting switch is
activated, nor may the electric motor be activated or deactivated by
anyone other than a player or players;
6. Certification No. 6. Guessing games wherein a single player upon
payment of fee is entitled to win a prize in the event the operator is
unable to guess, within announced limits, the weight or age of the
player, generally known as Guess Your Weight Game and Guess
Your Age Game;
7. Certification No. 7. A game wherein a single player upon payment
of a fee is entitled to win a prize in the event that within a permitted
number of tries he rings a bell or gong a required number of times
by striking with a mall one end of a horizontal level arm the other
end of which propels a weight upward long a vertical wire at the
top of which the bell or gong is located;
8. Certification No. 8. Miscellaneous skill games wherein a single
player upon payment of a fee is entitled to use a physical skill to
attain a predetermined goal for which a prize is awarded;
9. Certification No. 9. A game of chance incorporating a laydown
board marked in segments bearing numbers, names or symbols
wherein the player or players place the entry fee as an indication of
the choice of expected winner, which is determined by a
nonelectrical and nonmechanical device, set in motion by a player
or players, coming to rest.
c. Upon the issuance of a license(s) for the above certifications, licensee
shall be entitled to conduct such amusement games as authorized by
the State under each such certification which licensee has obtained a
license.
§ 4-14.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14.10
1:133
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — shall mean a building or portion thereof used
to house rides for children and young adolescents, electronic video games,
pinball and/or virtual reality games, indoor miniature golf and/or
amusement games of skill and chance.
AMUSEMENT GAME — shall mean any game or amusement which is
authorized under the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law,
N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.
AMUSEMENT PARK — as used herein, shall mean any building, structure
and/or any place of amusement operated upon a lot or plot of ground in
the open area, permanent in its nature, and operated by private enterprise
for profit during the entire year, or any part thereof, whether admission is
charged to enter or not.
§ 4-14.11. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 5-15.11; Ord. No. 19-1996]
§ 4-14.12. Expiration of License. [1973 Code § 5-15.12; Ord. No.
19-1996]
All licenses issued under this section shall expire on December 31 annually.
§ 4-14.13. Violation and Penalties. [1973 Code § 5.15.13; Ord. No.
19-1996]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable,
upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Section 1-5. This penalty shall be
in addition to the powers of suspension or revocation of any such license as
provided herein.
§ 4-15. (RESERVED)
§ 4-16. TAXICABS.15
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any carnival, fair or
other activity held on an annual basis by a nonprofit group or
organization wherein amusement games, structures or rides are
installed or used on a temporary basis.
b. Baseball, football and basketball games, entertainment or lecture
courses by civic bodies and fire companies of Aberdeen Township, the
expense of which are guaranteed by the residents of Aberdeen, are
excepted from the requirements of this section.
c. This section shall not be applicable to any amusement games when the
net proceeds are for the benefit of any charitable, fraternal, religious
and/or nonprofit organization located within Aberdeen Township or
when given by the pupils of any school within Aberdeen Township, the
proceeds of which are to be used for educational purposes.
15.Editor's Note: The general power to license and prescribe license fee is contained in
N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq. Licensing is also a part of the general police power granted by
§ 4-14.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-16.1
1:134
§ 4-16.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 8-1; Ord. 3/1/76 § 1]
As used in this section:
CRUISING — is the practice of driving about the streets of the Township
with a taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the
taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. Driving a taxicab along
the streets of this Township for any purpose other than transporting a
passenger going to a definite destination by the most direct route or in
response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger or returning by
the most direct route to the taxicab's home, terminus or hack stand after
discharging a passenger or going to or from the terminus or hack stand
to the driver's home by the direct route shall be prima facie evidence of
cruising.
DRIVER — shall mean any person who drives a taxicab within this
Township.
OPERATION — (of a taxicab) shall mean transporting in such taxicab one or
more persons for hire along any of the streets in this Township. Accepting
a passenger being transported for hire within this Township from a point
within this Township to a point outside of the Township limits or discharging
a passenger transported for hire from a point outside of the Township limits
shall be deemed to be operation of a taxicab within the meaning hereof. The
operation of a taxicab in any of the above described manners by one other
than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof as well as
by the person actually driving the same. The transportation of any person
other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing a sign therein
or thereon using the words taxi, taxicab, cab or hack shall be prima facie
evidence of operation.
OWNER — shall mean any person in whose name title to any taxicab
is registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or who
appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
TAXICAB — shall mean and include any automobile or motor car, commonly
called taxi, engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated
or run over any of the streets within the Township and which accepts
passengers for transportation from points or places to points or places
within or without the Township.
§ 4-16.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 8-2]
No person shall operate any taxicab within the Township unless both the
taxicab and the driver are licensed pursuant to this section and conform to
all the provisions hereof.
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, 30. Taxicabs must also comply with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq.
§ 4-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16.3
1:135
§ 4-16.3. Types of Licenses. [1973 Code § 8-3]
There shall be established two classes of taxicab licenses to be known as
Taxicab Driver's License and Taxicab Owner's License respectively.
§ 4-16.4. Licensing Requirements. [1973 Code § 8-4; Ord. No.
52-2005 § 2]
a. Taxicab Driver's License. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within the Township any taxicab duly
licensed hereunder until the license either expires or is surrendered,
suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable.
b. Taxicab Owner's License. A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the
taxicab therein described to be operated in the Township by a driver
duly licensed hereunder until the license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable.
a. Personal Information. All applications for the issuance or renewal of any
license of either class shall be made to the Township Council in
duplicate on forms adopted by the Council and obtained from the
Township Clerk and designed to elicit information respecting the
identification, responsibility and law-abiding habits of the applicant.
b. Filing of Application. Each applicant for a license of any class shall
supply the information requested on the application in full and verify
the correctness thereof by his oath or affirmation and thereafter file the
completed applications with the Township Clerk together with the full
amount of the proper fee. The Township Clerk shall thereupon notify
each Council member in writing, of the name and address of the
applicant and the type of license sought and shall post notice after such
application in at least one public place in the Township.
c. Photograph of Applicant. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license
shall file with his application two photographs each three and one-half
inches by three and one-half inches (3.5 x 3.5) in size, clearly depicting
the facial features of the applicant, which shall thereupon become the
property of the Township and be retained with the application form
unless the application shall be issued in which event one of such
photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license card in a space
provided thereon.
d. Fingerprinting. Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall, at
the time of filing his application, be fingerprinted by the Township
Police Department unless fingerprints are already on file elsewhere; an
impression of such fingerprints shall thereupon be forwarded forthwith
by the Police Department to the Bureau of Identification of the New
Jersey State Police for a report of applicant's criminal record which
report when received shall be permanently affixed to the application
before consideration thereof by the Township Council.
§ 4-16.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-16.4
1:136
§ 4-16.5. Insurance Coverage. [1973 Code § 8-5]
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall together with his
application submit an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of this State conditioned for
the payment of a sum of not less than $100,000.00 to satisfy all claims
for damages, by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one person,
resulting from an accident, and a sum of not less than $300,000.00 to
satisfy all claims for damages by reason of the bodily injuries to, or the
death of, all persons, on account of any such accident, by reason of the
ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of such taxicab upon any public
street; and conditioned for the payment of a sum not less than $50,000.00
to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any one person, resulting
from an accident and a sum not less than $50,000.00 to satisfy all claims
for damages to property of all persons, on account of any such accident, by
reason of ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of such taxicab upon
any public street.
§ 4-16.6. Revocation of Licenses. [1973 Code § 8-6]
The Township Council may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or may,
after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend:
e. Expiration Date. Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this section
shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which it was
issued unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked.
f. Number of Licenses to Be Issued. The number of any licenses of either
class at any one time issued and outstanding shall not exceed such
number as the Township Council shall in its discretion deem sufficient
adequately to serve public necessity and convenience.
g. License Fees.
1. Taxicab Driver's License Fee. The annual fee for each taxicab
driver's license hereafter issued or any renewal thereof shall be
fifty ($50.00) dollars for each year or portion of a year for which the
license is issued or renewed.
2. Taxicab Owner's License Fee. The annual fee for each taxicab
owner's license issued or renewed shall be one hundred ($100.00)
dollars for each year or portion of a year for which the license is
issued or renewed.
3. Refunds. Such fees shall not be prorated nor any part thereof
refunded for any reason except that upon the denial of an
application for issuance or renewal of a license by the Township
Council ninety (90%) percent of the fee deposited shall be returned
to the applicant and ten (10%) percent shall be retained by the
Township as compensation for investigation of the application.
§ 4-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16.6
1:137
§ 4-16.7. Regulations. [1973 Code § 8-7]
a. Any license of either class if the applicant for the license has been once
convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction, or convicted of
being a disorderly person or of a violation of Title 39 "Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulation" of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or who
violates any provision of this section or has any judgment unsatisfied of
record against him arising out of an automobile accident or who has
made false answers in his application for such license or any renewal
thereof or who has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and
adequate taxicab service or who has not complied fully with all
requirements of this section for such class of license.
b. Any taxicab driver's license if the licensee or applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle; or has any
communicable or contagious disease.
c. Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed by reason of unsafe or unsanitary condition is dangerous to the
safety or health of the occupants or others or if the policy of insurance
required herein has once lapsed, or such coverage has not been
maintained at all times.
a. Fares. The following rules shall apply.
1. No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in this Township unless and
until there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof within
the full view and access of any passengers therein a complete list of
fares, charges or tariff rates charged for transportation of
passengers, which shall be those to be charged any passengers so
transported.
2. The Township Council shall have the right, pursuant hereto, to
adopt resolutions establishing zones or districts within the
Township limits as it may from time to time deem desirable or
necessary, for the purpose of prescribing or fixing maximum or
minimum charges which may be made within the area or within the
districts for such taxicab service.
b. Display of License Card. Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's
license shall be issued a license card in evidence thereof in a form
approved by Township Council and signed by the Township Clerk in its
behalf; such license card shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of any taxicab operated by the
licensee so that the face thereof shall be at all times in the full view of
and plainly legible to any passenger seated in the rear seat of such
taxicab; the license card shall at all times be and remain the property of
the Township and at the discretions of the Township Council shall at any
time be surrendered to the Township Clerk. No taxicab driver's license
§ 4-16.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-16.7
1:138
card other than that of the licensee actually operating the cab at the
time shall be displayed therein.
c. Taxi Signs. Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides
thereof the words taxi or cab in letters at least six (6) inches high, the
name of the operating owner containing the words taxi, cab, and
taxicab or an electric sign affixed to the top of the motor vehicle in clear
view from all sides bearing the words taxi, cab or taxicab.
d. Trip Record. The owner of each taxicab so licensed shall keep or cause
to be kept a written daily record of each trip made by the taxicab
showing the date, time and place the cab was engaged, the place and
time of discharge of the passenger, the number of passengers carried,
the fare received, distance carried, a statement of receipts and
expenditures and the taxicab driver's license number of the person
driving the cab on the trip. Such records shall be subject to inspection
by the Police Department or the Township Council at their discretion.
There shall also be reported to the Township Clerk the happening of an
accident involving such taxicab or the loss of property left in the taxicab
by a passenger within twenty-four (24) hours after such event.
e. Receipt Book. The operator of each taxicab shall at all times have
available a suitable cash receipt book to write out, sign and give to any
passenger requesting the same a written receipt in the amount of the
fare paid.
f. Inspection. The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the
Township shall keep his taxicab in good running order so that it makes a
presentable appearance and affords comfortable safe rides to
passengers, free from mechanical defects, loose fenders, dents, loose
doors, broken or soiled upholstery and broken or cracked glass. The
owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Township shall
present his taxicab to the Chief of Police or other designated officer
prior to the issuance or renewal of his license and thereafter upon
request of the Chief of Police or other designated officers so that it may
be inspected to determine whether it complies with the provisions of
this subsection.
g. Additional Rules To Be Added. The Township Council may by resolution
make such general rules and regulations and such special findings and
rulings as may be necessary for the proper regulation and control of the
operation of taxicabs in the Township and enforcement of this section,
in addition thereto and not inconsistent therewith and may alter,
amend, repeal and publish the same from time to time.
h. Violations; Penalty. The violation by the taxicab owner or the taxicab
driver of any rules, regulations, special findings and rulings which are
promulgated by the Township Council and included in a resolution
adopted by the Township Council, shall be sufficient cause for
revocation of any license granted to such taxicab owner or taxicab
driver pursuant to this section and shall be sufficient cause for the
§ 4-16.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16.7
1:139
§ 4-17. CLOTHING DONATION BINS.
§ 4-17.1. Licensing of Clothing Donation Bins. [Ord. No. 17-2009]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a clothing donation bin within the Township for
solicitation purposes unless all of the following requirements are met:
refusal by the Township Council to renew such license in addition to any
and all other grounds heretofore specifically mentioned in this section.
This shall be in addition to any other penalty elsewhere provided in this
revision.
a. The clothing donation bin is owned or sponsored by a voluntary
emergency service organization ("voluntary organization") registered
pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16 (N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.) or is sponsored
by any department of the Township;
b. The registered voluntary organization has obtained a permit, valid for a
twelve-month period, from the Township's Zoning Officer in accordance
with the following:
1. In its application for such a permit, the registered voluntary
organization shall indicate:
(a) The location where the bin is currently situated or proposed to
be situated which location shall be on the property owned by
the voluntary organization;
(b) The manner in which the voluntary organization anticipates
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be
used, sold, or dispersed and the method by which the proceeds
of collected donations would be allocated or spent;
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
voluntary organization and any entity which may share or
profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin.
2. The Zoning Officer shall not grant a permit to place, use or employ
a clothing donation bin if it determines that the placement of the
bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include,
but not be limited to, the placement of a clothing donation bin
within one hundred (100) yards of any place which stores large
amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
3. The Zoning Officer shall impose a fee for such application, in the
amount of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars annually for each bin to
offset the costs involved in enforcing this section.
4. An expiring permit for a clothing donation bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of the applicable annual
§ 4-16.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-17.1
1:140
fee. Such application for renewal shall include information
detailing:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, and, if the person
intends to move it, the new location where the bin would be
situated after the renewal is granted.
(b) The manner in which the voluntary organization has used, sold,
or dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin; the method by which the proceeds of collected donations
have been allocated or spent; and any changes the voluntary
organization anticipates it may make in the processes during
the period covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
voluntary organization and of any entity which shared or
profited from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
5. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the clothing donation bin
in addition to the information required pursuant to paragraph d. of
this subsection.
c. The voluntary organization, and any other entity which may share or
profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin,
maintains a bona fide office where a representative of the voluntary
organization or other entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone
information line during normal business hours for the purpose of
offering information concerning the voluntary organization or other
entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering service
unrelated to the voluntary organization does not constitute a bona fide
office.
d. The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed
on the exterior of the clothing donation bin:
1. The name and address of the registered voluntary organization that
owns or is the sponsor of the bin, and any other entity which may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin;
2. The registered voluntary organization's charitable registration
number;
3. The telephone number of the registered voluntary organization's
bona fide office, and, if applicable, the telephone number of the
bona fide office of any other entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donation collected via the bin.
§ 4-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.1
1:141
§ 4-17.2. Duty to Maintain and Service Bins. [Ord. No. 17-2009]
It shall be the duty of each registered voluntary organization issued a
permit hereunder to properly maintain and service any clothing donation
bin placed within the Township so as to prevent such clothing bin from
creating a nuisance, hazardous or unsafe condition.
§ 4-17.3. Enforcement and Limitation on Licenses. [Ord. No.
17-2009]
The Zoning Officer or other person designated by the Township as a person
authorized to enforce the provisions of this section shall, upon receipt of a
complaint by a local resident or any other person that a clothing donation
bin is causing a nuisance, hazardous or unsafe condition, investigate such
complaint and take such enforcement action as is permitted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.62 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.63. The Zoning Officer shall not be
authorized to issue more than eight (8) total clothing donation bin permits
within the Township, and no more than two (2) at any given site.
§ 4-17.4. Violations, Penalties and Revocation of License. [Ord. No.
17-2009]
Any licensee who violates any provision of this section and fails to cure
such violation within forty-eight (48) hours of notice of such violation shall
be subject to the following penalties, in addition to those penalties and
remedies set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.62 and 40:48-2.63:
§ 4-17.5. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 17-2009]
The owner of any clothing donation bin which is sponsored by any
department of the Township shall be required to comply with the licensure
4. In cases when any entity other than the entity which owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared or given entirely to,
an entity other than the entity which owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
5. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Township in the most recent permit or renewal application
indicating the manner in which the entity anticipates any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
a. For the first offense: $100.00 per day.
b. For the second offense: $250.00 per day.
c. For the third offense: mandatory revocation of permit.
§ 4-17.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-17.5
1:142
requirements hereof, but shall specifically be exempt from the fee
requirement hereof.
§ 4-18. PAWNBROKERS, DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS,
SECONDHAND GOODS. [Amended 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 14-2015]
§ 4-18.1. Purpose and Intent.
§ 4-18.2. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another United States state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable United States government-issued identification, which will be
recorded on the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded
to the local police department on request.
ADMINISTRATIVE HOLD — An order issued by a police officer to hold onsite
certain merchandise obtained through a transaction covered under this
section, and not to dispose of said property until a police investigation is
completed and the property hold is released.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this section, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the city,
town, township, village, or borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
a. The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and
other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification,
reporting, maintenance, and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in
these goods.
b. No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or
occupation of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or
other secondhand goods without complying with the requirements of
this section in the exact manner described herein.
§ 4-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.2
1:143
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this section, "secondhand goods" shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 4-18.3. License Requirement for Dealers.
a. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of
precious metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality, without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a
number issued by the Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to
the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address
of the dealer, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United States,
and whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime(s),
§ 4-18.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-18.3
1:144
disorderly person's offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and
the date(s) thereof, along with information pertaining to the structure
and history of the business to be licensed.
b. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those
articles or secondhand goods referred to in § 4-18.2 above are being
bought in any location within the municipality shall constitute engaging
in business as a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this
chapter. No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation
or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for
purchase of such articles or goods without stating in the advertising the
license number issued to a person or entity by the municipality. In any
print advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller
than eight point in the lower-right-hand corner of the advertisement. In
any advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be
visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license
number shall be a violation of this section and shall be subject to the
penalties established in § 4-18.9.
c. This section shall not apply to purchases made by dealers from
wholesalers or other legitimate suppliers, but shall only apply to those
purchases made from the public which includes other retailer sellers as
defined in § 4-18.2. The dealer shall keep records of all wholesale
purchases for a period of six months from the date of such purchase,
which records shall be opened to investigation by the Aberdeen
Township Police Department, or any sworn law enforcement officer in
the performance of their duties.
d. The following are exempt from the requirements of this section:
1. Garage sales: As used in this section, a "garage sale" is defined as
the sale of used personal property by the lawful residents of
residentially zoned property that is not conducted on a periodic or
ongoing basis. A garage sale shall be deemed to be periodic or
ongoing if a garage sale is held by the lawful resident of
residentially zoned property more than five days in any consecutive
ninety-day period;
2. Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been
in active and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the
holding of the sale, or which are incorporated as a not for profit
corporation by the state;
3. Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the
State of New Jersey, including automobile dealers, used parts
dealers and automotive parts recyclers;
4. Antique dealers: As used in this section, an "antique dealer" is
defined as one who derives 75% of his/her gross sales each year
from the sale of antiques and/or primitives. As used in this section,
an "antique" or "primitive" is defined as an old and valuable art
§ 4-18.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.3
1:145
§ 4-18.4. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial.
object or article no longer in production that is at least 50 years
old. As used in this section, the term "sale" does not include an
exchange, trade, or swap of items.
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
chapter for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 4-18.2 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 4-18.6d of this section will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 4-18.6a.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
§ 4-18.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-18.4
1:146
§ 4-18.5. Identification of Seller; Recordkeeping Requirements for
Dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 4-18.5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 4-18.6, or any other portion of this section. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 4-18.8 of this chapter.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
§ 4-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.5
1:147
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
§ 4-18.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "declaration of ownership," which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 4-18.2, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
6. The receipt number;
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
9. If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
§ 4-18.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-18.5
1:148
§ 4-18.6. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions.
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, and 51:6-1 et seq.;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in Subsection c above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in subsection f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 4-18.6.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 4-18.6. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
a. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
§ 4-18.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.6
1:149
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described
above in § 4-18.5 except for jewelry, which must be maintained for at
least 10 business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A
2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject
to inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased
or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed,
modified, or melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period
has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the
purchased item(s) are being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 4-18.5b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
"victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
precious metals or other secondhand goods for such period, the dealer
may present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation may be implemented. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this
section.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 4-18.5c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate there under. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 4-18.9 of this
chapter.
§ 4-18.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-18.6
1:150
1. Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection h. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
h.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 4-18.9.
1. Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of suspension,
revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines that
revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
§ 4-18.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.6
1:151
§ 4-18.7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this section, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the [party municipality], be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 4-18.8. Fees; Period of License Validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or
a dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under
this section, is $200. The annual renewal fee for a license is $200. These
fees include any costs the dealer must pay in relation to the mandatory
electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police, as provided by
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines
that suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
h. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
i. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 4-18.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 4-18.8
1:152
§ 4-18.5d of this chapter. Payments are to be made in the manner directed
by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year period from the date
of its issuance.
§ 4-18.9. Violations and Penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation
of operating license as provided in § 4-18.6f and g above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 4-18.6g.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 4-18.10. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability.
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Editor's Note: See Chapter XI, Health, Section 11-10 for prohibitions
on feeding wildlife.
a. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this section.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
c. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
d. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 4-18.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1
1:153
§ 5-1. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 7-1; Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No.
21-2005 § II; New]
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — shall mean any person or agency
authorized by the Township of Aberdeen to provide animal control services.
CAT — shall mean any member of the domestic feline species, male, female
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a permanent set of teeth.
DOG — shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven (7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
IMMEDIATE — shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
KENNEL — shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — shall mean the agency or department of the
Township of Aberdeen, or any designated representative thereof, charged
with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses
under the provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — shall mean a cat, dog or other animal which has been
rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified by a licensed
veterinarian.
OWNER — when applied to the proprietorship of a dog or a cat or other
animal, shall mean and include every person having a right of property in
such dog or cat or animal and every person who has such dog or cat or
animal in his or her care, custody or control, or who knowingly permits a
cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person.
OWNER/KEEPER — shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP — shall mean any place of business which is not part of a
kennel, wherein animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the
purpose of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship
rather than for business or research purposes.
§ 5-1 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-1
1:154
PET SOLID WASTE — shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — shall mean, but is not limited to, any
dog or dog hybrid declared to be potentially dangerous and/or vicious by a
Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
POUND — shall mean an establishment for the confinement of animals,
including but not limited to dogs or cats, seized either under the provisions
of this act or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
SHELTER — shall mean any establishment where dogs or cats are received,
housed and distributed.
VICIOUS DOG — shall mean any dog or hybrid declared vicious by a
Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 5-2. LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 5-2.1. Licensing; When Required. [1973 Code § 7-2.1; Ord. No.
23-1986]
§ 5-2.2. Application for License. [1973 Code § 7-2.2; Ord. No.
23-1986; New]
a. Any dog or cat owned in New Jersey and duly licensed for the current
licensing year and bearing the proper registration tag for a New Jersey
municipality shall be exempt from the licensing and tag provisions of
this subsection.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Aberdeen any dog or cat licensed in a State other than New Jersey for
the current licensing year and who keeps the dog or cat in the Township
for a period of more than ninety (90) days shall immediately apply for a
license and registration tag for the dog or cat.
c. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog or cat and who keeps the dog or cat in the Township
for a period of more than ten (10) days shall immediately apply for a
license and registration tag for the dog or cat.
d. The owner or keeper of any newly acquired dog or cat of licensing age,
or of any dog or cat which attains licensing age, shall apply to the
Township for a license and registration tag for such dog or cat within
ten (10) days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.2
1:155
§ 5-2.3. Animal Control Fees. [1973 Code § 7-2.3; Ord. No. 23-1986;
Ord. No. 20-2007 §§ II, III]
a. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age
in the Township shall in the month of January in each year apply for and
procure from the Township Clerk a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog or cat owned, kept or harbored, and
shall place upon each such dog or cat a collar or harness with the
registration tag securely fastened to it.
No license to own, keep or harbor a dog or cat shall be issued to a
minor.
b. The application form furnished by the Township shall be signed by the
owner or keeper of the dog or cat and shall state the breed, sex, age,
color and markings of the dog or cat for which the license and
registration are sought, and whether the dog is of a long-haired or
short-haired variety, and also the name, street and post office address of
the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog or cat. At
the time of making application, the applicant shall submit to the
Township a written certificate showing rabies inoculation in accordance
with Section 5-3 of this chapter.
a. A person applying for a license for a non-potentially dangerous dog
shall pay to the Township the sum of twelve ($12.00) dollars for the
licensing of each such dog and the additional sum fixed by N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3 for the registration tag of each dog. An additional fee of five
($5.00) dollars per dog shall be assessed against dog owners who
license their dogs after January 31 of each year. There shall be a charge
of one ($1.00) dollar for the replacement of a registration tag during
any current licensing year.
b. A person applying for a potentially dangerous dog license shall pay to
the Township the sum of seven hundred ($700.00) dollars for the
licensing of each dog, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, as well as the
additional sums fixed under N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3. The fees collected under
this provision shall be deposited in a special account as required by
N.J.S.A. 4:19-35, to be used by the Township of Aberdeen to administer
and enforce the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 37, which govern
the regulation of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs.
c. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as seeingeye
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons or which are
commonly known as service dogs, or dogs used to assist deaf persons
and commonly known as hearing-ear dogs shall be licensed and
registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the
owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee, as per
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.31.
d. A person applying for a cat license shall pay to the Township the sum of
twelve ($12.00) dollars for the licensing of each such cat, and any
§ 5-2.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-2.3
1:156
§ 5-2.4. Expiration Date. [1973 Code § 7-2.4; Ord. No. 23-1986]
The license year shall run from January 1 of the year of issuance to
December 31 of the same year.
§ 5-3. RABIES INOCULATION.
§ 5-3.1. Inoculation Required. [1973 Code § 7-3.1; Ord. No.
23-1986]
No person shall own, harbor or keep any cat or dog within the Township
which is not inoculated against rabies. The inoculation shall be made by a
duly licensed veterinarian. The vaccine used must be of a type approved
by the United States government agency responsible for licensing
manufacturers of veterinary biologicals. Each cat or dog shall be inoculated
against rabies once each year unless the veterinarian's certificate indicates
a longer period of effectiveness.
§ 5-3.2. Certificate. [1973 Code § 7-3.2; Ord. No. 23-1986]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat or dog within the Township
shall procure and possess a veterinarian's certificate indicating that the
cat or dog has been inoculated against rabies and setting forth the date of
the inoculation. The certificate shall be produced upon the request of any
Township Health Official, member of the Township Police Department, or
Township Animal Control Officer.
§ 5-3.3. Inoculation Proof Required. [1973 Code § 7-3.3; Ord. No.
23-1986]
Proof of inoculation shall be required prior to issuance of a cat or dog
license.
§ 5-4. RABIES AND CONTROL OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 5-4.1. Authorization Order. [1973 Code § 7-7.1; Ord. No. 23-1986;
Ord. No. 27-1992]
Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the danger of
rabies, the Township Manager, if he or she deems it necessary, shall issue
a notice ordering every person owning or keeping a cat or dog to confine it
additional sums as fixed by State law. An additional fee of five ($5.00)
dollars per cat shall be assessed against cat owners who license their
cats after January 31 of each year. There shall also be a charge of
one ($1.00) dollar for the replacement of a registration tag during any
current licensing year.
e. There shall also be an additional fee of three ($3.00) dollars for any dog
or cat of reproductive age which has not had its reproductive capacity
neutered.
§ 5-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4.1
1:157
securely on his or her premises unless such cat or dog shall have a muzzle
of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any unmuzzled cat or
dog running at large during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and
impounded unless noticeably infected with rabies.
§ 5-4.2. Disposition of Rabid Dogs. [1973 Code § 7-7.2; Ord. No.
23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992]
§ 5-4.3. Confinement and Observation of Rabid Animals. [1973 Code
§ 7-7.3; Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992]
The following rules shall apply:
§ 5-5. IMPOUNDING AND DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
a. All dogs or cats so noticeably infected with rabies, or displaying vicious
propensities, shall be killed by the Animal Control Officer or other
authorized persons, without notice to the owner. The owner shall be
notified of such killing within three (3) days as to the reason for the
killing.
b. Dogs and cats impounded during the first two (2) days of a
proclamation issued under subsection 5-4.1 of this chapter, shall, if
claimed within five (5) days, be released to the owner unless infected
with rabies, upon payment of the impounding charges provided for in
this chapter. If unclaimed after that period, such dog or cat may be
summarily destroyed.
a. The owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other animal known or
suspected of being bitten by an animal known or suspected of being
affected by rabies shall kill the animal or confine it for a period of not
less than six (6) months.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog or cat
has rabies to allow such dog or cat to be taken off his or her premises,
or beyond the limits of the Township, without the written permission of
the Animal Control Officer, a Policeman or other authorized persons.
Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining a cat or dog is rabid
shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer, a Policeman or any
other authorized persons, who shall either remove the cat or dog to the
pound or summarily destroy it.
c. The owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal which
has attacked or bitten a person shall confine the animal, at the expense
of the owner or person in charge of it, upon the premises of the owner
or person in charge or at some other place designated in the notice, for
at least ten (10) days after the animal has attacked or bitten a person.
§ 5-4.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-5.1
1:158
§ 5-5.1. Causes for Impounding. [1973 Code § 7-4.1; Ord. No.
23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and every Police Officer, as well
as any contractor, dog catcher, Health Officer, or Animal Control Officer
appointed by the Township, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
to take into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, the following:
§ 5-5.2. Disposition of Unclaimed Cats or Dogs. [1973 Code § 7-4.2;
Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992]
The Animal Control Officer is authorized and empowered to cause the
destruction of any unclaimed cat or dog, in as humane a manner as possible,
under the following contingencies:
When any cat or dog so seized has been detained for seven (7) days after
notice, when notice can be given, or has been detained for seven (7) days
after seizure, when notice cannot be given, in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring
the cat or dog has not claimed the cat or dog, and paid all expenses incurred
by reason of its seizure and detention, and if the cat or dog is unlicensed at
the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring the
cat or dog has not produced a license or registration tag for the cat or dog,
a. Any cat or dog running at large in the Township.
b. Any cat or dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat or dog, unless accompanied by a person who is
capable of controlling it and who has the cat or dog securely confined
and controlled by an adequate leash or chain not more than six (6) feet
long, or which the official or his agent or agents have reason to believe
is a stray cat or dog.
c. Any dog with fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities or any cat or dog
noticeably infected with rabies or bitten by an animal suspected of
having rabies.
d. Any cat or dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the cat or dog without a current registration tag on the collar
of the cat or dog.
e. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring the dog.
f. Any cat or dog running at large in the Township upon complaint of any
citizen.
g. No cat or dog shall be returned to the owner or claimant of such cat or
dog unless such cat or dog shall have a current license, and the owner
or claimant has complied with the rabies inoculations requirements as
herein provided and has paid the proper fees required.
§ 5-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5.2
1:159
the Animal Control Officer or other designated authority may cause the cat
or dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 5-6. PROHIBITIONS.
§ 5-6.1. Compliance With Regulations. [1973 Code § 7-5; Ord. No.
23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992; Ord. No. 21-2005 § III; New]
No person shall own, keep or harbor an animal in the Township except in
compliance with this chapter and the following regulations:
a. No dog or cat shall run at large at any time within the limits of the
Township of Aberdeen.
b. No dog or cat shall be permitted off the premises of the person owning,
keeping or harboring it unless accompanied by a person who is capable
of controlling it and who has the dog or cat securely confined and
controlled by an adequate leash or chain not more than six (6) feet long.
c. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat shall permit or
cause it to do any injury to any person, or to do any damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property of persons other than the
owner or person having the care, custody or control of such dog or cat.
d. No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which barks, howls or
cries continuously for ten (10) minutes or intermittently for thirty (30)
minutes so that same unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life
or property of persons residing in the vicinity. The provisions of this
section shall apply to all private or public facilities including any animal
pounds, kennels and pet shops where a dog is held for any reason.
e. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog or cat
shall cause, suffer or allow such dog or cat to soil, defile or defecate on
or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
passageway, bypath, play area, park, school ground or any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public or private property,
without the permission of the owner of the property. The restriction
shall not apply to the street right-of-way, except for sidewalk, from
property line to property line which shall be used to curb such dog or
cat provided that the person who curbs such dog or cat shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog or cat and dispose
of same in a sanitary manner.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person. Any owner or keeper
who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for
that purpose.
f. No more than six (6) cats and/or dogs of licensing age shall be kept,
maintained or harbored at one time for any length of time in any
§ 5-5.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-6.1
1:160
§ 5-6.2. Shelter and Care of Animals. [New]
§ 5-7. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. [1973 Code § 7-6; Ord. No.
23-1986; Ord. No. 27-1992; New]
§ 5-8. REGULATION OF KENNEL, PET SHOP, SHELTER OR POUND.
§ 5-8.1. License. [1973 Code § 7-8.1; Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No.
27-1992]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the Township for a license entitling the
person to keep or operate such an establishment.
The application shall describe the premises, where the establishment is
located, the purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained and shall
be accompanied by the approval of the Township Department of Health
showing compliance with the local and State rules and regulations
governing location and sanitation at such an establishment.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall expire
on the last day of June of each year and be subject to revocation by the
residential housing unit or on its grounds or in any business
establishment or on its grounds. This restriction shall not apply to
properly licensed kennels, pet shops, pounds and shelters.
g. No person shall own, harbor or keep any wild animal including, but not
limited to, wolves, skunks, raccoons and foxes, as pets unless the
animal is purchased from a duly certified pet shop and is accompanied
by a certificate from the pet shop and/or an appropriate State or
Federal agency.
a. Condition of Pens and Premises. It shall be unlawful for any person
keeping or harboring animals to fail to keep the premises where such
animals are located free from excessive animal waste and offensive
odors to the extent that such waste and odors disturb person(s) residing
or located within twenty (20) feet of the premises. It shall be unlawful to
allow the premises where animals are kept to become unclean and a
threat to the public health by failing to diligently and systematically
removal all animals waste from the premises.
a. The Township Council shall appoint a suitable person as Animal Control
Officer for the Township and such assistants as from time to time may
be necessary, who shall possess and exercise the power and the
authority described in this chapter. Such Animal Control Officer shall be
paid compensation as the Township Council shall deem suitable and
proper.
b. No person shall hinder, molest or interface with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 5-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8.1
1:161
Township of Aberdeen on recommendation of the State Department of
Health or the Township Department of Health for failure to comply with
the rules and regulations of the State Department or Township after the
owner has been afforded a hearing by the State or Township. Any person
holding such license shall not be required to obtain individual licenses for
dogs owned by such licenses and kept at such establishment; such licenses
shall not be transferable to another owner or to different premises.
§ 5-8.2. Location. [1973 Code § 7-8.2; Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No.
27-1992]
No such kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be located, operated or
maintained, except as permitted in the Chapter XXV, Land Development of
the Township of Aberdeen.
§ 5-8.3. Fees. [1973 Code § 7-8.3; Ord. No. 23-1986; Ord. No.
27-1992; Ord. No. 41-2005 § 2]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten (10)
or less dogs shall be ten ($10.00) dollars and for more than ten (10) dogs,
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be
ten ($10.00) dollars. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
§ 5-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 21-2005 § IV]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Aberdeen Police
Department and Department of Health. Any person(s) who is found to be in
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine
of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per day with a maximum fine not to exceed
one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars.
§ 5-10. MANAGED CARE OF FREE-ROAMING CATS PERMITTED.
[Added 6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 19-2018]
§ 5-10.1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section the following terms shall have the meaning
set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in
the male gender include the female gender.
ABANDONED — That an owner or caregiver has forsaken a domesticated
cat entirely, or has neglected or refused to provide care and support to the
cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person employed or appointed by the
Township who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and regulations
concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with New Jersey
law and this Code.
§ 5-8.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-10.1
1:162
CAREGIVER — A resident of the Township of Aberdeen who provides food
and water for or otherwise cares for a cat.
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans, is licensed by
the Township of Aberdeen and is appropriate as a companion for humans.
EAR MARKED — A tagged, notched or tipped left ear as performed by a
licensed veterinarian.
FERAL CAT COLONY — A group of cats that congregates, more or less,
together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any
nonferal cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of
it.
FREE-ROAMING CAT — A cat that is regularly off the property of the owner
and is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner.
MANAGED CAT COLONY — Spaying and neutering the cats to stabilize the
population of the feral cat colony.
NUISANCE — Includes, but not limited to the following:
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
estate, or any other legal entity.
Disturbing the peace by habitually or continually howling, crying,
caterwauling, or screaming by a cat or cats;
a.
Spraying or leaving feces unburied or buried on private property by a
cat or cats without permission of the owner of the property;
b.
c. Fighting by a cat or cats;
The desecration or soiling of personal and/or real property by a cat or
cats without permission of the owner of the property;
d.
e. Endangering the life or health of other animals or persons;
Interfering with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to
enjoyment of life or property;
f.
g. Damaging the property of anyone other than their owner's property;
h. Entering the property of anyone other than their owner's property;
i. Killing or maiming domestic animals or wildlife;
Fouling the air with odor and thereby causing unreasonable annoyance
or discomfort to neighbors or others near to the premises where the cat
or cats are kept or harbored;
j.
Causing unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the
cat or cats are kept or harbored;
k.
Becoming offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety
by virtue of the number and/or types of cats maintained in light of the
nature and the size of the property on which they are maintained.
l.
§ 5-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10.1
1:163
RESCUE GROUP — Is a for-profit or not-for-profit entity, or a collaboration
of individuals, with at least one of its purposes being the adoption or
placement of cats in homes with humans to serve as companion animals.
STRAY CAT — A cat that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not
under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not regularly
provided with food by its owner or which is not licensed by the Township of
Aberdeen.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shelter provided by an owner to a domesticated cat
licensed by the Township of Aberdeen that provides protection from rain,
sun, and other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the cat.
TNR — Trap, neuter and return.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are
trapped, tested for feline leukemia, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against
rabies and returned to the location where they congregate.
ZOONOTIC DISEASE — Those diseases transmittable to humans from
animals, including parasitic, bacterial, fungal and viral diseases.
§ 5-10.2. Responsibilities of Owners of Domesticated Cats.
§ 5-10.3. Feral Cat Colonies.
a. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate
food, water and shelter for their cats and obtain licenses for their cats
from the Township of Aberdeen.
b. The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to
guard against the cat creating a nuisance.
c. The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated
cat shall not permit his/her cat to roam unsupervised.
d. An owner shall not abandon a domesticated cat.
a. Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
section.
b. Restriction of feral cat colony locations.
1. Neither feral cats nor feral cat colonies shall be maintained by any
caregiver within 200 feet of any Township-owned park or
playground.
2. No feral cat colony can be established without the written approval
of all adjacent property owners of a potential cat colony.
c. Sponsorship of colony TNR programs. The Associated Humane
Societies is approved as the sponsor. Other residents of the Township of
Aberdeen may apply to the Township to serve as colony TNR program
caretakers. Any person or entity so applying shall comply with the
§ 5-10.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-10.3
1:164
requirements of this section for caretakers and execute an Associated
Humane Societies approved caretaker contract. Any person intending
to undertake the responsibilities of caretaker shall advise the
Associated Humane Societies in writing and provide his/her/its address
and telephone number.
d. Sponsor Requirements. It shall be the duty of the sponsor to:
1. Review and approve of colony caregivers;
2. Send written notice of acceptance of the requirements and rules
set forth herein by all colony caregivers prior to their approval;
3. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony
caregiver or of cats within a colony;
4. Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the size and
location of the colonies as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the sponsor's colonies;
5. Report annually to the Township on the following:
(a) Number of colonies in the Township;
(b) Total number of cats in colonies;
(c) Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to
the TNR program;
(d) Number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes.
6. Register feral cat colonies;
7. Sponsor shall be equally responsible with that of the Animal
Control Officer for humanely capturing, trapping, testing,
neutering, vaccinating, identifying and spaying or neutering feral
cats and testing them for feline leukemia.
8. Sponsor shall obtain and maintain liability insurance in the
minimum amount of $500,000 for all activities, action and work
performed pursuant to this section and the laws of this state,
naming the Township of Aberdeen as an additional named insured,
providing an annual copy of the declaration of insurance and proof
of payment of same.
9. Sponsor shall agree to forever defend, protect, indemnify and hold
harmless the Township of Aberdeen, its officers, agents and
employees from and against any and all claims, causes of action,
injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and costs arising out of or
which may arise out of the creation and operation of the TNR
program.
10. Sponsor shall investigate an alleged violation of this section upon
receipt of two sworn affidavits of complaint on a form provided by
§ 5-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10.3
1:165
the Township, signed by two unrelated Township residents living
in separate dwellings in the vicinity of the alleged violation. One
of the affidavits may be provided by a person who works for a
recognized business or agency that regularly or frequently
provides services in the vicinity of the alleged violation. The
affidavit shall specify the address or location of the alleged
violation, the nature, time and dates of the alleged violation, the
name and address of the owner or caregiver, if known, and a
description of the animal, if known.
e. Feral Cat Caregiver Requirements. Caregivers are responsible for the
following:
1. Registering the feral cat colony with the sponsor;
2. All caregivers must acknowledge receipt and acceptance of the
requirements and rules set forth herein;
3. Taking steps that are reasonably likely to result in the vaccination
of the colony population for rabies and making best efforts to
update the vaccinations on cats that can be recaptured;
4. Taking steps that are reasonably likely to and making best efforts to
further the objective of the spay/neuter of at least 90% of the
colony population;
5. Providing the sponsor with descriptions of each cat in the colony
and copies of documents evidencing that the cats have been
vaccinated and spayed/neutered;
6. Providing food and water for colony cats;
7. Remove all food provided within two to four hours of providing
food;
8. Observing the colony cats at least twice per week and keeping a
record of any illnesses or unusual behavior noticed in any colony
cats;
9. Obtaining the approval, in writing, of the owner of any property to
which the caregiver requires access to provide colony cats;
10. In the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, the caregiver shall
take reasonable steps likely to result in the removal of the kittens
from the colony after they have been weaned, and the placement of
the kittens in homes or foster homes for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement or with the sponsor for subsequent
permanent placement;
11. Reporting annually in writing to the sponsor on the status of the
colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats in the
colony, the number of cats that died or otherwise ceased being a
part of the colony during the year, the number of kittens born to
§ 5-10.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-10.3
1:166
§ 5-10.4. Ordinance Enforcement.
colony cats and their disposition and the number of cats and kittens
placed in permanent homes as companion cats;
12. Providing proper medical attention to any colony cat that appears
to require it;
13. Taking reasonable steps to prevent cats from creating a nuisance in
adjacent properties.
f. Colony Cat Requirements.
1. The left ear of a colony cat that has been spayed or neutered and
vaccinated shall be eartipped.
2. An electronic animal identification device (EAID), more broadly
known as a microchip, shall be inserted into the cat by a
veterinarian in accordance with professional medical standards.
The colony number shall be used for purposes of the EAID.
g. Requirements in General. It shall be the responsibility of all residents of
Aberdeen along with the sponsor, feral cat caregivers, and all involved
individuals to use due consideration to avoid the taking of rare,
threatened or endangered species under the Endangered and Nongame
Species Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1, et seq. and pursuing the
actions allowed by this section.
h. Registration of Feral Cat Colonies. The sponsor shall register feral cat
colonies maintained by approved caregivers. Feral cat colonies within
the Township that are not registered by the sponsor are not entitled to
any benefits or protections set forth in this section. No colonies may be
established except in accordance with this section. On an annual basis
the sponsor shall provide the Township of Aberdeen with a colony
management plan for the Township containing all registered feral cat
colonies with information on the number of cats, anticipated rate of
attrition and the length of project, efforts to deter predation and to
prevent immigration of more cats into each colony. The list of registered
feral cat colonies and the annual colony management plan shall be filed
with the Township Manager.
a. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or by a fine not
exceeding $2,000; or by any period of community service not exceeding
90 days. Each day that a violation continues may be deemed to be a
separate offense.
b. Investigation and Disposition of Feral Cats by Animal Control Officer.
1. In the event that the sponsor becomes aware, either through a
complaint or personal observation, of a feral cat or feral cat colony,
§ 5-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10.4
1:167
he shall make a reasonable attempt to determine if the animal has
a caregiver who will comply with the requirements and rules. If,
after making such an attempt, no caregiver is identified or is willing
to comply with the provisions set forth herein, the sponsor shall
take all necessary action to obtain permission from the property
owner(s) to enter upon the property to capture and remove the
feral cats, and in the absence thereof may exercise their powers
as the certified animal control officer under N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 to
enter on to the property and to dispose of the captured cats in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
2. The sponsor shall make a good faith effort to contact animal
sanctuaries in New Jersey and out of the state for the purpose of
making arrangements to deliver feral cats and stray cats who do
not have a caregiver. In the event that no animal sanctuary is
available or willing to accept the cats, the sponsor may deliver the
cats to the Animal Shelter.
3. The Animal Control Officer and/or the sponsor have the right to
seize or remove cats from a colony that have not been vaccinated
against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the disease.
4. The Animal Control Officer and/or the sponsor has the right to seize
or remove a cat from a colony that is creating a nuisance, as
defined above, when the caregiver has been given time to remove
the nuisance but failed to do so.
5. The Animal Control Officer and/or the sponsor has the right to seize
or remove the colony of cats when the caregiver regularly fails to
comply with the requirements of this section and the Animal
Coordinator has not been able to obtain a replacement or
substitute caregiver that has been approved to be a caregiver.
6. The Animal Control Officer and/or the sponsor has the right to seize
or remove cats from a colony if it is determined that there is a
public health threat, including, but not limited to, zoonotic
diseases, feline HIV or leukemia.
7. The Animal Control Officer and Police Officers may investigate any
nuisance complaint.
c. Disposition of colony cats.
1. An Animal Control Officer or sponsor who has trapped a cat whose
left ear has been tipped or which bears some other distinguishing
mark indicating that it belongs to a feral cat colony shall scan any
cat trapped or picked up for an EAID. If an EAID is found, the
officer shall return the cat to its colony or its owner. If an EAID is
not found, the officer shall contact the sponsor and the sponsor or
any other person named as the owner of the cat.
§ 5-10.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 5-10.4
1:168
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Editor's Note: Laws concerning alcoholic beverage control are
contained in N.J.S.A. Title 33. All ordinances must be in conformity
with these provisions and approved by the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control. State law prescribes the types of
licenses that may be issued, their number, permissible license fees
and the regulation of licensed premises, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
See also Chapter III, Section 3-13 for the prohibition of consuming
alcoholic beverages in public places and Section 3-14, prohibiting
underage drinking on private property.
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1973 Code § 6-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Aberdeen in accordance with the provisions of
an act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
2. If the owner or sponsor is not able to immediately take custody of
the cat, the officer shall return the cat to the appropriate colony.
3. If the cat does not have an EAID then the Animal Control Officer
shall contact the sponsor so the cat can be properly placed in a
colony. If the cat is obviously a domestic cat the sponsor shall
arrange for care for the cat until the owner is located and may
determine the disposition of the cat in those circumstances where
the domestic cat's owner cannot be located. If the cat does not have
an EAID and the owner cannot be located, then the sponsor will
nevertheless treat the cat as any stray with a seven-day holding
period.
d. Nuisance complaints.
1. The requirements of this section notwithstanding, animal control
officers and police officers may investigate any nuisance complaint.
2. The provisions herein remain in full force and effect and are not to
be superseded by the aforesaid provisions. If there is any conflict
between this section and the aforesaid ordinance, the ordinances
are to be read in concert as they are consistent with protecting the
public health, safety and general welfare of the Township.
§ 5-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:169
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 6-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1973 Code § 5-3.1]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1973 Code § 6-3.2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Mayor and
Township Committee which shall also administer the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1973 Code § 6-3.3]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter, except in those cases provided by
law where the licenses in question are issued by the Director of the State
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3.4. Classes and Maximum Number of Licenses. [1973 Code
§§ 6-3.4 and Ord. No. 12-1976; Ord. No. 17-1978; Ord. No. 6-1980;
Ord. No. 6-1981; Ord. No. 29-1992; Ord. No. 20-1998 § 1; Ord. No.
51-2005 § 2; Ord. No. 10-2009 § II; Ord. No. 4-2014 § 2]
The classes and maximum number of licenses to be issued by the Township
are hereby fixed as follows and the annual fees of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of
License Annual License Fees Number of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Consumption
License.
$2,100.00 12
Plenary Retail
Distribution
Licenses.
$1,200.00 3
Club Licenses. $86.40
§ 6-2 ABERDEEN CODE § 6-3.4
1:170
Notes:
1. For State law authorizing the Township to restrict number of licenses
to sell alcoholic beverages at retail, see N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
§ 6-3.5. Licenses Not Issued. [1973 Code § 6-3.5]
Seasonal retail consumption licenses and retail distribution licenses shall
not be issued.
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1973 Code § 6-4.1]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed
in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter
provided.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1973 Code § 6-4.2; Ord. No. 8-1978]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays, no
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1973 Code § 6-4.3]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless
January 1 is a Sunday, in which case no alcoholic beverages may be sold,
served, delivered to or consumed in the licensed premises between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.4. Closing of Premises During Prohibited Hours of Sale;
Exceptions. [1973 Code § 6-4.4; New]
During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed and no person shall be admitted
or permitted to remain thereon except the licensee or bona fide employees
of the licensee; provided, however, that such requirement for the closing of
the premises shall not apply to bona fide hotels or restaurants as defined
in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t) and to clubs eligible for a club license under N.J.S.A.
33:1-12(5) and to other establishments where the principal business is other
than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons. [1973 Code § 6-4.5]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years, with exceptions as provided by
§ 6-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4.5
1:171
law, or to any person actually or apparently intoxicated, or allow, permit or
suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the
licensed premises.
§ 6-4.6. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Subsection 6-4.6, Distance Required Between Licensed
Premises, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 4-2014.
§ 6-5. LIMITING SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING AN
ELECTION. [1973 Code § 6-5]
A hall or room in which there is no bar may be used for a polling place
despite the fact that such hall or room is technically a part of a licensed
premises provided that no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed
upon any part of the licensed premises while the polls are open and until
after the votes shall have been counted and tabulated, and the election
officers shall have fully completed their duties in respect to the election, and
in any event, during any part of the twenty-four (24) hours of the calendar
day on which the election is held.
§ 6-6. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1973 Code
§ 6-7; Ord. No. 17-1981]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five (5) day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-7. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-7.1. Presence. [New]
No person under the legal age shall enter any premises licensed for the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing any
alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-7.2. Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages by a Person Under the
Legal Age. [New]
No persons under the legal age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or have
another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage on any premises licensed
for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 6-7.3
1:172
§ 6-7.3. Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages for a Person Under the
Legal Age. [New]
No person shall purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for
persons under the legal age. It shall be unlawful for any person to induce or
attempt to induce any licensee or any employee of a licensee to sell, serve
or deliver alcoholic beverages to persons under the legal age.
§ 6-7.4. Misstating Age. [New]
No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of another person for the
purpose of inducing any licensee or his employee to sell, serve or deliver
any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal age or to permit a person
under the legal age to remain on any premises in violation of subsection
6-7.1.
§ 6-7.5. Violations; Penalties. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, shall be punished by a
fine of not less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. In addition, the Court
shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six (6)
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor
vehicle in this State for six (6) months beginning on the date he becomes
eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
Chapter 7
(RESERVED)
Chapter 8
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 8-1. PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
§ 8-1.1. Definition. [1973 Code § 4-7.1; Ord. No. 14-1978]
As used in this chapter:
PARK — shall mean public parks, playground facilities and other facilities
used for recreation.
§ 6-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1.2
1:173
§ 8-1.2. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 4-7.2; Ord. No.
14-1978; Ord. No. 4-2009 § II]
a. Supervision. All parks in this Township shall be operated and
maintained under the supervision of the Director of Recreation and
Parks.
b. Hours of Operation. Public parks shall be open during the hours of 7:00
a.m. until sunset each day, except that the closing time of a public park
may be changed by prior permission and authorization issued by the
Township Council. No person shall, without permission, enter into or
remain in a public park except during the hours the park is open to the
general public.
c. Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall be permitted within a public park
while under the influence of intoxicating beverages, drugs or narcotics.
d. Refuse, Litter, Pollution. No person shall leave or throw bottles, broken
glass, ashes, wastepaper or other rubbish or litter in any public park,
except in a properly provided receptacle designated for that purpose.
No person shall throw or place any dirt, stone, rock debris, foreign or
waste substance in any portion of a public park, and no person shall
cause any portion of a public park to become polluted or otherwise unfit
or unsafe for use by the public.
e. Group Use, Meetings, Exhibitions. No group or organization of twenty
(20) or more persons shall use or occupy a public park without first
having obtained a group use permit. Such permit shall be obtained from
the Director of Parks and Recreation not later than seven (7) days
before the proposed date of use. The granting or denial of such permit
shall be based upon the rules, regulations and standards promulgated
by the Township Council. Group use shall be limited to designated
areas. Adult supervision of children's groups shall be required at all
times.
f. Picnics, Fires. No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other
than those designated for that purpose. No person shall build, light or
maintain a fire within a public park except in a camp stove or fireplace,
in an area designated for that purpose. All fires shall be extinguished
immediately upon completion of use of the camp stove or fireplace.
g. Fireworks. No person shall discharge or set off any fireworks,
firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or noise makers of any kind, in a public
park.
h. Commercial Use. No person shall engage in any commercial use or
enterprises in a public park, except that duly licensed vendors may sell
items to individuals from motor vehicles temporarily parked in the
vicinity or parking area of a public park.
i. Gambling. No person shall gamble or play at games of chance or use
any gambling device in any public park.
§ 8-1.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 8-1.2
1:174
§ 8-1.3. Park Traffic Rules. [1973 Code § 4-7.3]
The following rules shall apply:
§ 8-1.4. Addition of New Rules. [1973 Code § 4-7.4; Ord. 14-1978]
The Township Manager shall be empowered to prescribe additional rules
and regulations for the use of the Township parks which shall have the same
force and effect as if expressly set forth hereinabove.
j. Vehicles, Parking. No person shall use any portion of a public park,
except those areas designated for that purpose, for the purpose of
travel with or parking of vehicles. Footpaths and walks established for
pedestrian use shall not be used for vehicle travel. The use of any
unlicensed motor vehicle, snowmobile, trail bike, minibike, or moped is
prohibited in any public park. No parking of vehicles shall be allowed
between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where later hours are provided
in designated areas.
k. Interference With Others. No person shall harass, obstruct, molest,
assault or interfere with any person lawfully within a public park. Nor
shall any person resist, obstruct, molest, assault or interfere with any
law enforcement officer or public official in any public park.
l. Abusive or Threatening Language. No person shall use abusive,
threatening, boisterous, insulting or indecent language in a public park.
Nor shall any action by any person constituting a nuisance be allowed.
m. Signs. The Township Council hereby authorizes the installation of
appropriate signs to be located within public parks, giving notice of the
various rules and regulations, or portions thereof, set forth in this
section. No person shall damage or deface any such sign.
n. Glass Bottles. No person shall bring, carry or cause to be brought into
the park areas, as defined herein and including any and all beaches, any
glass bottles or other glass containers except upon special written
permission of the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
a. The Township Manager is hereby authorized to place and maintain
traffic control devices upon the park drives and ways as he deems
necessary for the regulation and proper control of traffic.
b. The speed limit on all drives in the Township park shall be ten (10) miles
per hour.
c. All vehicular traffic through the park area shall yield to pedestrians.
§ 8-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1.4
1:175
Chapter 9
TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: This Chapter IX, Traffic, requires certification by the
Township Engineer. This chapter includes ordinances adopted
through August 4, 2009 and N.J. Department of Transportation
January 4, 2001.
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 9-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1973 Code § 9-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 9-1.2. Official Time Standard. [1973 Code § 9-2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 9-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET.
§ 9-3. TOW-AWAY.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
a. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act,
the Chief's designee is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for
the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he/
she finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a. above, shall provide for the posting of proper
warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during
the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 8-1.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-3
1:176
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 9-4. PENALTIES.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute or in
this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than fifty ($50.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen
(15) days or both.
§ 9-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 9-6. REPEAL.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Aberdeen are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 9-7. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (Municipal Roads Only)
§ 9-7.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone.
When the Township Council hereby finds and declares that problems of
traffic control occur and traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic
through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the
work force performing these operations.
The Township of Aberdeen, in the County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7.2
1:177
§ 9-7.2. Preconstruction Meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above
the roadway to contact the Police Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department is in violation of
this section.
§ 9-7.3. Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers.
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two (2) emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case
of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to
the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call
from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 9-7.4. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the Officer in charge of the Police Department. If it is
determined by the Officer in charge that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 9-7.5. Road Closing and Detours.
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 9-7.6. Traffic Directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 9-7.7. Stop Work.
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including
the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in
§ 9-7.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-7.7
1:178
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 9-7.8. Site Preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 9-8. PARKING.
§ 9-8.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1973 Code § 9-3.1; Ord. No.
23-2006 § II]
§ 9-9. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
[1973 Code § 9-3.2]
§ 9-10. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW
PLOWING AND REMOVAL. [1973 Code § 9-3.8; Ord. No. 9-1999]
a. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute
or as hereinafter provided.
b. Any person who violates any parking regulation, when no other penalty
is established by law, shall be liable upon conviction to a penalty of not
more than one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 9-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-10
1:179
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways within the Township, an emergency shall exist
and no vehicle shall be parked on the streets or highways, or portions
thereof, as described herein. This parking prohibition shall remain in
effect after the snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed
sufficiently, and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. A warning may be issued to any motorist violating this subsection
during the first snowfall following the effective date of this subsection,
and thereafter during the first snowfall of each subsequent season.
d. Parking shall be temporarily prohibited for snow removal in accordance
with the following provisions:
If snow has fallen and has covered the street or highway on an even
numbered day and the resident's house has an even number, parking
shall be prohibited from 7:00 a.m. for a period of 24 hours on that side
of the street or highway.
If snow has fallen and has covered the street or highway on an odd
numbered day and the resident's house has an odd number, parking
shall be prohibited from 7:00 a.m. for a period of 24 hours on that side
of the street or highway.
The exception to this schedule shall be the commuter parking lot at
Line Road (off Lloyd Road) and Bechstein Drive near State Highway
34, as well as the areas in front of residential houses being used as
professional offices.
a. No Parking
1. Strathmore
A Section Arlene Terrace
B Section Blair Road
C Section Line Road (one side)
D Section Randall Way
F Section South Atlantic and Atlantic
I Section Reids Hill Road
J Section Van Brackle Road
N Section Woodbrook Drive
O Section Duda Lane
§ 9-10 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-10
1:180
W Section Church Street and Campbell Court
2. Oakshades Area
Gerard Avenue
3. River Gardens Area
Grove Street
Locust Street
Matawan Avenue
Myrtle Street
Prospect Avenue (west side of Highway 35)
4. Cliffwood Area
Aberdeen Road
County Road
Jason Street
Joyce Street
Margaret Street
Mystic Court
Nathan Court
Rose Street
Stemler Drive
5. Freneau Area
Texas Road
Wilson Avenue
Monastery Lane
6. Cliffwood Beach Area
Cliffwood Avenue
Greenwood Avenue
Lake Shore Drive
Lenox Road
Ocean Boulevard
Prospect Avenue
Shore Concourse
South Concourse
b. Alternate Parking
1. High School Area
Bank Street
First to Seventh Streets
Lake Boulevard
§ 9-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-10
1:181
Stillman Street
Water Street
2. Railroad Station Area
Brown Place
Central Avenue
Cliffview Avenue
Dock Street
Dolan Avenue
Glendale Place
Harrison Avenue
Highfield Avenue
Mathiasen Avenue
Northwood Place
Sinnett Street
Sunnybrook Place
Suydam Place
3. Oakshades Area
Cedar Street
Cross Avenue
Gaston Street
Maple Place
Oakshades Avenue
Ryan Street
Washington Avenue
Woolley Street
4. River Gardens Area
Archie Street
Edgeview Road
Ferndale Place
Garden Place
Hilltop Avenue
Maxwell Street
Riverdale Drive
Smith Court
5. Cliffwood Firehouse Area
Angel Street
Kort Street
§ 9-10 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-10
1:182
Meinzer Street
Pengel Lane
Pond Avenue
6. Cliffwood Area
Arlington Avenue
Avon Street
Barbara Place
Biondi Street
Bishop James H. Clark Place
Delaware Avenue
Gordon Street
Jeter Street
Kennedy Avenue
Lincoln Avenue
Marjorie Street
Milton Avenue
Monmouth Avenue
Moore Place
Ruth Lane
Salem Place
Stevenson Avenue
Strachan Street
7. Freneau Area
Anna Avenue
Charles Street
Euclid Avenue
Hamilton Avenue
Ruth Place
Spring Lawn Avenue
Willow Avenue
8. Cliffwood Beach Area
Arbordale Drive
Beach Drive
Beachwood Way
Beverly Drive
Brookside Avenue
Cedar Place
§ 9-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-10
1:183
Center Street
Cottage Place
East Concourse
Elm Place
Elmwood Drive
Fairfield Way
Glenmere Way
Gulden Street
Hawthorne Way
Keyport Avenue
Laurelhurst Drive
Lorraine Drive
Malden Drive
Marshall Concourse
Marz Way
Melrose Way
Netherwood Drive
North Concourse
Orchard Street
Overlook Circle
Parva Place
Pinehurst Drive
Raritan Street
Ravine Way
Ridge Road
St. Joe Terrace
Seawood Drive
Sherwood Drive
Shadynook Street
Sunrise Avenue
Sunset Way
Sweetbriar Way
Sylvan Way
Twilight Way
Wayside Drive
Welstead Way
West Concourse
§ 9-10 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-10
1:184
§ 9-11. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-12]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Atlantic
Avenue
East All hours Main Street to a point 300 feet
south of NJCL grade crossing.
Cambridge
Drive
Both All hours From the easterly curbline of State
Highway 34 to a point 100 feet
easterly therefrom.
County
Road
Both All hours From the westerly curbline of State
Highway 35 to a point 100 feet
west thereof.
§ 9-12. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1973
Code § 9-3.5; Ord. No. 15-2001; Ord. No. 11-2003; Ord. No. 22-2003;
Ord. No. 10-2004; Ord. No. 13-2005; Ord. No. 26-2005 § 5; Ord. No.
27-2005 § 5; Ord. No. 1-2009 § 5; Ord. No. 11-2015]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
a. From Lloyd Road to Avondale
Lane.
Andover
Lane
[Ord. No.
11-2015]
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
b. From a point 25 feet east of
Avondale Lane to a point 75
feet east thereof.
Ardmore
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From the intersection of
Avondale Lane 200 feet
southwest.
Woodbine Drive
Woodcrest Drive
Woodland Drive
Woodmere Drive
§ 9-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-12
1:185
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Atlantic
Avenue
South 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point opposite
the west side of Little Street
easterly to a point 300 feet south
of the NJCL grade crossing.
Autumn
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From the intersection of
Avondale Lane 300 feet south.
Avondale
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Between the intersection of
Andover Lane and Avondale
Lane and the intersection of
Avondale Lane and Ardmore
Lane.
Bechstein
Drive
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire street.
Brookview
Lane
Both 2 hrs 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From the intersection of
Highway 34 250 feet east.
Campbell
Court
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length.
Canfield
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
From intersection of Cambridge
Drive for 250 feet northeast.
Central
Avenue
[Added
4-19-2018
by Ord.
No.
8-2018]
North 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length
§ 9-12 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-12
1:186
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Cliffview
Avenue
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From lower Main Street for a
distance of 185 feet.
Clover
Way
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire street.
Cypress
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Lloyd Road and Church
Street.
Dawn Way Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire street.
Deerfield
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From intersection of Drexel
Lane 200 feet northwest.
Dolan
Avenue
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Atlantic Avenue the entire
length of the street.
Drexel
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From intersection of Lloyd Road
500 feet northwest.
Harrison
Avenue
North 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Atlantic Avenue to the end
of Harrison Avenue.
Idlewild
Court
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m. on
school
days
Entire cul-de-sac.
§ 9-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-12
1:187
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Idlewild
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m. on
school
days
From Inbrook Lane to Idlewild
Court.
Idlewild
Lane
West 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Between Lloyd Road and Ingress
Way, 675 feet south.
Idolstone
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From Ivyhill Drive to
intersection of Ivy Way.
Inbrook
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m. on
school
days
From Line Road to Ivory Place.
Independence
Drive
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire street.
Ithaca
Court
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire street.
Ivins
Court
Both 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m. on
school
days
Entire cul-de-sac.
Ivyhill
Drive
East 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Beginning at a point 60 feet
south of the intersection of
Ivyhill Drive and Lloyd Road,
1,554 feet south.
§ 9-12 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-12
1:188
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Ivyhill
Drive
West 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Beginning at a point 25 feet
from the intersection of Ivyhill
Drive and Lloyd Road, 1,554 feet
south.
Lake
Boulevard
North 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 3:30
p.m. on
school
days
Entire length.
Line Road 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 2:00
p.m.
From the end of the guard rail
on Line Road in a westerly
direction ex-tending
approximately 755 feet up to the
Dickstein Agency.
Lloyd
Road
South 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Ivyhill Drive to the
Aberdeen Township - Keyport
Borough line.
Mathiasen
Avenue
West 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Dolan Avenue the entire
length of street.
Olden
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length.
Oxford
Lane
Both 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
To the intersection of Overlea
Lane.
Oxford
Lane
South 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m.
to 10:00
a.m.
Monday
through
Friday
To intersection with Olden Lane.
Reids Hill
Road
South 2 hrs. Monday
through
Friday
The entire length from Van
Vrackle Road to Lloyd Road.
§ 9-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-13
1:189
§ 9-13. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING.
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Hours & Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-14. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-3.3; Ord. No. 3-2002; Ord. No. 12-2003;
Ord. No. 4-2004; Ord. No. 28-2005 § 5; Ord. No. 2-2012]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts
described.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Archie Street East Entire length.
Ayrmont Lane West From a point formed by the intersection of
Church Street and Ayrmont Lane northerly
along the westerly side of Ayrmont Lane a
distance of 521 feet.
Cambridge
Drive
East and
West
300 feet from intersection with Lloyd Road.
Central
Avenue
South Entire length.
Church Street East and
West
Beginning at a point on the westerly
curbline of Church Street at a point formed
by the intersection of the northerly curbline
of South Atlantic Avenue northerly to the
Matawan Borough line.
Cliffwood
Avenue
North and
South
State Highway 35 to Matawan Avenue.
Cliffwood
Avenue
South State Highway 35 to Cross Road.
Cliffwood
Avenue
Both From its intersection with Shore Con-course
to a point 250 feet west of the intersection.
Cliffwood
Avenue
Both From State Highway 35 east to the
intersection of Raritan Street and Gulden
Street.
Cliffwood
Avenue
North and
South
From Lenox Avenue to State Highway 35.
§ 9-13 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-14
1:190
Name of
Street Sides Location
County Road
[Added
6-7-2018 by
Ord. No.
15-2018]
South From Bayview Street to Biondi Street
Fifth Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
First Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Fourth Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Greenwood
Avenue
West From Lakeshore Drive to the intersection of
Cliffwood Avenue and South Con-course and
between South Concourse and North
Concourse.
Highfield
Avenue
South Entire length.
Lake
Boulevard
North and
South
Church Street to Matawan Borough line.
Lakeshore
Drive [Added
6-7-2018 by
Ord. No.
15-2018]
West From Ocean Boulevard to Greenwood
Avenue
Lenox Road East From Cliffwood Avenue north to a point
opposite the intersection of St. Joe Terrace.
Line Road East 185 feet from the intersection with Lloyd
Road.
Line Road West From a point formed by the intersection of
Church Street and Line Road northerly
along the westerly side of Line Road a
distance of 120 feet.
Line Road West 685 feet from the intersection with Lloyd
Road.
Lloyd Road North From the Marlboro Borough line to the
Keyport Borough line.
Lloyd Road South 500 feet east and west of State Highway 34.
Matawan
Avenue
West Beginning at a point at the westerly curbline
of Matawan Avenue at a point formed by
the intersection of a line projected from the
northerly curbline of Prospect Avenue in a
southerly direction to the Matawan Borough
line.
§ 9-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-14
1:191
Name of
Street Sides Location
Matawan
Avenue
East and
West
Beginning at a point formed by the
intersection of Matawan Avenue and the
southerly side of Cliffwood Avenue southerly
along Matawan Avenue a distance of 1,000
feet.
Myrtle Street East Cliffwood Avenue to Grove Street.
Ocean
Boulevard
[Added
6-7-2018 by
Ord. No.
15-2018]
South From Lakeshore Drive to Whale Creek
Bridge
Pengel Place South From Cliffwood Avenue to Angel Street.
Reids Hill
Road
West From a point formed by the intersection of
Reids Hill Road and Lloyd Road southerly
along the westerly side of Reids Hill Road a
distance of 140 feet.
Reids Hill
Road
West Beginning at a point on the westerly
curbline of Reids Hill Road at a point formed
by the intersection of a line projected from
the northerly curbline of State Highway 34
in an easterly direction to a point formed by
the intersection of the westerly curbline of
Lloyd Road.
Reids Hill
Road
North The entire length from Van Brackle Road to
Lloyd Road.
Second Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Seventh
Street
South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Shore
Concourse
Both From its intersection with South Concourse
to a point 150 feet south of intersection.
Sixth Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Sixth Street East From Lake Boulevard to a point 100 feet
north.
Smith Court West Entire westerly side of Smith Court.
South Atlantic
Avenue
South From Church Street to State Highway 34.
South Atlantic
Avenue
North From a point 400 feet west of Church Street
to State Highway 34.
§ 9-14 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-14
1:192
Name of
Street Sides Location
South
Concourse
Both Between Shore Concourse and Prospect
Avenue.
Suydam Place East and
West
From a point formed by the intersection of
Suydam Place and Lower Main Street to the
intersection of Suydam Place and Mathiasen
Place.
Texas Road Both From Matawan Borough line to Marlboro
Township line.
Third Street South Atlantic Avenue to Lake Boulevard.
Wayside Drive South, East
and North
Beginning at the intersection of the easterly
side of North Concourse and the southerly
side of Wayside Drive and continuing in an
easterly direction along the southerly side of
Wayside Drive, and along the easterly side of
Wayside Drive after said street turns
northward, and then along the north side of
Wayside Drive after said street turns to the
west, to the intersection of the north side of
Wayside Drive with the easterly side of
Brookside Drive.
Woolley Street East Beginning at a point 250 feet from the
intersection with Gerard Avenue to the
intersection of Geran Street.
§ 9-15. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-3.4; Ord. No. 23-2003; Ord. No.
13-2005]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Atlantic
Avenue
North and
South
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on
school days
Second Street to Sixth Street.
Atlantic
Avenue
South 6:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Mon.
through Sat.
From Lower Main Street to Bridge
west of Little Street.
Church
Street
East and
West
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on
school days
East side of Avondale Lane 652 feet
easterly.
§ 9-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-15
1:193
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Cliffwood
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on
school days
From a point formed at the
northwest curbline of Van Cleef
Lane in a northerly direction along
Cliffwood Avenue to a point
opposite the southeast curb of
Smith Road.
Highfield
Avenue
East and
West
7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Mon.
through Fri.
Entire street.
Highfield
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m. on
school days
From Lloyd Road to Ivanhoe Lane.
Lake
Boulevard
South 7:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m. on
school days
Entire length.
Line Road Extension 10:00 a.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Mon.
through Fri.
Entire length from the north corner
extending approximately 437 feet
east.
Matawan
Avenue
East and
West
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. on
school days
From a point formed at the
northwest curb on Grove Street
along Matawan Avenue for a
distance of 910 feet to the end of
the Board of Education property
line (Matawan Avenue School).
Mathiasen
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.
through Fri.
Dolan Avenue to Suydam Place.
Oxford Lane West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Mon.
through Fri.
From State Highway 34 to Olden
Lane.
§ 9-15.1. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets During Certain Times of the Year. [1973 Code § 9-3.7]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on Saturdays
and Sundays between April 1 through November 30 of each year, upon any
of the following streets or parts of streets hereof:
§ 9-15 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-15.1
1:194
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Archie
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Sat.
and Sun.
From Cliffwood Avenue south 300
feet.
Maxwell
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Sat.
and Sun.
From Cliffwood Avenue south 210
feet.
§ 9-16. PARKING OF CERTAIN TRUCKS, VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
PROHIBITED. [1973 Code § 9-11]
§ 9-17. RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Township of Aberdeen is displayed on said vehicle
for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the
following sections.
(Reserved)
a. No person shall park a truck or vehicle over two (2) tons registered
gross weight (G.V.W.), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational
vehicle, camper, boat or trailer on any street or parts of streets
described upon any street between the hours specified.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All
municipal
streets
Both 12:00
midnight to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Vehicles owned by a public utility in the normal course of business.
2. Vehicles making deliveries of merchandise or other property.
3. Moving vans in the normal course of business.
4. Self-propelled motor homes.
5. Inoperable vehicles in need of emergency repairs when permitted
by the Chief of Police.
6. Vehicles generally engaged in a bona fide business or commercial
activity at the premises adjacent to where the vehicle is parked.
§ 9-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-18
1:195
§ 9-18. ANGLE PARKING.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as Angle
Parking at an angle so indicated below.
(Reserved)
§ 9-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-12(A); Ord. No.
9-1999]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Andover Lane Between Avondale Lane and Lloyd Road.
Angel Street Entire length.
Anna Avenue Between New Brunswick Avenue and dead end.
Avondale Lane Between Church Street and Andover Lane.
Ayrmont Lane Between Church Street and Andover Lane.
Bayview Street a. Between County Road and 50 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Arlington Avenue.
b. Between County Road and 20 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Bishop James H. Clark Place.
Bechstein Drive Between South Atlantic Avenue and Brookview Lane.
Brookside Avenue Between West Concourse and Wayside Drive.
Brookview Lane Between Bechstein Drive and State Highway 34.
Cambridge Drive Entire length.
Charles Street Between New Brunswick Avenue and dead end.
Chilton Lane Entire length.
Church Street Between Line Road and the Aberdeen Township-
Matawan Borough corporate line.
County Road Entire length.
Courtland Lane Between Cambridge Drive and Chilton Lane.
Deerfield Lane Entire length.
Dolan Place Between dead end and Atlantic Avenue.
Drexel Lane Between Lloyd Road and Deerfield Lane.
Fordham Drive Between Lloyd Road and Lloyd Road.
Gerard Avenue Between Lloyd Road and Lower Main Street.
§ 9-18 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-19
1:196
Name of Street Limits
Gordon Street Between County Road and the Aberdeen Township-
Old Bridge Township corporate line.
Greenwood Avenue Between Lakeshore Drive and its southernmost
intersection with West Concourse.
Highfield Avenue Entire length.
Idlebrook Lane Between Ivyhill Drive and Idolstone Lane.
Idlewild Lane Between Imbrook Lane and Lloyd Road.
Idolstone Lane Between Van Brackle Road and Ivyhill Drive.
Imbrook Lane Between Line Road and Idlewood Lane.
Irongate Lane Entire length.
Ivyhill Drive Entire length.
Ivy Way Between Van Brackle Road and Idolstone Lane.
Kennedy Avenue Between Jeter Street and County Road.
Keyport Avenue Between Raritan Street and Lenox Road.
Lenox Road/
Lakeshore Drive
Between Cliffwood Avenue and the Aberdeen
Township-Old Bridge Township corporate line.
Line Road a. Between Van Brackle Road and Church Street.
b. Between Church Street and Lloyd Road.
Loraine Drive Between Prospect Avenue and Beverly Drive.
Lower Main Street Between municipal borders of Aberdeen, Matawan
and Keyport.
Malden Drive Entire length.
Matawan Avenue From Cliffwood Avenue to the Matawan Borough line.
North Concourse Between West Concourse and Woodcrest Drive.
Northland Lane Between Lloyd Road and Noble Place.
Overlea Lane Entire length.
Oxford Lane Between Lloyd Road and State Highway 34.
Prospect Avenue Between Amboy Road and South Concourse.
Reids Hill Road Entire length.
Riverdale Drive Entire length.
Rose Street Entire length.
Shore Concourse Between the easterly intersection with Amboy Avenue
and a point 50 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Fairfield Way.
§ 9-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-19
1:197
Name of Street Limits
South Atlantic
Avenue—Atlantic
Avenue
Between Route N.J. 34 and Lower Main Street.
Van Brackle Road Between Route N.J. 34 and the Aberdeen
Township—Holmdel Township corporate line.
Warren Drive Between Lloyd Road and Lloyd Road.
West Prospect
Avenue
From Matawan Avenue to State Highway 35.
Wilson Avenue From Texas Road (Matawan Borough line) to
Marlboro Township line.
Willow Avenue Between New Brunswick Avenue and a point 50 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Grand Avenue.
Woodmere Drive Entire length.
§ 9-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1973 Code § 9-12(B)]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Angel Street and Pond Avenue Pond Avenue
Angel Street and Pengel Lane Pengel Lane
Arbordale Drive and Shadylawn Way Shadylawn Way
Arden Lane and Avalon Lane Avalon Lane
Arlington Avenue and Strachan
Street
Strachan Street
Autumn Lane and Ardmore Lane Autumn Lane
Avalon Lane and Anton Lane Anton Lane
Avon Street and Delaware Avenue Delaware Avenue
Barbara Place and Kennedy Avenue Kennedy Avenue
Beverly Drive and Lorraine Drive Lorraine Drive
Brookside Avenue and Wayside
Drive
Brookside Avenue
Brookside Avenue and West
Concourse
Brookside Avenue
Carol Lane and Crystal Lane Crystal Lane
Clair Court and Cashel Drive Clair Court
§ 9-19 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-20
1:198
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Delaware Avenue and Strachan
Street
Strachan Street
Euclid Avenue and Grand Avenue Grand Avenue
Faith Lane and Ferland Lane Ferland Lane
Fayette Lane and Fawn Place Fawn Place
Ferland Lane and Fair Lane Fair Lane
Ferland Lane and Ferris Place Ferris Place
Grove Street and Myrtle Street Myrtle Street
Harrison Avenue and Sinnett
Avenue
Sinnett Avenue
Idaho Lane and Invanhoe Lane Idaho Lane
Idaho Lane and Invar Way Invar Way
Idaho Lane and Italic Place Italic Place
Imperial Place and Ives Place Ives Place
Ingram Circle and Island Place Island Place
Ithan Lane and Infield Lane Infield Lane
Jersey Avenue and Marjorie Street Marjorie Street
Juniper Place and Jordan Place Jordan Place
Juniper Place and Jubilee Circle Jubilee Circle
Keyport Avenue and Lenox Road Keyport Avenue
Keyport Avenue and Raritan Street Keyport Avenue
Laurelhurst Drive and Arbordale
Drive
Laurelhurst Drive
Laurelhurst Drive and Parva Place Parva Place
Mathiason Avenue and Suydam
Place
Suydam Place
Meinzer Street and Kort Street Kort Street
Meinzer Street and Van Cleef Lane Meinzer Avenue
Milton Avenue and Gordon Street Gordon Street
Norwood Lane and Noble Place Noble Place
Oaklyn Lane and Opal Place Opal Place
Primrose Avenue and Gulden Street Primrose Avenue (both sides)
Primrose Avenue and Shadynook
Street
Shadynook Street
Ridge Road and Ravine Way Ridge Road
§ 9-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-20
1:199
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Ryan Street and Maple Avenue (at
its northerly intersection with Ryan
Street)
Maple Avenue (at its northerly
intersection with Ryan Street).
Seventh Street and Eighth Street Eighth Street
Sherwood Drive and Cedar Place Cedar Place
Sunrise Avenue and Gulden Street Sunrise Avenue
Sunrise Avenue and Hawthorne
Street
Sunrise Avenue
Sunrise Avenue and Shadynook
Street
Sunrise Avenue
Sunrise Avenue and Sweetbriar
Street
Sunrise Avenue
Waverly Place and Weston Place Weston Place
Welstead Way and Glenmere Way Welstead Way
West Concourse and Greenwood
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue
Woodcrest Drive and Seawood Drive Woodcrest Drive
§ 9-21. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.
§ 9-21.1. Multi-Way Stops.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as Multi-Way Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall
be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
(Reserved)
§ 9-21.2. All-Way Stop Intersections. [Ord. No. 30-2005 § 1, 5-8]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as All-Way Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Line Road and Van
Brackle Road
All approaches
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
§ 9-20 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-21.2
1:200
§ 9-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On
(Reserved)
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or
municipal roadway, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas
within the street lines.
ALL-WAY STOP INTERSECTION — shall mean the street(s) or part(s)
of street(s) described in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as All-Way Stop Intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
b. Prohibited Conduct. To promote obedience and insure visibility of stop
signs, the State law parking prohibition provided in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138
that "no operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle within fifty
(50) feet of stop sign" shall be enforced. If a vehicle shall stand or park
within the limit, the party responsible for parking must move the
vehicle from the said limit or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this subsection.
c. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the
Aberdeen Township Police Department for those stop signs as located
within the municipal boundaries of Aberdeen. Where the All-Way Stop
Intersection is located within both Aberdeen Township and an adjoining
municipality, the Police Department of said adjoining municipality shall
enforce the provisions of their ordinance within their municipal
corporate limits.
d. Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statutes, every person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than fifty
($50.00) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15)
days or both.
§ 9-21.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-23
1:201
§ 9-23. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-4]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of
Street Direction Limits
Archie Street North From a point 315 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Cliffwood Avenue and extending
northerly therefrom.
Beverly Drive North From Shore Concourse to Cliffwood Avenue.
Maxwell
Street
South From the southerly curbline of Cliff-wood
Avenue and extending 200 feet southerly
therefrom.
Reids Hill
Road
North From Van Brackle Road to Lloyd Road.
Shore
Concourse
North From Cliffwood Avenue-South Con-course
intersection to a point 60 feet south thereof.
§ 9-24. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as route for vehicles OVER four (4) tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four (4) tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-25. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [1973 Code § 9-10; Ord. No. 17-2001]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.
a. Limiting Use of Streets of Certain Class of Vehicles. Vehicles having a
combined or registered gross weight in excess of four (4) tons are
hereby excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets:
§ 9-23 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-25
1:202
§ 9-26. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 19-2006 § 5; Ord. No.
9-2008 § 4; Ord. No. 12-2008 § 5]
No person shall turn at the below described locations as indicated.
Intersection
Turn
ProhibitedMovement Prohibited
Shore Concourse
and Fairfield Way
Left From north on Shore Concourse.
Shore Concourse
and Cliffwood
Avenue
Left From north on Shore Concourse into
Cliffwood Avenue.
Exiting from
Regency Shopping
Center onto Lloyd
Road
Left From Regency Shopping Center to north
on Lloyd Road.
From all properties
abutting Route No.
35
Left From all properties and all streets
intersecting Route 35.
Cliffwood Avenue
and Shore
Concourse
Left West on Cliffwood Avenue from Shore
Concourse.
Oxford Lane and
State Highway 34
Left On Monday through Friday between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Biondi Street onto
Country Road
Left Truck having a combined or gross weight
in excess of one (1) ton.
Name of
Street Weight Location
Ivyhill
Drive
4 tons From Lloyd Road to Line Road.
b. Limiting Use of Streets by Trucks. Trucks having a carrying capacity in
excess of one (1) ton are hereby excluded from the following described
streets or parts of streets.
Street
Carrying
Capacity
(weight
limited) Location
Gordon
Street
Over 1 ton Entire Street.
§ 9-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-26
1:203
Intersection
Turn
ProhibitedMovement Prohibited
Lloyd Road (CR
#3) at 1168 Route
34
Left From Lloyd Road (CR #3) into any
driveway which accesses the property
located at 1168 Route 34 (Block 104, Lot
11)
Right From Lloyd Road (CR #3) into any
driveway which accesses the property
located at 1168 Route 34 (Block 104, Lot
11)
Left Onto Lloyd Road (CR #3) from any
driveway which accesses the property
located at 1168 Route 34 (Block 104, Lot
11)
Lloyd Road (CR
#3) and private
driveway into
Block 86 Lots 6
and 7
Left From Lloyd Road westbound into
southeast corner of Lloyd Road and Route
34
Cashel Drive Left From Church Street onto Cashel Drive
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. through
10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. through 7:00
p.m.
Cashel Drive and
South Atlantic
Right From South Atlantic Drive onto Cashel
Drive between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
through 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. through
7:00 p.m.
§ 9-27. RIGHT TURN ONLY.
No person shall make a turn at the below listed location other than a Right
Turning Movement.
Intersection Movement Permitted
(Reserved)
§ 9-28. NO TURN ON RED.
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop) indication whenever an official sign is present prohibiting
or limiting such a turn on red signal at any of the following locations:
§ 9-26 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-28
1:204
Location Limitation
Church Street and Atlantic Avenue Monday through Friday
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
South on Church Street to west on
Line Road. From west on Line Road
to north on Church Street.
Monday through Friday
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Lloyd Road and Church Street Monday through Friday
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Cambridge Drive onto Lloyd Road All times
§ 9-29. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [Ord. No. 19-2003; Ord. No.
6-2006]
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following
location.
§ 9-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-29
1:205
Name of Street Location
Gerard Avenue Beginning at a point 160 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Lloyd Road (County Road 3)
to a point ten (10) feet west therefrom.
The Henry Hudson
Trail established by the
Monmouth County Park
System
There is hereby created a ten (10) foot wide
pedestrian mid-block crossing at the following
locations:
1. Texas Road - beginning at a point 1,343 feet
southwest of the centerline of Wilson Avenue
and continuing to a point southwest, 10 feet
therefrom.
2. Wilson Avenue - beginning at a point 887 feet
southwest of the centerline of Texas Road and
continuing to a point southwest, 10 feet
therefrom.
3. Church Street (CR #45) - beginning at a
point 278 feet southwest of the centerline of
Orchard Street and continuing to a point
southeast, 10 feet therefrom.
4. Stillwell Street - beginning at a point 375
feet east of the centerline of Orchard Street
and continuing to a point east, 10 feet
therefrom.
5. Clinton Street - beginning at a point 325 feet
southeast of the centerline of Orchard Street
and continuing to a point east, 10 feet
therefrom.
§ 9-30. LANE USE RESERVATIONS.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 9-31. EXCLUSIVE LANE USE.
The Lane Locations described are hereby designated as Exclusive Lanes for
use by certain vehicles as indicated.
Name of Street Type of Vehicle Direction Limits
(Reserved)
§ 9-29 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-32
1:206
§ 9-32. BICYCLE ROUTES/LANES.
The Lane Locations described are hereby designated as Bicycle Lanes.
Bicycle Lanes shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width, pursuant to the
"Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways."
Name of Street Side Lane Width Limits
(Reserved)
§ 9-33. SPEED LIMITS. [1973 Code § 9-6 and Schedule VI; Ord. No.
5-2008 § 5]
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
b. Regulator and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to affect
the above-designated speed limits.
Name of
Street MPH Limits
Aberdeen Road 35 Entire length.
Atlantic Avenue 35 Church Street to center of Freehold and
Atlantic Highlands Railroad underpass.
Atlantic Avenue 30 North to Main Street
Atlantic Avenue 25 Matawan Regional High School Zone during
recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening or closing
hours.
Church Street 25 Strathmore Elementary School Zone during
recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening or closing
hours.
Church Street 40 Entire length.
Cliffwood
Avenue-South
Concourse
40 Westerly Matawan Borough-Aberdeen
Township line to N.Y. and L.B. RR crossing.
Cliffwood
Avenue-South
Concourse
45 To easterly terminus of road at Beach Drive.
Cliffwood
Avenue-South
Concourse
25 Cliffwood Memorial School Zone, in Zone 2,
during recess or while children are going to
or leaving school during opening or closing
hours.
§ 9-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-33
1:207
Name of
Street MPH Limits
Cliffwood
Avenue-South
Concourse
25 Cliffwood Elementary School Zone during
recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening or closing
hours.
Cliffwood
Avenue
35 From N.Y. and L.B. RR crossing to South
Concourse.
Cliffwood
Avenue
25 From Rose Street to South Concourse.
County Road
[Added
9-15-2015 by
Ord. No.
13-2015]
25 Both directions; entire length
County Road 45 From the center of First Avenue to N.J.
Route No. 35.
County Road 35 From Cliffwood Avenue to the center of
First Avenue.
County Road 25 From Garden State Parkway to Salem Place.
Line Road 25 When St. John Vianney High School is in
recess or when students are going to or
leaving school.
Line Road 30 East side from Church Street to Van Brackle
Road.
Line Road 30 West side from Lloyd Road to Bethany Road-
Church Street.
Lloyd Road 35 From Route 34 to Marlboro line.
Lloyd Road 25 Lloyd Road Elementary School Zone during
recess or while children are going to or
leaving school, during opening or closing
hours.
Matawan
Avenue
40 Entire length.
Matawan
Avenue
25 Matawan Avenue Middle School Zone
during recess or while children are going to
or leaving school, during opening or closing
hours.
Wellington
Drive
25 Entire length.
§ 9-33 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-34
1:208
§ 9-34. NO PASSING ZONES.
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Sketch # Sketch Date
(Reserved)
§ 9-35. BUS STOP. [Ord. No. 14-2005; Ord. No. 15-2005]
Editor's Note: New Jersey Transit now handles these bus stop regulations.
The repealed clause in this Code eliminates the old bus stop approvals.
New Jersey Transit will investigate bus stops and will submit a new list to
Aberdeen Township. Bus stops can be inserted when the list is furnished.
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus which is picking up or discharging passengers shall
be permitted to occupy the location between the hours indicated.
Street
Lloyd Road, westbound, on the northerly side:
a. Between Nutmeg Road and Garden State Parkway: specifically, midblock
beginning 61 feet east of the easterly curbline of Nutmeg Road
and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
b. Norwood Lane: specifically, far side beginning at the westerly curbline
of Dawn Way and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
c. Dawn Way: specifically, near side beginning at the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Idlewild Lane and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom.
d. Idlewild Lane: specifically, near side beginning at the prolongation of
the easterly curbline of Idlewild Lane and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom.
e. Cypress Lane: specifically, near side beginning at the easterly curbline
of Cypress Lane and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
f. Between Cambridge Drive and Ivyhill Drive: specifically, mid-block
beginning 195 feet east of the easterly curbline of Cambridge Drive and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
g. Between Route 34 and Cambridge Drive: specifically, mid-block
beginning 616 feet east of the easterly curbline of Route 34 and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
Lloyd Road, eastbound, on the southerly side:
a. Between Route 34 and Cambridge Drive: specifically, mid-block
between 280 feet east of the easterly curbline of Route 34 and extending
135 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 9-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-35
1:209
b. Cambridge Drive and Ivyhill Drive: specifically, mid-block beginning 195
feet east of the easterly curbline of Cambridge Drive and extending 135
feet easterly therefrom.
c. Idlewild Lane: specifically, near side beginning at the westerly curbline
of Idlewild Lane and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
d. Andover Lane: specifically, near side beginning at the westerly curbline
of Andover Lane and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
e. Between Line Road and Garden State Parkway: specifically, mid-block
beginning 220 feet east of the easterly curbline of Line Road and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
Route 34, northbound, on the easterly side:
a. Cambridge Drive: specifically, far side beginning at the northerly
curbline of Cambridge Drive and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom.
b. South Atlantic Avenue and Cambridge Drive: specifically, mid-block
beginning 545 feet south of the southerly curbline of South Atlantic
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom, in front of bowling
lanes.
c. Between Bechstein Drive and Brookview Lane: specifically, mid-block
beginning 65 feet north of the northerly curbline of Bechstein Drive and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
Route 34, southbound, on the westerly side:
a. Between Cambridge Drive and Lloyd Road: specifically, mid-block
beginning 83 feet south of the southerly curbline of Cambridge Drive
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom the bus shelter.
Route 35, northbound, on the easterly side:
a. Cliffwood Avenue: specifically, near side beginning at the southerly
curbline of Cliffwood Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
Route 35, southbound, on the westerly side:
a. Cliffwood Avenue: specifically, near side beginning at the northerly
curbline of Cliffwood Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
§ 9-35 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-35
1:210
Note: Below are minimum standards for bus stop length which are based
on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers and
studies conducted by the Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety
programs. These standards include minimum lengths required for Bus
Stops in order that buses may leave moving traffic lanes safely. Keep in
mind that buses must stop alongside the curb within six (6) inches thereof
as provided by State Law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-135. These minimums
are as follows:
NEAR SIDE — 90 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or cross-walk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
FAR SIDE — 85 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
MID-BLOCK — No intersection on either side of roadway: minimum
acceptable length is 135 feet.
FAR-SIDE — (AFTER BUS MAKES RIGHT TURN) — Minimum acceptable
length is 150 feet. An additional 45 feet of length should be provided for
each additional bus expected to stop simultaneously.
§ 9-36. ARTICULATED BUS STOPS.
The locations described are hereby designated as Articulated Bus Stops. No
vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Hours
(Reserved)
(Minimum distances) Near side 155 feet
Far side 140 feet
Mid-Block 170 feet
§ 9-37. LOADING ZONES.*
*Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading Zone
may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stop, stand or park
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-38
1:211
§ 9-38. TAXI STANDS.
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 9-39. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 9-39.1. Handicapped Parking on Street.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these places.
Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-39.2. Handicapped Parking on Street for Private Residences.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front
of private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Street
Permit
Number Location
840
Brookside
Avenue
[Added
12-20-2018
by Ord. No.
26-2018]
In front of No. 840
1 First
Street
In front of No. 1
111
Highfield
Avenue
Westerly side of Highfield Avenue beginning at a
point 51 feet north of Sunnybrook Place and
extending to a point 30 feet north of the property
§ 9-38 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-39.2
1:212
Street
Permit
Number Location
23 Lower
Main Street
In front of No. 23
§ 9-39.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197
the following off-street parking yards and Board of Education property
are designated as Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards issued by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Aberdeen
Township
Municipal
Complex
1 Aberdeen
Square
2 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
Strathmore
Elementary
School Church
Street
2 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
Lloyd Road
Middle School
Lloyd Road
3 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
Administration
Building
Board of
Education
Crest Way
4 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
Matawan-
Aberdeen High
School
Atlantic Avenue
4 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
§ 9-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-39.3
1:213
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Matawan
Avenue School
Matawan
Avenue
2 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
Cliffwood
Avenue School
Atlantic Avenue
4 As per sketch on file in Township Clerk's
Office and NJDOT
§ 9-39.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-39.5. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-39.6. Handicapped Parking on Municipal Parks.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-39.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-39.7
1:214
§ 9-39.7. Handicapped Parking on Postal Properties.
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the off-street locations are hereby designated as Handicapped
Parking, pursuant to P.L. 1989 c. 201(1) eff. 06/01/1990. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 9-39.8. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 9-35.3 and 9-35.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 9-40. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 9-40.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [1973 Code
§ 9-3.6; Ord. No. 53-2005§§ 2-4]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
a. Aberdeen Township Municipal Complex, 1 Aberdeen Square.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
§ 9-39.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:215
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be properly
identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the
attached site plan.
3. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
4. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
b. Strathmore Elementary School, Church Street.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be properly
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:216
identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the
attached site plan.
3. Stop Intersections:
The following described intersections are hereby designated as
Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road "A" and Road "B" Road "B"
4. One Way Streets:
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "A" West
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road "B" South
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road "C" South
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
5. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
7. School Bus Stop(s):
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:217
The locations described are hereby designated as School Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said location between the
hours indicated.
Street Hours Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan.
c. Lloyd Road School, Lloyd Road.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be properly
identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the
attached site plan.
3. Through Streets:
A. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the Through Street except
where Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "A" Entire length
4. One Way Streets:
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "A" West Entire length
5. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:218
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
7. Loading Zone(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones.
No person shall park a vehicle in said location during the times
indicated other than for the loading and unloading of goods and
materials:
Street Time Side Location
Road "B" All West As indicated on site
plan.
8. School Bus Stop(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as School Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said location between the
hours indicated.
Street Hours Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan.
d. Administration Building, Board of Education, Crest Way.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:219
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc. must be properly
identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the
attached site plan.
3. Stop Intersections:
The following described intersections are hereby designated as
Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road "A" and Road "B" Road "B"
4. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
5. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
6. Mid-block Crosswalks:
The following described locations are hereby designated as midblock
crosswalks.
Name of Street Location
Road "B" As indicated on site plan.
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:220
e. Matawan-Aberdeen High School, Atlantic Avenue.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers' vehicles, etc. must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown
on the attached site plan.
3. Through Streets, Stop Intersections:
A. Through Streets:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the Through Street except
where Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Road "C" Entire length.
B. Stop Intersections:
The following described intersections are hereby designated
as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road "A" and Road "E" Road "E"
Road "F" and Road "I" Road "I"
Road "G" and Road "H" Road "H"
4. One Way Streets:
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:221
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "C" North Entire length
Road "D" East
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road "I" East Entire length
Road "F" South
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road "B" East Entire length
5. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
7. Loading Zone(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones.
No person shall park a vehicle in said location during the times
indicated other than for the loading and unloading of goods and
materials:
Street Time Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan.
8. School Bus Stop(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as School Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said location between the
hours indicated.
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:222
Street Hours Location
Road "F" All As indicated on site plan.
9. Lane Use Reservations:
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use
Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Atlantic Avenue and
Road "J"
(a) Northbound left lane of Road "J"
reserved for Left Turn only.
(b) Northbound right lane of Road "J"
reserved for Through Traffic and
Right Turn only.
Atlantic Avenue and
Road "G"
(a) Northbound left lane of Road "G"
reserved for Left Turn only.
(b) Northbound right lane of Road "G"
reserved for Right Turn only.
f. Matawan Avenue School, Matawan Avenue.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Reserved Parking:
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section, such
as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers' vehicles, etc. must be
properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must be shown
on the attached site plan.
3. Stop Intersections:
The following described intersections are hereby designated as
Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Road "B" and Lot "F" Lot "F"
Grove Street and Road "B" Road "B"
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:223
4. One Way Streets:
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "A" North
(counterclockwise)
Entire length
Road "B" North Entire length
Road "F" North Entire length
5. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
7. School Bus Stop(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as School Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said location between the
hours indicated.
Street Hours Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan.
Road "B" All As indicated on site plan.
g. Cliffwood Elementary School, Cliffwood Avenue.
1. General Parking:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:224
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads Both All Entire length
2. Through Streets:
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side
of each street intersecting the Through Street except where Yield
signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Roads "C" - "D" - "E" Entire length
3. One Way Streets:
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one way streets in the direction indicated.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "A" West Entire length
Road "B" East Entire length
Road "E" South Entire length
4. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
All Roads 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
5. Tow Away Zones:
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills,
any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety
or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:225
6. School Bus Stop(s):
The locations described are hereby designated as School Bus
Stops. No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging
passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said location between the
hours indicated.
Street Hours Location
Road "A" All As indicated on site plan.
7. Parking Prohibited at all Times on Certain Township Driveways or
Access to Parking Areas.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
Township driveways or access to parking areas or parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
Storyland Park, Block 103,
Lot 42
From Woodman Place a distance of
approximately 140 feet to the
beginning of the lined parking
area for Storyland Park with a
width of approximately 42 feet
widening to a width of
approximately 47 feet.
h. Atlantic Avenue Parking Lot, Atlantic Avenue.
Location: The Atlantic Avenue Parking Lot is located on premises known
as Lots 105 and 106, Block 7 on the tax map of the Township.
1. General Parking. [1973 Code § 9-3.6]
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas between the lines
provided.
i. Railroad Station Parking Lot.
1. Location: The Railroad Station Parking Lot is located on premises
more particularly described in Schedule A of Ordinance 14-1970,
which schedule is hereby incorporated as part of this revision as if
fully set forth herein.
2. Parking Permit Required.
A. Use. No person shall park any vehicle in the Railroad Station
Parking Lots without a valid municipal parking permit
identification sticker being displayed on the bottom right hand
corner of the rear window of the vehicle.
B. No person shall park any vehicle in areas other than those
designated with lines or stalls for parking purposes. Permit
parkers are to utilize white spaces and daily parkers are to
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.1
1:226
utilize yellow spaces. All permit and handicap parkers must
park nose into the marked spots. Handicapped parkers without
permits must pay for the spot.
C. Permits. Application forms for parking permit identification
stickers shall be obtained from the administrative secretary.
Each applicant for a parking permit identification sticker shall
register the license plate of the vehicles to be used. Such
vehicles must be registered at the applicant's address in the
name of the applicant or an immediate member of the
applicant's family. One permit will be issued which shall be
affixed to the bottom right hand corner of the rear window of
the vehicle to be parked. If applicable, plastic pocket holders
will be issued if more than one preregistered household vehicle
will be used. These holders should be affixed to the bottom
right hand corner of the rear window of the vehicle and the
parking sticker inserted as applicable. In an emergency when
an unregistered vehicle must be used, Police headquarters
should be advised by the permittee of the make, license plate
number and space to be used by the unregistered car.
Thereupon, the Police Department shall authorize temporary
parking.
D. Fees. The annual fee for a permit is three hundred sixty
($360.00) dollars payable in advance, and for a quarter permit
the sum ninety ($90.00) dollars per quarter, payable in advance
and submitted with the application. For each replacement
identification sticker issued to the applicant, there shall be a
charge of ten ($10.00) dollars to defray administrative
expenses. Subsequent to the initial issuance of stickers, any
changes in vehicles, owners, license plates or other provision
requiring the issuance of an additional sticker or stickers shall
require the payment of a service charge of ten ($10.00) dollars
per sticker. Administrative fees of twenty ($20.00) dollars shall
be charged for any refunds made, and it shall be the duty of the
registrant for the parking spot to advise the administrative
secretary of any of the above changes. Meter daily parking will
be made available at a charge of two ($2.00) dollars per day.
E. Termination and Refunds. Any registrant giving up his parking
space prior to the expiration of the year for which the permit
was granted shall notify the administrative secretary in writing
as soon as practicable so as to facilitate reassignment of the
space to the person highest on the waiting list. Except in the
case of car pooling, if the space is terminated within the first
nine (9) months of the permit year, the registrant shall be
entitled to a refund of the unused portion of the annual fee less
a charge of twenty ($20.00) dollars to cover administrative
expenses. Refunds shall be calculated from, and the parking
space shall terminate on, the first day of the month following
§ 9-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.1
1:227
§ 9-40.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public is
Invited (Retail Business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the current "Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" (MUTCD). The cost of
signs and installations shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property. The owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost of expense to the Township of Aberdeen.
the date the registrant intends to vacate. If a space is vacated
within the last (3) months of the permit year, no refund shall be
allowed.
F. Effective Dates. Permits shall be issued effective January 1
through December 31 of each year. For annual permits,
applications and fees shall be submitted to the administrative
secretary no later than November 30 of the year proceeding
the year for which the permit is applied. Quarterly permits will
be issued from January 1 through March 31, April 1 through
June 30, July 1 through September 30 and October 1 through
December 31, respectively.
G. Speeding. The speed limit within the parking lots shall be ten
(10) miles per hour, and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq.
shall be applicable.
H. Unlawful Parking. Vehicles unlawfully parked may be towed
away and impounded by direction of the Police Department
and shall receive summonses for violation of the terms of this
subsection. Owners may obtain release of the vehicles by
payment of towing and other costs.
I. Administration. The Township Manager or his designee shall
be the official responsible for the administration of the
municipal parking lots.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply on Saturdays,
Sundays and national legal holidays.
§ 9-40.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 9-40.2
1:228
The penalty for a violation and conviction of this section shall be not less
than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars and/
or imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days,
or by a period of community service not to exceed thirty (30) days.
§ 9-40.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 9-40.4. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Park Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4 the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 9-40.5. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
United States Post Office Property.
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the following Various Traffic Regulations are hereby made
applicable to the properties listed below as follows. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations listed below.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
§ 9-40.6. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
Chapter 10
§ 9-40.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-40.6
1:229
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Editor's Note: The power of the Township to establish personnel
policies is derived from N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, 30.
The Employee Manual was adopted by Resolution of the Township
Council on March 16, 2004.
§ 10-1. PERSONNEL POLICIES.
§ 10-1.1. General Policies. [1973 Code § 3-1.1]
§ 10-1.2. Abolition or Modification of Offices. [1973 Code § 3-1.2]
The Council may by ordinance abolish, increase, decrease or modify the
terms and compensation of any office of the Township, except that the
Township Council may not abolish or alter the terms of an office that has
been or is created by general law. Except where an office is abolished, no
decrease or modification of its terms and compensation shall affect any
incumbent holding such office for the duration of the term for which he was
appointed.
§ 10-1.3. Classification of Applicants for Classified Positions. [Ord.
No. 13-1998]
§ 10-2. APPOINTMENTS.
a. Employment in the Township shall be based on merit and fitness, free of
personal and political considerations.
b. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be on a
merit basis.
c. Qualified Township personnel shall be given first consideration for
vacancies and new positions.
a. In accordance with the general laws of the State of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Township of Aberdeen, all duly qualified applicants
for appointment to any classified position in the Township of Aberdeen
shall be classified in the categories set forth below and appointed in the
order and manner specified therein:
1. Residents of the Township of Aberdeen;
2. All other residents of the County of Monmouth;
3. Other residents of the State of New Jersey;
4. All other qualified applicants.
b. The residency status described herein is determined as of the closing
date of the application acceptance by the New Jersey Division of
Personnel pursuant to law.
§ 9-40.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-2.1
1:230
§ 10-2.1. Application for Appointment. [1973 Code § 3-2.1]
Applicants for employment shall apply on forms provided by the Office of
the Township Manager and which have been designed to obtain pertinent
information concerning the applicant's education, training, experience,
character and other factors necessary to determine his fitness and
qualification for service to the Township. All applications shall be filed with
the Office of the Township Manager.
§ 10-2.2. Processing. [1973 Code § 3-2.2]
The Office of the Township Manager shall be charged with processing
all applications for appointment to vacancies or new positions. Where it
appears that an applicant is otherwise qualified for employment, the
Manager shall require that the applicant furnish evidence that he is
physically fit for the position for which he seeks employment.
§ 10-2.3. Grounds for Rejection of an Applicant. [1973 Code § 3-2.3]
An applicant for employment may be rejected where he:
§ 10-3. PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT.
§ 10-3.1. Probation. [1973 Code § 3-3.1]
Except when provided by law, every person appointed to a new position
shall be deemed to be on probation in the position to which he shall have
been appointed for a period of six (6) months, but such probation shall
not affect permanent status of any other Township employment that such
person may have achieved. Prior to his completion of the probationary
a. Is not qualified for appointment to the position for which he has applied;
b. Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he has
applied;
c. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants;
d. Has been convicted of any crime or offense, including disorderly
persons offenses involving moral turpitude;
e. Has received other than an honorable discharge from the Armed
Services of the United States;
f. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct;
g. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his
application or in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for
appointment;
h. Is not within age limits that have been established for the position for
which he seeks appointment.
§ 10-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3.1
1:231
period, the employee or officer shall be evaluated by the Township Manager
to determine whether he shall be granted permanent status or dismissed.
The Township Manager may require reports and recommendations from
immediate superiors and department heads for this purpose. In accordance
with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69, a probationary or temporary appointment as a
Police Officer may be made for a total period not exceeding one (1) year for
the purpose of enabling a person seeking permanent appointment to take a
Police training course as required by law.
§ 10-3.2. Personnel File. [1973 Code § 3-3.2]
The Township Manager shall initiate a personnel file for each new employee
and all records of such employee concerning qualification, permanent
status, work history, accumulated vacation and sick leave, leave time and
the like shall be maintained for such employee in such file. The Manager
shall make such files available for inspection by the employee on a
reasonable basis.
§ 10-4. WORKING CONDITIONS.
§ 10-4.1. Hours. [1973 Code § 3-4.1]
The official office hours of the Township are 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
prevailing time, Monday through Friday. The hours of work for employees,
including lunch hours, shall be specified by the Manager.
§ 10-4.2. Holidays. [1973 Code § 3-4.2; Ord. No. 7-1994; New]
a. The following official holidays shall be observed by the Township:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Birthday
Lincoln's Birthday
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Election Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Friday after Thanksgiving Day
§ 10-3.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-4.2
1:232
§ 10-4.3. Vacations. [1973 Code § 3-4.3; Ord. No. 7-1994]
The following shall apply:
§ 10-4.4. Sick Leave. [1973 Code § 3-4.4]
One-half day before Christmas
Christmas Day
One-half day before New Year's Day
Columbus Day: One (1) floating holiday
b. If a holiday falls on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following
Monday, and if a holiday falls on a Saturday, it shall be observed on the
preceding Friday.
c. In the event that an official holiday is observed during an employee's
vacation, he shall be entitled to an additional vacation day, and should
an official holiday occur while an employee is on sick leave, he shall not
have that holiday charged against his sick leave.
d. If New Year's Day falls on a Saturday, the Township Building shall be
closed the following Monday.
a. Employees with less than one (1) year of service shall receive one (1)
paid vacation day for each month of service, provided the probationary
period has been completed. There will be no vacation accrued for any
employee dismissed during the probationary period.
b. Employees with one (1) year or more of service shall receive twelve (12)
days paid vacation for each year, plus one (1) day per year after the first
year to a maximum of fifteen (15) days.
c. Employees with fifteen (15) years or more of service shall receive
twenty (20) days paid vacation each year.
d. Members of the SOA Union shall receive twenty-two (22) days paid
vacation each year, over twenty (20) years of service.
Vacation time may not be accumulated for a period past the vacation
year without the prior consent of the Manager.
a. As used in this subsection, sick leave shall mean paid leave that may be
granted to an employee who through sickness or non-job related injury
becomes incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for him to
perform the duties of his position, or who is quarantined by a physician
because he has been exposed to a contagious disease. Part-time
temporary employees are not eligible for sick leave.
b. A certificate from the employee's doctor may be required as sufficient
proof of the need for sick leave. A certificate will be required for a sick
leave greater than three (3) days.
§ 10-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.4
1:233
§ 10-4.5. Bereavement Leave. [1973 Code § 3-4.6; Ord. No. 7-1994]
§ 10-4.6. Outside Employment. [1973 Code § 3-4.7]
Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without prior approval of the Manager. No application for
permission to accept outside employment shall be granted unless there is
reasonable probability that such outside employment will not interfere with
the employee's performance or compromise his position with the Township
through a conflict of interest or if, in the case of a full-time employee of
the Township, such outside employment shall exceed twenty (20) hours per
week.
§ 10-4.7. Donated Sick Leave. [Ord. No. 3-2009 § II]
c. In the first year of employment, an employee shall be entitled to one (1)
day sick leave for each month of employment. Sick leave shall
accumulate on the basis one and one-quarter (1 1/4) day per month or
fifteen (15) days per year.
d. Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness in his immediate family which requires his attendance
upon the ill person, quarantine restrictions, pregnancy or disabling
injuries. For the purpose of this paragraph, immediate family means a
spouse, child, parent or unmarried brother or sister or a relative or
dependent living under the same roof.
a. Leave with pay, not exceeding five (5) days, shall be granted to any
employee in the event of death in his immediate family which includes:
1. Employee's spouse, child, parent, brother, sister, paternal
grandparents, maternal grandparents.
2. Child, parent, brother, brother-in-law, sister or sister-in-law of his
or her spouse.
3. Any other relative permanently living under the same roof as
employee.
b. Employee shall be granted up to one day off with pay per year to attend
the funeral of any other relative. In the event an employee is required to
travel out of the State of New Jersey to attend a funeral, an additional
day off with pay shall be afforded.
c. Such leave will not be charged against the employee's sick leave.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Donated Sick Leave Program is to allow
employees to voluntarily donate a portion of their earned sick and/or
vacation time to other employees who have exhausted their own earned
leave time and who are suffering from a catastrophic health condition
or injury which necessitates the employee's prolonged absence from
work, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 4A:6-1.22.
§ 10-4.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-4.7
1:234
b. Eligibility of Recipient. An employee shall be eligible to receive donated
sick and/or vacation leave from other employees if the employee meets
all the following criteria:
1. Employee must be suffering from a catastrophic health condition or
injury which necessitates the employee's absence from work and
for which the employee has no availability of paid leave.
Catastrophic health condition or injury is defined as either a lifethreatening
condition or period of disability (physical or mental), or
the health of the employee's fetus which requires the care of a
physician and the need for the employee's absence from work for
sixty (60) days or more.
2. Employee must produce acceptable medical verification from a
physician or other licensed health care professional. The medical
verification must indicate the nature, severity, and anticipated
duration of the disability resulting from the catastrophic health
condition or injury involved.
3. Employee must have completed at least one (1) year of continuous
service with the Township.
4. Employee must have exhausted all accrued paid leave including
compensatory time, sick leave, vacation leave and administrative
leave.
5. Employee must have received at least five (5) donated days from
one (1) or more donors to participate in the Program.
c. Eligibility of Donor. An employee may be eligible to donate leave to
another employee if the employee meets all the following criteria:
1. Employee may donate up to ten (10) days to any one (1) recipient.
2. Only whole days may be donated
3. Following a donation, donor's time will be reduced by the number
of days which are to be donated, however, donor must have a credit
of at least twenty (20) days of accrued sick leave, if donating sick
leave and/or twelve (12) days of accrued vacation leave, if donating
vacation leave.
4. Donor must not have solicited or accepted anything of value for the
donation.
5. Donor may not revoke the leave donation.
d. Procedures.
1. Requesting Participation. Any employee may request to participate
in this Program. He/she should contact the Township Manager, in
writing, of his/her intent to request participation. A supervisor/
§ 10-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-4.7
1:235
department head may also initiate this process on behalf of the
employee.
2. Decision on Eligibility. Decisions regarding eligibility will be made
on a case-by-case basis by the Township Manager, Personnel
Officer and the employee's department head/supervisor.
3. Approval.
(a) Requests are subject to approval of the Recipient Affidavit and
Donor Transfer Certification Forms. In the event the employee
is unable to complete the Recipient Affidavit Form, the
employee's family may complete the form on behalf of the
employee. The donor shall also complete the Donor Transfer
Certification.
(b) The donor forms shall reflect that no one has directly or
indirectly intimidated, threatened or coerced, or attempted to
intimidate or coerce any other employee for the purpose of
interfering with any right which such employee may have with
respect to contributing, receiving, or using paid leave under
this Program. The forms shall further reflect that the employee
was also not promised any benefit (i.e., appointment,
promotion or compensation) or threatened with reprisal (i.e.,
demotion or deprivation of appointment, promotion or
compensation).
(c) Once a recipient has been approved for the Program, the
Township Manager will post or otherwise advise, all employees
of the ability to donate leave time to the recipient. This will be
done only with the consent of the recipient, or if the recipient is
unable to consent, the recipient's family.
4. Participation in the program is on a strictly voluntary basis.
5. Recipient may not use more than one hundred eighty (180) days of
donated leave.
6. Donated leave is not retroactive.
7. The recipient's leave account will be credited with the donated time
upon approval of the Recipient Affidavit Form. The recipient may
receive days from more than one (1) donor to a maximum of one
hundred eighty (180) days.
8. Any unused, donated leave time shall be credited to the leave
donor(s) on a prorated basis upon the leave recipient's return to
work. However, any portion that would amount to less than one (1)
day per donor will not be returned.
9. The recipient shall continue to accrue sick and vacation leave while
using donated leave time. This entitlement shall be retained and
credited to the employee upon his/her return to work.
§ 10-4.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-4.7
1:236
§ 10-5. DISCIPLINARY ACTION. [1973 Code § 3-5]
An employee who has acquired permanent status may be disciplined by the
appointing authority in accordance with civil service regulations, general
law and this chapter by any of the following actions, which are stated in
order of severity.
§ 10-6. MERITORIOUS ACTIONS. [1973 Code § 3-6]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to recognize and
encourage meritorious actions on the part of its officers and employees.
To this end, letters of commendation concerning Township employees from
their superiors and from members of the public with whom they deal
shall be directed to the attention of the Council, and then recorded in the
employee's personnel file. In addition, the Council may, on its own motion,
commend the work of particular officers and employees and cause such
commendation to be inserted in their personnel files.
§ 10-7. BONDING OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. [1973 Code
§ 3-7]
Every officer or employee of the Township who, by virtue of his office or
position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
monies or funds, and any other officer or employee who may be required
to do so by the Council shall, before entering upon the duties of his office
or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as may be
fixed by the Council, binding him to the Township in its corporate name and
conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his duty. Each officer
or employee required by law to give bond shall execute such bond with
sufficient surety and deliver the same to the Clerk, except that the Clerk
shall deliver his bond to the Treasurer before he enters upon the discharge
of his duties of the office or employment.
10. Recipients cannot collect Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI)
while participating in the Leave Donation Program. Once an
employee has exhausted all benefits from the Leave Donated
Program, the employee may enroll in the TDI Program.
11. Upon retirement, the recipient shall not be granted supplemental
compensation on retirement for any sick leave he/she received
through the Donated Sick Leave Program.
a. Informal, verbal reproof.
b. Written reproof.
c. Suspension from duty.
d. Dismissal.
§ 10-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:237
If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond as
herein required within thirty (30) days after due notification of his election
or appointment, his office or position may be declared vacant.
In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the State or by
any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for the faithful performance
of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized
to do business in this State and the premium therefor shall be paid by the
Township. Each such bond shall be approved by the Township Attorney as
to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
§ 10-8. CODE OF ETHICS.
§ 10-8.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 3-8.1; Ord. No. 14-1991 § 1]
As used in this section:
INTEREST — shall mean the ownership or control of more than ten percent
of the profits, assets or stock of a business organization but shall not include
the control of assets in a non-profit entity or labor union.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY — shall mean any agency, board,
governing body, including the chief executive officer, bureau, division,
office, commission or other instrumentality within a County or municipality,
and any independent local authority, including any entity created by more
than one County or municipality, which performs functions other than of a
purely advisory nature, but shall not include a school board.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE — shall mean any person, whether
compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time, employed by or serving
on a local government agency who is not a local government officer, but
shall not mean any employee of a school district.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICER — shall mean any person whether
compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time; (1) elected to any
office of a local government agency; (2) serving on a local government
agency which has the authority to enact ordinances, approve development
applications or grant zoning variances; (3) who is a member of an
independent municipal, county or regional authority, or (4) who is a
managerial executive or confidential employee of a local government
agency, as defined in section 3 of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee
Relations Act," P.L. 1941, c. 100 (C. 34:13A-3), but shall not mean any
employee of a school district or member of a school board.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — shall mean the spouse or dependent
child of an officer or employee residing in the same household.
§ 10-8.2. Code of Ethics. [1973 Code § 3-8.2; Ord. No. 14-1991 § 2]
a. No local government officer or employee or member of his immediate
family shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in any
§ 10-7 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-8.2
1:238
business, transaction or professional activity which is in substantial
conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest;
b. No independent local authority shall, for a period of one (1) year next
subsequent to the termination of office of a member of that authority:
1. Award any contract which is not publicly bid to a former member of
that authority;
2. Allow a former member of that authority to represent, appear for or
negotiate on behalf of any other party before that authority; or
3. Employ for compensation, except pursuant to open competitive
examination in accordance with Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, any former member of that authority.
The restrictions contained in this paragraph shall also apply to any
business organization in which the former authority member holds
an interest.
c. No local government officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for
himself or others;
d. No local government officer or employee shall act in his official capacity
in any matter where he, a member of his immediate family or a business
organization in which he has an interest, has a direct or indirect
financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be expected to
impair his objectivity or independence of judgment;
e. No local government officer or employee shall undertake any
employment or service, whether compensated or not, which might
reasonably be expected to prejudice his independence of judgment in
this exercise of his official duties;
f. No local government officer or employee, member of his immediate
family or business organization in which he has an interest, shall solicit
or accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of
future employment, or other thing of value based upon an
understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise
or other things of value was given or offered for the purpose of
influencing him, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his official
duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of
contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for elective
public office, if the local government officer has no knowledge or reason
to believe the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the
intent to influence the local government officer in the discharge of his
official duties;
g. No local government officer or employee shall use, or allow to be used,
his public office or employment, or any information not generally
§ 10-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-8.2
1:239
§ 10-9. (RESERVED)
§ 10-10. CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS.
§ 10-10.1. Partial Adoption by Township. [1973 Code § 2-24.1]
The New Jersey Department of Personnel at the request of the Township,
has completed a survey of all positions and has submitted to the Township
Council three (3) separate and distinct schedules. The Township hereby
implements portions of the schedules. Class specifications and job
descriptions as set forth in the Report of Reclassification Survey for the
positions classified in subsection 10-10.2 are hereby adopted or confirmed
as the case might be.
§ 10-10.2. Schedule. [1973 Code § 2-24.2 Ord. No. 16-1979; Ord. No.
2-1981; Ord. No. 18-1981; Ord. No. 13-1983; Ord. No. 13-1985; Ord.
available to the members of the public which he receives or acquires in
the course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose
of securing financial gain for himself, any member of his immediate
family, or any business organization with which he is associated;
h. No local government officer or employee or business organization in
which he has an interest shall represent any person or party other than
the local government in connection with any cause, proceeding,
application or other matter pending before any agency in the local
government in which he serves. This provision shall not be deemed to
prohibit one local government employee from representing another
local government employee where the local government agency is the
employer and the representation is within the context of official labor
union or similar representational responsibilities.
i. No local government officer shall be deemed in conflict with these
provisions if, by reason of his participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or
which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary
gain accrues to him as a member of any business, profession,
occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could
reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such
business, profession, occupation or group;
j. No elected local government officer shall be prohibited from making an
inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or
other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or
a member of his immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in
return therefor, and
k. Nothing shall prohibit any local government officer or employee, or
members of his immediate family, from representing himself, or
themselves, in negotiations or proceedings concerning his, or their, own
interests.
§ 10-8.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 10-10.2
1:240
No. 23-1985; Ord. No. 6-1986; Ord. No. 3-1987; Ord. No. 18-1987;
Ord. No. 12-1988; Ord. No. 20-1993; Ord. No. 16-1994]
The following classification of positions in the Township is hereby created
or affirmed as the case might be:
Full-Time Positions
Title
Division
Classification
Account Clerk C
Assessing Clerk C
Assessment Search Officer C
Assistant Construction Official C
Assistant Director of Parks and Recreation C
Assistant Road Foreman C
Assistant Tax Search Officer C
Building Service Worker Non-competitive
Building Maintenance Worker C
Cashier C
Clerk Stenographer C
Construction Official C
Court Aide C
Court Attendant C
Deputy/Assistant Municipal Tax Collector C
Director of Finance and Accounts C
Equipment Operator C
General Foreman C
Health Officer C
Laborer L
Municipal Court Administrator C
Deputy Court Administrator C
Patrolman C
Plumbing Subcode Official C
Police Chief C
Deputy Police Chief C
Police Lieutenant C
Police Sergeant C
§ 10-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-10.2
1:241
Full-Time Positions
Title
Division
Classification
Principal Clerk Steno/Registrar of Vital
Statistics
C
Principal Personnel Clerk C
Recreation Program Coordinator C
Registrar of Vital Statistics C
Road Foreman C
Secretarial Assistant/Planning and Zoning
Board Secretary
C
Secretarial Assistant in the Police Department C
Secretaries to the Various Boards C
Senior Account Clerk C
Senior Clerk, Stenographer C
Senior Personnel Clerk, Typing C
Senior Police Records Clerk/Steno C
Typing Senior Purchasing Assistant C
Water Repairer/Water Plant Operator C
Water Treatment Plant Operator C
Chapter 11
HEALTH
Editor's Note: The general power to adopt health ordinances is
contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31. The penalties that may be provided for
a violation of health provisions are contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-70, 71.
The statutory power to adopt health codes by reference is contained
in N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. In addition to the health regulations
contained in this chapter, the State Sanitary Code promulgated by
the State Public Health Council is by reason of N.J.S.A. 26:1A.9
enforceable in every municipality in this State.
§ 11-1. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Established. [1973 Code § 17-1.1]
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
§ 10-10.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-1.1
1:242
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
Enforcing Official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Township in removing
or abating such nuisances, and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
herein.
§ 11-1.2. Adoption. [1973 Code § 17-1.2]
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953).
§ 11-1.3. Public Record. [1973 Code § 17-1.3]
Three (3) copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 11-2. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE.
§ 11-2.1. Code Established. [1973 Code § 17-2.1]
By virtue of the authority granted N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6, a Code is
hereby adopted regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties
for its violation. A copy of this Code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 11-2.2. Title of Code. [1973 Code § 17-2.2; Ord. No. 19-1976]
The Code established and adopted by this section is commonly known as the
Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1972).
§ 11-2.3. Public Record. [1973 Code § 17-2.3; Ord. No. 19-1976]
Three (3) copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1972) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 11-2.4. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 17-2.4; Ord. No. 25-1980]
a. No person shall operate a retail food handling establishment unless a
permit or approval of an existing certificate, permit or license to
operate same shall have been issued by the Health Officer. Such permit
or approval of an existing certificate, permit or license shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in such establishment.
§ 11-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2.5
1:243
§ 11-2.5. Mobile Food Establishments.16 [1973 Code § 17-2.5; Ord.
No. 25-1980; Ord. No 5-1984; Ord. No. 19-1987; New]
§ 11-2.6. Fees. [1973 Code § 17-2.6; Ord. No. 2-1976; Ord. No.
25-1980; Ord. No. 19-1987; Ord. No. 42-2005 § 2]
The fee for issuance or renewal of any licenses mentioned hereunder shall
be as follows:
a. Definition.
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — means any movable
restaurant, truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle, watercraft, or other
movable unit including hand carried, portable containers in or on which
food or beverage is transported, stored, or prepared for retail sale or
given away at temporary locations.
b. Permit Required for Mobile Food Handling Establishments. A person
conducting an itinerant retail food handling establishment shall secure
a permit, but if such person is the holder of a certificate, permit or
license issued by the Department of Health of another jurisdiction, the
certificate, permit or license may be approved by the Health Officer and
there shall be a fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars charged for such
approval.
a. Up to 2,000 sq. ft. $75.00
2,001—3,000 sq. ft. $100.00
3,001—5,000 sq. ft. $150.00
5,001—10,000 sq. ft. $200.00
Over 10,000 sq. ft. $300.00
Mobile Units $125.00
Pre-packaged goods
only
$50.00
Temporary (maximum
7 days)
$50.00
b. Plan Review Fee. Retail food establishment shall be charged a fee for
plan review. This fee shall be based on the square footage of the entire
establishment. The fee for any plan review mentioned hereunder, shall
be as follows:
Up to 2,000 sq. ft. $75.00
2,001—3,000 sq. ft. $100.00
3,001—5,000 sq. ft. $150.00
5,001—10,000 sq. ft. $200.00
16.Editor's Note: See Chapter III, Section 3-15, for location permitted for the operation of a
mobile food establishment.
§ 11-2.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-2.6
1:244
§ 11-2.7. Expiration and Renewal Dates. [1973 Code § 17-2.7]
Permits issued or approved under the provisions of this section shall expire
annually on December 31 and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to December 1 of each year.
§ 11-2.8. Suspension and Revocation. [1973 Code § 17-2.8]
A permit or approval of a certificate, permit or license, may be suspended
or revoked for a violation by the holder of any provision of this section or
code after an opportunity for hearing by the Health Officer or his authorized
representative.
§ 11-2.9. Transferability. [1973 Code § 17-2.9]
A permit or approval of a certificate, permit or license issued by another
Board of Health is not transferable.
§ 11-2.10. Food Handlers' Educational Program. [New]
Over 10,000 sq. ft. $300.00
c. Penalty for Late Licensing. A penalty of seventy-five ($75.00) dollars
shall be imposed after January 31st of any year for late licensing.
d. Re-inspections; Charges. In the event that two (2) successive
inspections result in conditionally satisfactory rating, or one (1)
unsatisfactory rating, the licensee shall be subject to the amount of one
hundred ($100.00) dollars for the first and each subsequent inspection.
a. In the event that the Department of Health shall present a food
handlers' educational program during any year, attendance at such or a
comparable course, which has been approved by the Department of
Health, by the licensee, proprietor, manager, assistant manager or
other person in charge of a retail food establishment shall be required
prior to the renewal of any license.
b. A reasonable registration fee per applicant or per person per
establishment, as determined by the Department of Health for
attending such food handlers' educational program shall be payable in
advance for such program to the Township of Aberdeen, upon
notification by the Department that such program will be conducted.
c. At the option of the Department of Health and notwithstanding the
provisions of paragraph b. hereof, attendance at a food handlers'
educational program sponsored by the State of New Jersey or County of
Monmouth or the Monmouth County Health Officers' Association may
be required and in which event all attendees required to attend shall be
liable for and shall pay to such agency or unit conducting such food
handlers' educational program all reasonable fees as may be
established for the same upon notification by the Department of Health.
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2.11
1:245
§ 11-2.11. Penalties. [N.J.S.A. 8:24-10.7]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of the Department or
health authority, shall be liable to penalties as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10
or an injunctive action as provided by law, or both.
§ 11-3. (RESERVED)
§ 11-4. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
§ 11-4.1. Adoption of Code by Reference. [1973 Code § 17-4]
A Code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance, and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean such systems, and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the Code is annexed hereto and made a part of
this section without inclusion of the text herein.
The Code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as N.J.A.C. Standards for Individual Subsurface Disposal
Systems (1990).
§ 11-4.2. Public Record. [1973 Code § 17-4.1]
Three (3) copies of N.J.A.C. Standards for Individual Subsurface Disposal
Systems (1990) have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk for the use
and examination of the public.
§ 11-4.3. Permits Required. [1973 Code § 17-4.2]
No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal
system until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of the
sewage disposal system has been issued by the Health Officer.
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which
must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until the Health Officer
has issued a certificate indicating that the disposal system has been located
and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the
requirements of the Code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required
for alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
§ 11-4.4. Denial of Permit; Hearing. [1973 Code § 17-4.3]
If any permit or certification required by this section is denied by the Health
Officer, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Health Officer within
fifteen (15) days after request therefor is made by the applicant and upon
such hearing the Health Officer shall affirm, alter or rescind his previous
§ 11-2.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-4.4
1:246
determination and take action accordingly within fifteen (15) days after the
date of such hearing.
§ 11-4.5. Violation of Code; Stop Work Order. [1973 Code § 17-4.4]
The Health Officer may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed in violation of
the Code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the Code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except
as aforesaid.
§ 11-4.6. Fees. [1973 Code § 17-4.5; Ord. No. 25-1980; Ord. No.
6-1990; Ord. No. 43-2005 § 2]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and construct
an individual sewage disposal system, two hundred ($200.00) dollars.
For the filing of a revised application and plans for a permit to locate
and construct an individual sewage disposal system (each revision), fifty
($50.00) dollars.
For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an individual
sewage disposal system, fifty ($50.00) dollars.
For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter an individual
sewage disposal system, fifty ($50.00) dollars.
For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or part
thereof, caused by the failure of the licensee to locate and construct or alter
the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms of
the aforesaid standards, one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
For the witnessing of each percolation test for each individual lot as
required by the Health Department, one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars.
For the witnessing of each soil boring test for each individual lot as required
by the Health Department, one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars.
For the issuance or renewal of a permit to a person or corporation engaged
in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the reception and
storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter, for each vehicle or
conveyance. No fee.
§ 11-4.7. Penalties for Violations. [New]
Any person or persons, firms or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than
§ 11-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-4.7
1:247
two hundred ($200.00) dollars, nor more than fifty thousand ($50,000.00)
dollars for each offense. Each day shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 11-5. KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
§ 11-5.1. Number; Permit. [1973 Code § 17-5.1]
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than three (3) sheep, goats,
pigs, hogs or swine for home consumption on an area of less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet without a permit therefor issued by the Health
Officer, the permit to be renewed annually. The permit shall be revocable at
the pleasure of the Health Officer.
§ 11-5.2. Resale Permit. [1973 Code § 17-5.2]
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain four (4) or more sheep, goats, pigs,
hogs or swine for resale without a permit therefor issued by the Health
Officer, the permit to be renewed annually. The fee therefor shall be the
sum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars. The permit shall be revocable at the
pleasure of the Health Officer.
§ 11-6. PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING.
§ 11-6.1. Adoption by Reference [1973 Code § 17-6; Ord. No.
18-1976; New]
A Code regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of swimming pools, the issuance of permits to locate and
construct, alter or operate swimming pools, and declaring and defining
certain swimming pools as nuisances and fixing penalties for violations is
hereby adopted, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the Code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
The Code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the N.J.A.C. 8:26 of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter
IX, Public Recreational Bathing.
§ 11-6.2. Public Record. [1973 Code § 17-6.1; Ord. No. 18-1976;
New]
Three copies of N.J.A.C. 8:26 of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Public
Recreational Bathing have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk
of this Township and will remain on file in the office for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 11-6.3. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 17-62; New]
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a public swimming
pool as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:26 et seq. until permits therefor shall have been
issued by the Health Officer.
§ 11-4.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-6.4
1:248
§ 11-6.4. Expiration Date. [1973 Code § 17-6.3]
Permits issued for the operation of a public swimming pool shall expire
annually on December 31 and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to January 1 of each year.
§ 11-6.5. Denial of Permits; Hearing. [1973 Code § 17-6.4]
Permits required by this section or Code may be denied or suspended by the
Health Officer for failure to comply with this section or Code.
The Health Officer shall afford the person whose permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an opportunity to
be heard in public hearing; and following this to be informed of his decision
as hereafter provided.
§ 11-6.6. Fees. [1973 Code § 17-6.5; Ord. No. 25-1980; Ord. No.
19-1987; Ord. No. 44-2005 §§ 2, 3]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
The fee for the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate each individual
public swimming pool, hot tub or spa shall be one hundred fifty ($150.00)
dollars.
§ 11-7. SANITATION.
§ 11-7.1. Accumulation of Garbage. [1973 Code § 17-7.1]
It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or allow to remain in or upon any public
or private property any dead animal or part thereof, any offal, garbage,
manure (except in properly covered pits), overflow from cesspool or privy
vault, waste matter, dirty water, slops, stable drainage, or any foul, offensive
or noxious substance whatsoever. Where manure is kept upon farm lands for
use in farming the farm lands, such manure thereon shall not be required to
be kept in covered pits.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or lessee to allow any waste water
or excremental matter which would be unhealthful or obnoxious to collect
or accumulate upon any public, semi-public or private property.
It shall be unlawful to keep garbage except in watertight containers,
covered or tied, and of not over twenty (20) gallons capacity.
§ 11-7.2. Toilets Required. [1973 Code § 17-7.2]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or lessee of any building, or any
part thereof, to lease or let or hire out the same or any portion thereof
to be occupied as a place of residence or business, except when such
buildings or such parts thereof are sufficiently lighted, ventilated, provided
and accommodated and are in all respects in that condition of cleanliness
and wholesomeness, for which this section or any law of this State provides,
§ 11-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7.2
1:249
or in which they, or either of them, require any such premises to be kept,
and unless suitable and adequate toilet facilities are installed therein.
§ 11-8. (RESERVED)
§ 11-9. REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF TATTOOING, BODY
PIERCING, EAR PIERCING AND THE APPLICATION OF
PERMANENT COSMETICS.
§ 11-9.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 2-2003, Preamble; New]
The Township Council of Aberdeen Township has general jurisdiction under
N.J.S.A. 26:3-64 to adopt health ordinances for the control of disease and
improvement of the health of its citizens, and the New Jersey Administrative
Code authorizes the regulation of establishments that engage in the
practice of tattooing, body piercing, ear piercing and the application of
permanent cosmetics.
There is a need for the regulation of these establishments because of
the potential danger for the spreading of communicable disease through
processes unless there are safeguards to ensure that said processes are safe
and under appropriate regulations.
§ 11-9.2. Licensing and Regulations for Tattooing, Body Piercing,
Ear Piercing and Practice of Application of Permanent Cosmetics.
[Ord. No. 2-2003 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of or operating
an establishment where tattooing, body piercing, ear piercing, or the
application of permanent cosmetics is performed, as defined and governed
by Chapter VIII, New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.)
without first obtaining a license from the Department of Health to engage
in such business in accordance with the provisions hereof, and without
complying with any and all of the provisions concerning operation and
maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned Chapter VIII
of the State Sanitary Code.
a. An application for an initial license to conduct an establishment where
tattooing, body piercing, ear piercing or the application of permanent
cosmetics is performed shall be accompanied by a fee of four hundred
fifty ($450.00) dollars. The licenses issued aforesaid shall be effective
for the calendar year, expiring on the 31st day of December of the year
of issue, and shall be renewable for succeeding calendar years
thereafter. The fee for license renewals shall be two hundred ($200.00)
dollars due and payable on or before the first day of February in the
year of renewal. Establishments in operation at the time of enactment
of this section shall be required to procure licensing within thirty (30)
days of enactment.
b. A fifty ($50.00) dollar late fee shall be charged on all license fees that
are not paid on or before February 1 of the license year. An additional
§ 11-7.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-9.2
1:250
§ 11-10. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 11-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 22-2005 § II]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 11-10.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 22-2005 § III]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by Aberdeen Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
fifty ($50.00) dollars shall be charged for each thirty (30) day period
that the license fee is not paid after February 1 of the license year.
c. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this section may
be suspended or revoked, after public hearing, by the Department of
Health for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this section
or Chapter VIII of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code or whenever it
shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation
of the person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is
conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of this
Township.
d. The provisions of Chapter VIII, New Jersey State Sanitary Code
(N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.), which govern the operation or establishments
that engage in the practices of tattooing, body piercing, ear piercing
and the application of permanent cosmetics are hereby annexed as part
of this section and are made a part of this section by reference, and the
required number of copies have been placed on file in the office of the
Department of Health.
e. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-9.1, establishments and
individuals that pierce the ear lobe only shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
§ 11-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-10.2
1:251
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 11-10.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 22-2005 § IV]
§ 11-10.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 22-2005 § V]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per day
with a maximum fine not to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per
day.
§ 11-11. MARRIAGE AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES.
§ 11-11.1. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2-2008 § II]
§ 11-11.2. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2-2008 § II]
Chapter 12
BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION AND HOUSING
N.J.S.A. 52:27-119, et seq. provides for the enforcement of the State
Uniform Construction Code by the Township. The power to adopt
a housing code by reference is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, 5.2
a. This section shall be enforced by the Aberdeen Police Department and
Code Enforcement Official.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish policies and
procedures for the collection of fees associated with the performance of
marriage or civil union ceremonies by the Mayor.
a. Collection of Fees. Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union
by the Mayor of the Township of Aberdeen shall remit a fee of one
hundred ($100.00) dollars for such services at Town Hall and one
hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars for such services performed at locations
outside of Town Hall.
b. Compensation and Reimbursement of Fees.
1. Receipt of Fees. The fee shall be paid by check payable to the
Township of Aberdeen. Fees collected shall be deposited into the
Township of Aberdeen's current fund.
2. Disbursement of Fees. Fees for such service may be disbursed to
the Mayor through the appropriate budget line item and with
appropriate authorization.
§ 11-10.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 11-11.2
1:252
and 5.3, N.J.S.A. 40:48-7.12a provides general authority to regulate
buildings and structures. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 provides for the
regulation of buildings unfit for human habitation.
§ 12-1. ENFORCEMENT OF STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION
CODE.
§ 12-1.1. Enforcing Agency; Establishment; Composition. [1973
Code § 11-1.1; Ord. No. 9-1979; New]
There is hereby established in the Township a State Uniform Construction
Code enforcing agency to be known as the Officials of the Department of
Planning, Zoning and Development, consisting of a construction official,
building subcode officials, plumbing subcode officials, electrical subcode
officials, fire protection subcode official, and such other subcode officials
for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the
chief administrator of the Enforcing Agency.
§ 12-1.2. Qualifications; Official Positions. [1973 Code § 11-1.2; Ord.
No. 9-1979; Ord. No. 33-2005 § 2]
Each official position created in subsection 12-1.1 hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode
official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 12-1.3. Office Location. [1973 Code § 11-1.3; Ord. No. 9-1979]
The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing Agency at
one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 12-1.4. Construction Board of Appeals. [1973 Code § 11-1.4; Ord.
No. 9-1979]
It is hereby determined that the construction board of appeals shall be
the board designated and appointed by the County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to hear appeals from decisions of the enforcing agency.
§ 12-1.5. Fees. [1973 Code § 11-1.5; Ord. No. 9-1979; Ord. No.
10-1985; Ord. No. 12-1986; Ord. No. 21-1986; Ord. No. 17-1988;
Ord. No. 3-1994; New; Ord. No. 33-2005 § 5; Ord. No. 2-2009
§§ I—IV; Ord. No. 5-2012 §§ 1—3]
a. General.
§ 11-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.5
1:253
1. The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee for a
construction permit, shall be paid at the time of application for a
permit. The amount of this fee shall then be deducted from the
amount of the fee due for a construction permit, when the permit is
issued. Plan review fees are not refundable.
2. The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum of
the basic construction fees plus all applicable special fees. This fee
shall be paid before a permit is issued and proposed work
commencing.
3. The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
4. All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
5. All fees paid under the regulations shall be nonrefundable except
as otherwise specifically set forth in the regulations. All fees shall
be paid by cash, check or money order, payable to the "Township of
Aberdeen."
b. Fee Schedule. The fees shall be as follows:
1. Plan Review Fee. The fee for plan review shall be twenty (20%)
percent of the amount to be charged for a new construction permit.
Elevator device plan review shall be in the amount noted in N.J.A.C.
5:23-12.
2. The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the
number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number
of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices, the number of
sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit
rates and/or the applicable flat fees as provided herein plus any
special fees. The minimum fee for a basic construction permit
covering any and all of the technical subcodes shall be sixty-five
($65) dollars.
(a) Building Volume or Cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(1) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be
in the amount of $0.030 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of
construction as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of
the Building Subcode; except that the fee shall be $008 per
cubic foot for structures on farms, including commercial
farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the
§ 12-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-1.5
1:254
maximum fee for such structures on farms not to exceed
$1,145.
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with pre-engineered systems of
commercial farm buildings, pre-manufactured
construction, and the external utility connection for premanufactured
construction shall be based upon the
estimated cost of work. The fee for use groups R-3, R-4 and
R-5 shall be in the amount of $30 per $1,000. From
$50,001 to and including $100,000, the additional fee shall
be in the amount of $18 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the
amount of $15 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$100,000. The fee for all other use groups shall be in the
amount of $30 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including
$1000,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $21
per $1,000 of estimated cost above $50,000. Above
$100,000, the additional fee shall be in the amount of $18
per $1,000 of estimated cost above $100,000. For the
purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant shall
submit to the Agency such cost data as may be available
and produced by the architect or engineer of record, or by
a recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A
bonafide contractor's bid, or contract if available, shall be
submitted. The Construction Official and/or Subcode
Official shall make the final decision regarding the
estimated cost/value.
(3) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion.
(4) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with items (2) and (3) above.
(5) The fee for replacement type roof coverings shall be a flat
rate of $75 for use groups R-3, R-4, and R-5 type structures
that are less than 5,000 square feet per floor area. There
shall be a fee for all other use groups of $40 per $1,000 of
the estimated cost with a minimum fee of $75.
(6) The fee for replacement type siding and other exterior wall
coverings shall be a flat rate of $75 for use group R-3, R-4
and R-5 type structures that are less than 5,000 square
feet per floor area. There shall be a fee for all other use
groups of $40 per $1,000 of the estimated cost with a
minimum fee of $75.
(7) The fee charged for a private above-ground swimming pool
as defined in the building subcode, in use group R-3, R-4
§ 12-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.5
1:255
and R-5 shall be $75. The fee charged for a private inground
swimming pool as defined in the building subcode,
in use group R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $225. The
construction fee for public swimming pools as defined in
the building subcode in all use groups other than R-3,
R-4 and R-5 shall be computed and based upon the cubic
volume of the structure. The minimum fee shall be $150.
(8) The fee for replacement barriers surrounding and
enclosing public or private swimming pools shall have a
flat rate of $50.
(9) The fee for storage type-sheds exceeding 100 square feet
shall be considered to be a structure and calculated in
accordance with (a)(1) above.
(10) Temporary Structures: the fee shall be $100 per structure.
(11) Tents: The fee for tents\ in excess of 900 square feet or
more than thirty (30) feet in any dimension shall be $100.
(b) Plumbing Fixtures and Equipment. The fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fees shall be the amount of $15 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the plumbing
system, and for each appliance connected to the gas
piping, propane or oil piping system, except as indicated in
paragraph (2) below.
(2) The fee shall be $60 per special device for the following:
gas piping, grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration
units, water service connection, sewer service connection,
backflow preventers equipment with test ports (double
check valve assembly, reduced pressure zone and pressure
vacuum breaker backflow preventers), active solar
systems, sewer pumps and interceptors. There shall be no
inspection fee charged for gas service entrances.
(3) For cross connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to testing annually, the fee shall be $65 for each
device.
(4) The fee for backflow preventers installed in residential
lawn sprinkler systems and other use groups that are not
subject to annual testing shall be $65.
(5) The fee for domestic hot water heaters (electric, natural
gas, oil or propane) installed in use group(s) R-3, R-4 and
R-5 shall be $50 per unit and $125 per unit for all other use
groups.
§ 12-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-1.5
1:256
(6) The fee for warm air furnaces (electric, natural gas, oil or
propane) installed in use group(s) R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be
$75 per unit and $175 per unit for all other use groups.
(7) The fee for HVAC condensate drainage lines installed in
use group(s) R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $35 and $75 per unit
for all other use groups.
(8) The fee for roof drainage systems in use groups other than
R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $150 per building or system.
(9) The fee for domestic hot water boilers (electric, natural
gas, oil or propane) installed in use groups R-3, R-4, and
R-5 shall be $75 per unit and $125 per unit for all other use
groups.
(10) The fee for any item not listed and that is regulated by the
NJ Uniform Construction Code shall be $35.
(c) Electrical Fixtures and Devices. The fee shall be as follows:
(1) For the first block consisting of one to 50 receptacles,
fixtures or devices, the fee shall be $75; for each additional
block consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or
devices, the fee shall be $25. For the purpose of computing
this fee, receptacles, fixtures or devices shall include
lighting fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles,
sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat
detectors, communications outlets, light-standards eight
feet or less in height including luminaries, emergency
lights, electric signs, exit lights or similar electric fixtures
and devices rated 20 amperes or less including motors or
equipment rated less than one horsepower (hp) or one
kilowatt (kw).
(2) For each motor or electrical device rated from one hp or
one kw to 10 hp or 10 kw; for each transformer or
generator rated from one kw or one kva to 10 kw or 10
kva; for each replacement of wiring involving one branch
circuit or part thereof; for household electric cooking
equipment rated up to 16 kw; for each fire security or
burglar alarm control unit; for each receptacle rated from
30 amperes to 50 amperes; for each light-standard greater
than eight feet in height including luminaries; and for each
communications closet, the fee shall be $35.
(3) For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 10 hp or 10 kw or 50 hp or 50 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motorcontrol-
center, or disconnecting means rated 225 amperes
or less; for each transformer or generator rated from
greater than 10 kw or 10 kva to 45 kw or 45 kva; for each
§ 12-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.5
1:257
electric sign rated from greater than 20 amperes to 225
amperes including associated disconnecting means; for
each receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes; and for
each utility load management device, the fee shall be $75.
(4) For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 50 hp or 50 kw to 100 hp or 100 kw; for each service
equipment, panel board, switch board, switch gear, motorcontrol-
center or disconnecting means rated from greater
than 225 amperes to 1,000 amperes; and for each
transformer or generator rated from greater than 45 kw or
45 kva to 112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $125.
(5) For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
hp or 100 kw; for each service equipment, panel board,
switch board, switch gear, motor-control-center or
disconnecting means rated greater than 1,000 amperes;
and for each transformer or generator rated greater than
112.5 kw or 112.5 kva, the fee shall be $460.
(6) The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private above-ground swimming pool as defined
in the building subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a
flat fee of $75 and $140 for in-ground swimming pools
which shall include any "required" bonding, and
associated equipment such as filter pumps, motors,
disconnecting means, switches, required receptacles, and
heaters, etc., excepting panelboards. For each storable
pool or hydro massage bath the fee shall be $50. For public
swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the basis of
number of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical
devices involved in accordance with paragraph (1) through
(5) above. The fee charged for the annual electrical
inspection of swimming pools, spas or hot tubs shall be
$100.
(7) The fee charged for the installation of single and multiple
station smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or
security alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwelling
shall be a flat fee of $40 per dwelling unit. For fire, burglar
and security alarm systems and detectors in building other
than one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be a flat fee
of $75.
(8) For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack. Individual loadside panel boards shall be
charged in accordance with paragraph (3), (4) or (5)
above. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual feeder conductors.
§ 12-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-1.5
1:258
(9) For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor or
device. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual circuit components,
for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting
means.
(10) For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be in accordance with paragraph (2) through (5)
above based on the designed ampere rating of the
overcurrent device of the service or feeder.
(11) The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the
conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
(12) For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and
motors, which are part of premises wiring, except those
which are potable plug-in type, shall be counted.
(13) The fee for any item not listed and that is regulated by the
NJ Uniform Construction Code shall be $35.
(d) For fire protection and hazardous equipment, sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke/heat/carbon monoxide), preengineered
suppression system, gas and oil fired appliances
not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust
systems, incinerators and crematoriums, the fee shall be as
follows:
(1) The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $85; for
21 to and including 100 heads, the fee shall be $145; for
101 to and including 200 heads, the fee shall be $260; for
201 to and including 400 heads, the fee shall be $650; for
401 to and including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,250.
In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number of
each shall be counted separately and two fees, one for
heads and one for detectors shall be charged.
(2) The fee for each individual standpipe shall be $275.
(3) The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall
be $125.
(4) The fee for each gas, oil or propane fired appliances in
"existing" buildings and use groups R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall
be $65 per unit and $75 per unit for all other use groups.
§ 12-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.5
1:259
(5) The fee for each solid fuel-burning device shall be $55 per
unit.
(6) The fee for each fire pump shall be $250 per unit.
(7) The fee for each commercial-type kitchen exhaust system
shall be $150.
(8) The fee for each incinerator shall be $450.
(9) The fee for each crematorium shall be $450.
(10) For single and multiple station smoke detectors, heat
detectors, carbon monoxide detectors and fire alarm
systems installed in R-3, R-4 and R-5 type dwellings, there
shall be a flat fee of $55 per dwelling unit. For detectors
and fire alarm systems installed in all other buildings and
use groups other than R-3, R-4 and R-5 type dwellings, the
fee shall be charged in accordance with paragraph (1)
above.
(11) The minimum fee for the installation, relocation or
replacement of illuminated or self-luminous Exit Signs,
Exit Directional Signage and/or Emergency Lighting
fixtures shall be $75 for the first twelve (12) devices and
$15 for each additional device thereafter.
(12) The fee for placards and/or replacement placards shall be
$55 per set.
(13) The fee for the installation, relocation or replacement of
each fire protection device not specified above or
otherwise shall be $40 per device. Such devices may
include, but not be limited to, voice alarms, speakers, Fire
Department communication devices, equipment controls,
replacement valves and fittings, etc.
(14) The fee for any item not listed and that is regulated by the
NJ Uniform Construction Code shall be $35.
c. Fees for Certificates and other Permits are as follows:
1. The fee for a demolition permit shall be $150 for any single
structure. The fee for a tank abandonment or removal permit shall
be $80 per tank. Each additional structure demolished shall be $25.
2. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount of $4
per square foot surface area of the sign, computed on one side only
for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall be $75. Exception:
no permit is required for signs installed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.14(b)6.
§ 12-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-1.5
1:260
3. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of 10
percent of the total construction permit fee. The minimum fee shall
be $75 for R-3, R-4 and R-5 type use groups and the minimum fee
for all other use groups shall be $150 per building, tenant space or
unit.
4. The fee for an extension of an expired temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be $30 per extension.
5. The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use group shall be $250.
6. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(c) shall be $250.
7. The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and non-depletable energy source provisions of
the energy subcode shall be $275 for one- and two-family homes
(use groups R-3, R-4 and R-5 of the building subcode), and for light
commercial structures having the indoor temperature controlled
from a single point, and $1,369 for all other structures.
8. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $594 for class I structures and $120 for
class II and class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $229 for class I structures and
$65 for class II and class III structures.
9. The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $140.
The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $28.
10. The fee to reinstate lapsed, suspended or revoked permits noted in
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16(b) or N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16(f) or otherwise shall be
$25 per outstanding subcode. This fee may be waived at the
discretion of the Construction Official.
11. The fee for DCA plan review for elevator devices shall be in the
amount as published and noted in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4 and N.J.A.C.
5:23-12.
12. The fee for a mechanical inspection in a Use Group R-3 or R-4
structure by a mechanical inspector shall be $43 for the first device
and $10 for each additional device. No separate fee shall be
charged for gas, fuel oil, or water-piping connections associated
with the mechanical equipment.
13. The fee for the annual electrical inspection of swimming pools, spas
or hot tubs shall be $125 per unit.
d. (Reserved)
e. Annual Permit Requirements are as follows:
§ 12-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.5
1:261
§ 12-1.6. Waiver of Construction Permit Fees for Construction to
Promote Accessibility by Handicapped to Existing Structures or
Facilities Therein. [New]
Notwithstanding the provisions of the "State Uniform Construction Code
Act," P.L. 1975, c. 217 (C. 52:27D-119 et seq.), or any rules, regulations or
standards adopted pursuant thereto, to the contrary, the Governing Body
of any municipality which has appointed an enforcing agency pursuant to
the provisions of section 8 of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (C. 52:27D-126) may, by
ordinance, provide that no person shall be charged a construction permit
surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote
1. The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be
charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number
of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility, and who
are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be considered
maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual
construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/
fire protection, electrical and plumbing.
2. Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
(a) One to 25 workers (including foremen) $667/worker; each
additional worker over 25, $232/worker.
(b) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $140 per subcode and a list of not more than
three (3) individuals to be trained per subcode shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Department of Community
Affairs, Bureau of Code Services, Training Section along with a
copy of the construction permit (Form F170).
f. Elevator Devices: Test and Inspection Fees.
The Elevator Unit at the Department of Community Affairs ("DCA")
performs all plan review and inspection services of Elevator Devices
and equipment for the Township. The fees established, effective and
published by DCA for plan review, inspections, variations, etc., shall
be in the amount as noted in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-12
respectively. A copy of the current DCA fee schedule is available upon
request and adopted herein.
g. Zoning Permits:
1. The fee for a standing sign or attached sign shall be $50.
2. The fee for structure or building improvement i.e., fences, pools
and accessory structures, shall be $20.
3. The fee for new construction (prebuilding permit) shall be $20.
§ 12-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-1.6
1:262
accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure
or any of the facilities contained therein.
The section may further provide that a disabled person, or a parent or
sibling of a disabled person, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee
or charge in order to secure a construction permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility to
his own living unit.
For the purposes of this section, "disabled person" means any person who
has the total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial gainful
activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to,
any resident of the State who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. and 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act
of 1974 (45 U.S.D. and 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a sixty (60%)
percent disability or higher pursuant to any Federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this paragraph "blindness"
means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of
a correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields
of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle
no greater than twenty (20) degrees shall be considered as having a central
visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
§ 12-1.7. Surcharge Fee. [1973 Code § 11-1.6; Ord. No. 9-1979; Ord.
No. 33-2005 § 6]
a. In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support
programs required by the Act, an enforcing agency including the
Department when acting as the local agency shall collect a surcharge
fee to be based upon the volume of new construction within the
municipality. Said fee shall be accounted for and forwarded to the
Division of Codes and Standards in the manner herein provided.
b. Amount: This fee shall be in the amount of $0265 per cubic foot of
volume of new buildings and additions. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all other construction
shall be $1.35 per $1,000 of value of construction.
1. No fee shall be collected for pre-engineered systems of commercial
farm buildings.
2. No fee shall be collected for permits to perform asbestos
abatement or lead abatement.
3. No fee shall be collected for permits for the construction or
rehabilitation of residential units that are to be legally restricted to
occupancy by households of low or moderate income as defined in
N.J.A.C. 5:43-1.5.
4. No fee shall be collected for demolition of buildings or structures.
§ 12-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.7
1:263
§ 12-1.8. Fire Limits; Biannual Report. [1973 Code § 11-1.8; Ord.
No. 27-1976]
The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Township Council
biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire limits. This
report shall indicate the recommendations of the Construction Official, the
Building Subcode Official, and the Fire Subcode Official regarding those
areas which should be designated as within fire limits, with their reasons
therefor.
§ 12-2. HOUSING CODE.
§ 12-2.1. Adoption of Housing Code. [1973 Code § 11-2.1; Ord. No.
36-2005 § 2; Ord. No. 5-2012 § 4]
The "2009 International Property Maintenance Code," as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Housing Code
of the Township of Aberdeen in the State of New Jersey for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided; and each and all regulations
of the "2009 International Property Maintenance Code" are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, save
and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, added, changed or
supplemented by subsection 12-2.2. Three (3) copies of the same are on file
in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 12-2.2. Changes and Revisions of the Housing Code. [1973 Code
§ 11-2.2; Ord. No. 36-2005 § 3; Ord. No. 5-2012 § 5]
The following provisions of the "2009 International Property Maintenance
Code" are hereby deleted, added, changed or supplemented to read as
follows:
Section 111 Right of Appeal. There is hereby appointed an appeal official
who shall be the Township Manager.
Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the
Enforcing Officer, in any matter relative to the interpretation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of the Housing Code may appeal the
decision or interpretation to the Township Manager.
5. No fee shall be collected for work consequential to a natural
disaster when the local code enforcement agency is waiving its fee.
c. Remitting and reporting:
1. The municipality shall remit fees to the Bureau on a quarterly basis
in conjunction with report number R-840B State Training Fee
Report in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5(e). Fees remitted shall
be for the quarter. Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer,
State of New Jersey."
§ 12-1.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-2.2
1:264
The appeal must be filed with the Township Manager in writing, requesting
a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
twenty (20) days after receipt of the ruling or decision of enforcing officer.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Manager shall set a time and
place for a hearing and shall give the petitioner notice thereof. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and to
show cause why such ruling or decision of the Enforcing Officer should be
modified or withdrawn.
After such hearing, the Township Manager shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the ruling or decision of the Enforcing Officer depending upon his
findings as to whether the provisions of this subsection and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with.
The proceedings of such hearing, including the findings and decisions of the
Township Manager, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered
as a matter of public record in the office of the Building Department. Such
record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Manager may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction,
as provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Whenever the Township Manager finds that an emergency exists, which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
subsection, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon written
petition to the Township Manager, shall be afforded a hearing within fortyeight
(48) hours. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to
whether the provisions of this subsection and of any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Township Manager
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 12-2.3. Saving Clause. [1973 Code § 11-2.3]
That nothing in this section or in the Housing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed. No right
or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired, or affected by this
section.
§ 12-2.4. Certificate of Occupancy. [1973 Code § 11-2.4; Ord. No.
12-1987; Ord. No. 17-1987; Ord. No. 4-1994; Ord. No. 36-2005 § 4;
Ord. No. 5-2012 § 6; Ord. No. 5-2015]
No owner, owner of rental properties, agent of owner, real estate agent or
broker, firm, company, partnership, corporation or person or persons shall
§ 12-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.4
1:265
sell, rent, transfer, grant, lease, let, mortgage with right of occupancy or
otherwise dispose of the ownership or occupancy thereof, whether or not
for consideration and whether such disposal of ownership of occupancy
be temporary or permanent, any dwelling unit, hotel, motel, rooming unit,
boarding house or premises on which a building is located and used for
human occupancy, as well as commercial properties, unless a Certificate of
Occupancy, certifying the building and premises are in compliance with all
other ordinances of the Township, shall first be obtained from the Housing
Officer of the Township. Such a Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted or
denied within ten (10) days from the date of the application for same.
§ 12-2.5. Registration and Inspection of Rental Dwelling Units.
[Ord. No. 5-2012 § 7; amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
a. The Housing Officer shall cause to be prepared appropriate application
forms for such Certificate of Occupancy, which forms shall be available
at the office of the Housing Officer.
b. The Housing Officer shall also cause to be prepared appropriate forms
of such Certificate of Occupancy.
c. A charge of $150 for residential transfer of ownership to cover the cost
for inspection in connection with such application shall be paid to the
Housing Department at the time an application is filed and shall not be
refundable. A charge of one hundred $175 for commercial and other
nonresidential transfer of ownership to cover the cost for inspection in
connection with such application shall be paid to the Housing
Department at the time that the application is filed and shall not be
refundable. [Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
d. In the event of any violation of this section and/or any applicable law, a
fine or penalty may be imposed against the owner of such property in
accordance with the provisions under Chapter 1, § 1-5, of the Code.
[Added 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
a. General. The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of
procedures for the registration and inspection of all rental dwellings
within the Township.
b. Registration Required.
1. Annual registration is required of owners and management of every
building and structure in the Township which is occupied by one
family or more as tenants of the owner or lessor. Such registration
shall be with the Township Housing Department upon forms
prescribed by and furnished by the Township. Every such
registration form shall include the name and address of the owner,
the name and address of the lessor if other than the owner, and the
name and address of an agent in charge of the premises residing in
the Township. Annual registration is required to be filed with the
Township Housing Department no later than January 31 of each
§ 12-2.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-2.5
1:266
§ 12-3. DEMOLITION OF UNFIT BUILDING.
§ 12-3.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 11-4.1; Ord. No. 18-1974]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — shall mean any building or structure or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise, and shall include any out-houses
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
OWNER — shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who shall
be in actual possession thereof.
year. Updated registration is required with the Township Housing
Department immediately upon change in occupancy.
2. Service of notice shall be sufficient upon any owner, lessor and
agent by posting it upon the premises in a conspicuous place where
the owner or lessor has failed to register his premises with the
Township Housing Department as required by this section, and has
failed to designate an agent, in respect to the premises, residing in
the Township or where such an agent has been designated but
cannot be found at the address given in the registration.
c. Inspection.
1. The person who owns, purports to own, or exercises control of any
residential rental property, prior to rental or lease involving a new
occupancy and successively prior to the commencement of any and
all succeeding tenancies of any unit of dwelling space in a rental
dwelling, is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy for the
unit of dwelling space. Such certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the appropriate Township representative, as designated by the
Township Manager, upon the inspection of the unit of dwelling
space by a Township inspector and his findings that such unit meets
the standards provided by law.
2. The Township may charge a fee to fund the costs of the inspections
and the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The person who
owns, purports to own, or exercises control of any residential rental
property will be required to pay the applicable inspection fee of
$150.
d. Penalties and Fines.
1. In the event of any violation of this section and/or any applicable
law, a fine or penalty may be imposed against the owner or lessor of
any such building or structure in accordance with the provisions
under Chapter 1, § 1-5, of the Code.
§ 12-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3.1
1:267
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — shall mean any housing authority or any officer who
shall be in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
municipality, County or State relating to health, fire, building regulations or
to other activities concerning buildings in the municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER — shall mean the officer, officers, board or body who shall
be authorized to exercise the powers hereinafter set forth.
§ 12-3.2. Public Officer; Powers. [1973 Code § 11-4.2; Ord. No.
18-1974]
The Township Manager shall hereby be designated as the person authorized
to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section, including the
following powers in addition to others herein granted:
§ 12-3.3. Determination of Unfit Dwelling; Standards. [1973 Code
§ 11-4.3; Ord. No. 18-1974]
A building may be deemed unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use
if it shall be found and determined, as hereinafter provided, that conditions
exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or
safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents of the Township; such conditions may include
the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects; uncleanliness.
§ 12-3.4. Notice; Complaint; Hearing. [1973 Code § 11-4.4; Ord. No.
18-1974]
Whenever a petition shall be filed with the Township Manager by a public
authority or by at least five (5) residents of the Township charging that
any building shall be unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 12-3.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-3.4
1:268
whenever it shall appear to the Township Manager or his designated agent,
on his own motion, that any building shall be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, the Township Manager or his designated agent shall, if
his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building
a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing shall be held before the Township Manager or his designated
agent at a place therein fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than
thirty (30) days after serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties
in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling in hearings before the Township Manager or his
designated agent.
§ 12-3.5. Order for Repair or Demolition. [1973 Code § 11-4.5; Ord.
No. 18-1974]
If after notice and hearing the Township Manager determines that the
building under consideration shall be unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of the building and parties in
interest an order:
§ 12-3.6. Repair or Demolition by Township Manager. [1973 Code
§ 11-4.6; Ord. No. 18-1974]
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, if the cost of such repair shall not be in excess of
fifty (50%) percent of the value of the building, within ninety (90) days,
which time shall be set forth in the order, or at the option of the owner,
to vacate or have the building vacated and closed within the time set
forth in the order.
b. If the building shall be in such a condition as to make it dangerous to
the health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the cost to
repair, alter or improve the building shall be in excess of fifty (50%)
percent of the value of the building, the Township Manager shall issue
an order requiring the owner to remove or demolish the dwelling within
sixty (60) days from the receipt of the order.
a. If the owner shall fail to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Township Manager may cause the building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed; the Township Manager may also
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupancy of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
§ 12-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3.6
1:269
§ 12-3.7. Costs to Be a Lien. [1973 Code § 11-4.7; Ord. No. 18-1974]
§ 12-3.8. Service of Complaints and Orders [1973 Code § 11-4.8;
Ord. No. 18-1974]
Notices, complaints or orders issued by the Township Manager pursuant
hereto shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons shall be unknown and cannot
be ascertained by the Township Manager with reasonable diligence and
the manager makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint or order may be made by publishing it once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper qualified to accept legal notices for
the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order and a
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded in the Monmouth
County Clerk's office.
§ 12-3.9. Other Remedies. [1973 Code § 11-4.9; Ord. No. 18-1974]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
b. If the owner shall fail to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Township Manager may cause such building to be
removed or demolished.
a. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceedings
hereunder determined in favor of the Township shall be a lien against
the real property upon which such cost shall be incurred.
b. The cost when done by the Township of repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which
such cost shall be incurred.
c. If the building shall be removed or demolished by the Township
Manager, he shall sell the materials of such building and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and
any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Township Manager, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by the Court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court. If there are no such credits, or if the sum total
of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of
the aforesaid costs and the amount so due, a lien statement, shall be
filed with the tax collector and a copy thereof shall be forthwith
forwarded to the owner by registered mail.
§ 12-3.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-3.10
1:270
§ 12-3.10. Statutory Authority. [1973 Code § 11-4.10; Ord. No.
18-1974]
This section shall be adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et
seq., and the method of enforcement, definitions, procedure and remedies
shall be governed and controlled thereby and as therein set forth or any
amendments or supplements thereto.
§ 12-3.11. Conflict of Interest. [1973 Code § 11-4.11; Ord. No.
18-1974]
Under no circumstances shall the Township Manager serve as Hearing
Officer in any case in which the investigation leading to the filing of a
complaint shall be conducted by the Township Manager.
§ 12-4. (RESERVED)
§ 12-5. REGULATIONS FOR SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 12-5.1. Fences Required. [1973 Code § 4-9.1]
Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on which there is
situated a swimming pool, wading pool or any outside body of water created
by artificial means (herein referred to as a pool) any portion of which is two
(2) feet deep or more shall install and maintain on the lot or premises and
completely surrounding such pool or body of water a permanent fence.
§ 12-5.2. Fence Specification. [1973 Code § 4-9.2]
The following specifications shall apply:
§ 12-5.3. Access to Aboveground Pools. [1973 Code § 4-9.3]
Nothing in this section shall apply to pools having sides extending four (4)
feet or more above grade provided that the stairs or other means of access
to the pool are removed when not in use or are effectively closed with a gate
a. A permanent fence of durable material at least four (4) feet in height
shall be so constructed as not to have openings, mesh, holes or gaps
larger than four (4) square inches in any dimension, except for doors
and gates, and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the horizontal
dimension shall not exceed four (4) inches.
b. All doors or gates used in conjunction with the fence shall meet the
same specifications as the fence itself and shall be of such size as to
completely fill any opening in the fence.
c. All doors or gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices and shall be kept closed and securely latched at all times when
the pool is not in use.
§ 12-3.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.3
1:271
as provided above, which shall be closed and securely latched when such
pool is not in use.
§ 12-5.4. Unattended Pools. [1973 Code § 4-9.4]
All other aboveground pools greater than two (2) feet deep, unless enclosed
by a fence of the type and dimensions herein above specified shall be either
(1) emptied when not in use or unattended; or (2) covered with a suitable,
strong protective covering, securely fastened or locked in place when not in
use or attended.
§ 12-6. UNIFORM NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR COMMERCIAL,
RESIDENTIAL, INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES.
§ 12-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to require the clear display of authorized
and assigned house or building numbers for every building fronting on any
street in the Township of Aberdeen in order to assist the general public and
emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in case
of emergency, as well as for the welfare of the general public in conducting
their normal affairs, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq.
§ 12-6.2. Display of Numbers Required. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 2]
All residential, commercial, industrial or other structures erected or to
be erected within the Township of Aberdeen shall display identification
numbers on buildings or curbside mailboxes in accordance with
specifications provided herein. It shall be the duty of every property owner
to place the assigned street number upon each lot where a building is
located.
§ 12-6.3. Specifications. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 3]
Building or curbside mailbox numbers shall be:
a. In Arabic numerals.
b. A minimum height of three (3) inches.
c. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
d. At least thirty (30) inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
e. Building numbers shall be mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall
or porch of the building so as to be clearly visible from the street.
Curbside mailbox numbers shall be mounted in a secure fashion and
shall appear on each side of the curbside mailbox so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
§ 12-5.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-6.4
1:272
§ 12-6.4. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 4]
Building or curbside mailbox number signs as required by this section shall
be periodically maintained as needed to provide continued high visibility.
The property owner shall be responsible for said maintenance.
§ 12-6.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 5]
Any owner, agency, person or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this section or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be subject to a penalty to be determined by the appropriate
Township Official. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Fire Official, Code Enforcement Officer, Housing Inspector, Zoning Officer
and any other enforcement agency or individual designated by the
Administration.
The effective date of the enforcement provisions set forth in this section
shall be twelve (12) months for existing structures and fifteen (15) days
from the passage of this section for new structures.
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 16-2008, codified herein as Section 12-6, was
adopted December 2, 2008.
§ 12-6.6. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or Habitability
Conditioned upon Proper Display of Assigned Numbers. [Ord. No.
16-2008 § 6]
No certificate of occupancy for habitability shall be issued for any dwelling,
store or other building hereafter erected, enlarged or occupied, unless the
provisions of this section shall have been complied with. Temporary house
numbering must be posted immediately upon the issuance of a building
permit.
§ 12-6.7. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 16-2008 § 7]
Any property owner in violation of this section shall receive written notice
thereof from the Township Officials listed herein requiring compliance with
this section within fourteen (14) days. Should the property owner thereafter
fail to comply and remain in violation of this section, they shall be subject
to a summons being issued for appearance in Municipal Court which may
result in a penalty of up to five hundred ($500) dollars to be collected by the
Court.
§ 12-7. VACANT/ABANDONED PROPERTY LIST; REGISTRATION.
[Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 20-2015; amended 9-6-2016 by Ord.
No. 22-2016; 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 23-2016]
a. The Township hereby directs the public officer to identify abandoned
property and to establish an abandoned property list throughout the
Township or within those parts of the Township as the governing body
may, from time to time, designate. The abandoned property list shall
§ 12-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:273
include, for each abandoned property identified, the tax block and lot
number, the name of the owner of record, if known, and the street
address of the lot. The Township, by resolution, may add properties to
the abandoned property list at any time.
b. An interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned property list following that procedure set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-105.
c. Abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned property
list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as evidenced
by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of rehabilitation work
authorized by those permits.
d. A property on which an entity other than the Township of Aberdeen has
purchased or taken assignment from the Township of a tax sale
certificate which has been placed on the abandoned property list may
be removed in accordance with the provisions of Section 2917 of N.J.S.A.
55:19-103.
e. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list or any
additions thereto by publication in the official newspaper of the
Township, which publication shall constitute public notice, and, within
10 days after publication, shall send a notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and by regular mail to the owner of record of every
property included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall
identify property determined to be abandoned, setting forth the owner
of record, if known, the tax lot and block number and street address.
The public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send
out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization,
or property tax processing organization that receives a duplicate copy
of the tax bill pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the owner of record
is not known for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be
mailed but instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the
factual basis for the public officer's finding that the property is
abandoned property as that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and
shall specify the information relied upon in making such finding. In all
cases a copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the
public officer in the office of the Monmouth County Clerk. This filing
shall have the same force and effect as a notice of lis pendens under
N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of the
Property owner as defendant and the name of the Township as plaintiff,
as though an action had been commenced by the Township against the
owner.
f. The public officer, within 10 days of establishment of the abandoned
property list, or any additions thereto, shall send, by regular mail,
17.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 12-7 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-7
1:274
facsimile, or electronic mail, a copy of the abandoned property list to
the electric and gas utilities serving the Township.
g. The owner or party in interest of the abandoned property will be
required to file a registration statement for such vacant property with
the Housing Inspector on forms provided by the Township for such
purposes within 60 days of notice or within 30 days after assuming
ownership of a vacant property. The registration will be valid for one
year and the owner or parties in interest will be required to annually
renew the registration.
h. The registration fee schedule is as follows:
Initial registration $500
First renewal $1,000
Second renewal $2,000
Third renewal $3,000
i. An owner or lien holder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the public officer shall have 40
days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer shall
accept a late filing of an appeal.
j. Within 30 days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the findings
contained in the notice pursuant to Subsections e and f of this section,
the public officer shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the
matter. Any property included on the list shall be presumed to be
abandoned property unless the owner, through the submission of an
affidavit or certification by the property owner averring that the
property is not abandoned and stating the reasons for such averment,
can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list.
The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation, such as but not limited to photographs, and repair
invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal
shall be that the property in question is not abandoned property as that
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The public officer shall decide any
timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall
promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular
mail, notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons
therefore.
k. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination as the
result of an appeal with the public officer pursuant to Subsections g and
h of this section, by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey
Court Rules, a summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:275
§ 12-8. MAINTENANCE OF VACANT AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES DURING FORECLOSURE. [Added
12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 21-2015]
§ 12-8.1. Notice of Foreclosure Action.
Division, Monmouth County, which action shall be tried de novo. Such
action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice
of decision mailed by the public officer pursuant to Subsection h of
this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the property in
question is not abandoned property as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the court may extend
the deadline for instituting the action. The public officer shall promptly
remove any property from the abandoned property list that has been
determined not to be abandoned on appeal.
l. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the Township
shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to
properties on the abandoned property list at such time as any one
property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions
of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect
to that property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the property
owner.
m. Any interested party may submit a written request to the public officer
asserting that any property within the Township of Aberdeen should be
included on the abandoned property list. The written request must
specify the street address and block and lot number of the property to
be included, and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30 days of receipt
of any such request, the public officer shall provide a written response
to the party, either indicating that the property will be added to the list
or, if not, the reasons for not adding the property.
n. Any interested party may participate in a redetermination hearing
regarding the inclusion of a property on the abandoned property list.
Upon written request by any interested party, the public officer shall
provide that party with at least 20 days' notice of any such hearing. The
party shall provide the public officer with notice at least 10 days before
the hearing of its intention to participate, and the nature of the
testimony or other information that is proposes to submit at the
hearing.
a. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage on residential property within the Township shall, within 10
days of serving the summons and complaint, notify the Township Clerk
that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage
has been filed against the subject property and provide the name and
contact information for the representative of the creditor who is
§ 12-7 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-8.1
1:276
§ 12-8.2. Creditor Responsibility.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Public Laws of 2014, Chapter 35, a
creditor filing a summons and complaint to foreclose a lien on an residential
property that is vacant and abandoned, whether the filing of the summons
and complaint is made prior to or after the determination that the property
is vacant and abandoned, shall be responsible for the care, maintenance,
security and upkeep of the exterior of the residential property. This
obligation applies whether the determination that the property is vacant
and abandoned is made by the public officer, as defined in Chapter 12,
§ 12-7, pursuant to the provisions of this section 12, § 12-8 of this Code,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73, or otherwise.
§ 12-8.3. Notice to Creditor; Time to Correct Violations.
If the public officer, or other authorized Township official, determines that
a creditor obligated to care, maintain, secure and keep up a vacant and
abandoned property has failed to do so in violation of the provisions of this
section 12, § 12-8 or Chapter 12, § 12-7 of this Code, the Public Officer
or other authorized Township official shall issue a notice of violation to
the creditor that has filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on the
property in question. The notice shall require the person or entity to correct
the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice. If the violation presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety, then remedial action must
be completed within 10 days of receipt of notice. The issuance of this
notice shall constitute prima facie evidence that a property is "vacant and
abandoned" for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
responsible for receiving complaints of property maintenance and code
violations pursuant to paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
b. An out-of-state creditor that serves a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a residential property within the Township must
include the full name and contact information of an in-state
representative or agent who shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the property if it
becomes vacant and abandoned pursuant to paragraph one of N.J.S.A.
46:10B-51.
c. In the event a property being foreclosed on is an affordable unit
pursuant to the "Fair Housing Act" (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.), the
creditor shall provide notice to the Township Clerk within 10 days of
service of a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on the
mortgage advising the property is subject to the "Fair Housing Act,"
include the street address, lot and block number of the property, and
the full name and contact information of an individual located within
the state who is authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor
pursuant to paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51.
§ 12-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8.4
1:277
§ 12-8.4. Failure to Designate Representative of Out-of-State
Creditor; Violation.
An out-of-state creditor found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 shall be subject to a fine of
$2,500 for each day of the violation commencing on the day after the tenday
period set forth in paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 and § 12-8.1
of this Code with respect to notifying the Township clerk that an action to
foreclose on the property has been filed.
§ 12-8.5. Violations and Penalties.
§ 12-8.6. Additional Notice Required.
Notice of violations of property maintenance, building or other property
codes for any property declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to this
section shall be given to a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the procedures
of § 12-8.3 of this Code as required by P.L. 2014, c. 35.
§ 12-8.7. Statutory Consistency.
All sections hereof arising from or citing a specific statutory reference shall
be deemed as automatically adopting any amendment to such statute(s) as
may be consistent with the Township's purposes in enacting this section.
§ 12-8.8. Severability and Repealer.
If any provision or portion of a provision of this section is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the section
shall not be invalidated. All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances, which
are inconsistent with any provisions of this section, are hereby repealed as
to the extent of such inconsistencies.
a. Except as set forth in § 12-7.418 and herein, any person, firm,
corporation or entity violating any provision of this section 12, § 12-8,
or Chapter 12, § 12-7 of this Code shall, upon conviction, be punishable
as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-5, of this Code. A creditor required to
care, maintain, secure and keep up a property under this section, cited
in a notice issued pursuant to § 12-8.3, shall be subject to a fine of
$1,500 for each day of the violation.
b. The Township shall have the same recourse against any creditor as it
would against the title owner of the property if the Township, as a
matter of public necessity or safety, unilaterally decides to expend
public funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct a violation on a
property in situations in which the creditor was given notice, but failed
to abate the nuisance or correct the violation pursuant to N.J.S.A.
46:10B-51 or pursuant to any other statutory or common law authority.
18.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 12-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 12-8.9
1:278
§ 12-8.9. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect following adoption and publication in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 12-8.10. No Waiver of Other or Additional Remedial Rights.
Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to waive, limit or
interfere with any other or additional rights the Township or private
individual may have or acquire, with regard to the condemnation,
remediation, injunctive relief, damages and fees, from other regulations,
statutes, common law or ordinances concerning remedial or enforcement
actions against properties (their owners, occupiers and interest holders)
which are abandoned, vacant, a public nuisance or constitute some threat
or impediment to the publics' interest, health or safety.
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 13-1. REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS, BRUSH, AND OTHER
DEBRIS.
§ 13-1.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 4-4.1; Ord. No. 10-1992; Ord.
19-2005 § II]
As used in this section:
DEBRIS — shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
including but not limited to the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and
other combustible materials; the term shall also include but is not limited
to household garbage, litter, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, plastic, leather, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery,
aluminum, automobile parts, tires, dust and other similar materials.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
WEEDS — shall include but is not limited to all grasses, annual plants
and vegetation other than trees, shrubs or wetlands; this term shall not be
interpreted to include cultivated flowers and gardens.
YARD WASTE — shall mean leaves only.
§ 12-8.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1.2
1:279
§ 13-1.2. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. 19-2005 § III]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste at the curb
or along the street is only allowed during the seven (7) days prior to a
scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed closer than
ten (10) feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at
the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a
violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party
responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste from
the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this section.
Grass clippings are not picked up the Township. Residents may either leave
the grass clippings on their lawn or take the clippings to the Grass Drop
Off Center at the Monmouth County Reclamation Center located on Asbury
Avenue in Tinton Falls. Call 732-918-0142 for drop off times. There is a fee
for this service.
Brush and branches are not picked up by the Public Works Department.
They are picked up by the garbage hauler. All brush and branches must be
tied in small bundles no longer than four (4) feet and each branch should
not be wider than three (3) inches in diameter. Only two (2) bundles will
be picked up with each regular garbage pickup. Scheduled garbage and
recyclable pickup times are available in the Township's calendar and on
the website. All brush and branches that do not comply with the above
limitations shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 13-1.3. Notification to Owners. [1973 Code § 4-4.2; Ord. No.
10-1992]
Whenever it shall appear necessary and expedient to the Township Manager
for the preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare, or to
eliminate a fire hazard, to remove from lands lying within the limits of
the Township debris, brush, weeds and plant growth in excess of ten (10)
inches, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage and trash, the Township Manager or such other officer of the
Township as the Township Manager may designate from time to time, shall
cause notice to be given to the owner, tenant, occupants or person in control
of such lands, and the owner, tenant, occupants or persons in control of
the property shall, within ten (10) days after receipt of this notice remove
the items and maintain the property in accordance with the provisions
of this section. This notice shall be delivered either in person or sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter
is returned to the Township with receipt showing that it has not been
delivered, then a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous space
at the property in question. The notice shall inform the owner, tenant,
occupants or person in control of such lands of the obligation to comply
with this section, as well as the obligation by the Township to act to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare upon a determination
of noncompliance with its provisions.
§ 13-1.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 13-1.4
1:280
§ 13-1.4. Penalties. [1973 Code § 4-4.3; Ord. No. 10-1992; New]
§ 13-1.5. Removal by Township. [1973 Code § 4-4.4; Ord. No.
10-1992]
In cases where the owner, tenant, occupants or person in control of any
such lands refuses or neglects to remove the debris, brush, weeds, dead and
dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage and trash after
notice has been received as provided above, and in the manner required by
the Township, the same may be removed by or under the direction of the
Township Manager or such other officer of the Township as the Township
Manager may designate.
§ 13-1.6. Recovery of Costs. [1973 Code § 4-4.5; Ord. No. 10-1992]
In cases where the aforesaid debris, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage and trash are removed
from any lands as provided for herein, by or under the direction of the
Township Manager or such other officer as the Township Manager may
designate, the Township Manager or such other officer shall certify the cost
thereof to the Township Council who shall examine the certificate and, if
found correct, shall cause the cost as shown on the certificate to be charged
against the lands. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such
lands and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and the same manner as taxes, as provided for pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14.
§ 13-2. REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
a. A violation of this section shall subject the person upon conviction to
one or more of the following: imprisonment for a period not to exceed
ninety (90) days; a fine not to exceed two thousand ($2,000) dollars or
to a period of community service not to exceed ninety (90) days. Such
penalties shall be applicable regardless of the number of convictions for
violation of this particular section.
b. In addition to the penalties set forth above, pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, a person violating this section within one (1) year of
the date of the previous violation of this section, and who was fined or
penalized for the previous violation shall be sentenced by a court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than one
hundred ($100) dollars nor more than two thousand ($2,000) dollars
and shall be calculated separate and apart from the fine imposed for the
repeated violation of this section.
§ 13-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.1
1:281
§ 13-2.1. Owner to Maintain Sidewalk and Curb. [1973 Code
§ 4-14.1; Ord. No. 24-1982]
The sidewalk and curb shall be kept in good maintenance and repair by the
owner or owners of the property in front of which the sidewalk and curb are
located.
§ 13-2.2. Owners' Duty to Repair. [1973 Code § 4-14.2; Ord. No.
24-1982]
In accordance with the notice procedures provided in subsection 13-2.3, any
sidewalk or curb on any public street which is out of line or grade, or broken
or out of repair, or is otherwise in need of construction or repair shall be
relaid to line or grade or the broken portions thereof shall be repaired or
reconstructed by the owner or owners of the land in front of which any
such improvement, reconstruction or repair is to be made. This subsection
shall not apply to any sidewalk or curb during the period it is covered by a
performance or maintenance bond.
§ 13-2.3. Notice to Repair. [1973 Code § 4-14.3; Ord. No. 24-1982]
Whenever the Township Engineer or Director of Public Works/Engineer
determines that such sidewalk or curb work is necessary, he shall cause
notice thereof, duly signed by himself, to be served upon such owner or
owners directing him to do the work within sixty (60) days after service
of the notice. The notices shall specify in sufficient detail the character of
the improvement, reconstruction or repair to be made. It shall set forth
a description of the property affected sufficiently definite to identify the
same and shall otherwise comply with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:65-1,
etc., for such cases made and provided. The notice shall give opportunity
to such owner or owners to be heard and to offer satisfactory reasons to
the Township Engineer or Director of Public Works/Engineer, as the case
may be, why such work should not be done. Service of the notice and proof
of service thereof shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 40:65-1, etc.
§ 13-2.4. Failure of Owner to Repair. [1973 Code § 4-14.4; Ord. No.
24-1982]
If, in the absence of any good and sufficient reason why such work should
not be done, the owner fails to make such improvement, reconstruction or
repair within sixty (60) days after service of the notice aforesaid, then the
Township Engineer or Director of Public Works/Engineer may have the work
done at the cost and expense of the owner or owners, and he shall keep
an accurate account of the cost thereof. The cost thereof shall be assessed
against the owner or owners of the land in front of the improvement or
repair, and a report thereof shall be filed with the Township Clerk. The
Governing Body, after notice to the owner or owners, shall confirm the
report and file it with the Tax Collector. Such sidewalk or curb assessment
shall bear interest from the time of confirmation and shall be a lien on the
§ 13-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 13-2.4
1:282
real estate assessed and shall be collected in the same manner as taxes and
other legal assessments.
§ 13-2.5. Obstructing Public Thoroughfares. [1973 Code § 4-14.5;
Ord. No. 24-1982]
§ 13-2.6. Burning on Asphalt Prohibited. [1973 Code § 4-14.6; Ord.
No. 24-1982]
The making, lighting, starting or maintenance of any fire upon any street,
roadway or curb improved with asphalt, bituminous substance or any
substance other than natural earth, gravel or sand is hereby prohibited.
§ 13-2.7. Removal of Grass, Bushes, Branches. [1973 Code § 4-14.7;
Ord. No. 24-1982]
The owner or tenant of any land abutting upon a public highway, street
and avenue in the Township shall remove all grass, weeds, hedges, bushes,
low hanging branches and other impediments from the abutting sidewalks,
sidelines or gutters of such highways within three (3) days after written
notice to remove the same, and shall remove all grass, weeds, hedges,
bushes, low hanging branches and other impediments from the portion
of any public highway, street or avenue which shall be a hindrance to or
obstruct the view of operators of vehicles using such public highway, street
or avenue, within three (3) days after written notice to remove same.
§ 13-2.8. Removal Notice. [1973 Code § 4-14.8; Ord. No. 24-1982]
The written notice provided in subsection 13-2.7 for directing the removal
of grass, weeds, hedges, bushes, low hanging branches or other
impediments shall be prepared by the Director of Public Works over his
signature and shall identify the lands abutting on the highways, streets
or avenues and shall contain a short statement relating in detail and
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in or
upon any public sidewalk, street or other form of public easement any
object, thing or obstruction of any kind in such manner as to interfere
with the use of the easement by the general public.
b. The provisions of paragraph a. of this subsection shall particularly
apply but shall not be limited to boxes, crates, displays of merchandise
or produce, carts and the like.
c. Persons who store vehicles or apparatus of any nature which either
encroach directly upon a public sidewalk or parts of which project over
the sidewalk shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
d. Articles placed in the easement in the course of the making of
commercial pickups or deliveries shall be excepted from the provisions
of this subsection; provided, that such articles shall be removed from
the easement within a reasonable time.
§ 13-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2.8
1:283
identifying such grass, weeds, hedges, bushes, low hanging branches or
other impediments which are directed to be removed. Such notice shall
also contain a statement that the violation of the terms of such section is
punishable by fine.
Such notice may be served upon the owner or tenant, resident of the
Township in person, or by leaving the same at his house or place of
residence with a member of his family above the age of fourteen (14) years.
In case any such owner shall not reside in the Township, such notice may be
served upon him personally or mailed to his last known post office address
or it may be served upon the occupant of the property, or upon the agent
in charge thereof. In case the owner of any such property is unknown or
service cannot for any reason be made as above directed, notice thereof
shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating in the Township
and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises.
§ 13-2.9. Removal of Items by Township; Cost to Be Lien. [1973
Code § 4-14.9; Ord. No. 24-1982]
If the owner or tenant of any land abutting upon a public highway, street
and avenue of the Township shall violate the provisions of subsection 13-2.8,
the Director of the Department of Public Works may remove all of grass,
weeds, hedges, bushes, low hanging branches or other impediments and
after such removal, the Superintendent of Streets shall certify the costs
thereof to the Mayor and Township Council, which shall examine the
certificate, and if found correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to
be charged against the lands abutting on the public highway, street and
avenue. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such lands and
shall be assessed and levied upon such lands, shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers in the
same manner as taxes.
§ 13-3. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 13-3.1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. [1973 Code
§ 11-3.1; Ord. No. 20-1986 § 1; Ord. No. 17-1988; Ord. No. 4-2012
§ 1]
The "2009 International Property Maintenance Code" as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of Aberdeen in the State of New Jersey;
for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided; and each
and all of the regulations of the "2009 International Property Maintenance
Code" are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
added, changed or supplemented. Three (3) copies of the same are on file in
the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 13-2.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 13-3.1
1:284
Any and all references to the BOCA National Existing Structures Code/
1987 in this Chapter 13 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township
of Aberdeen shall now automatically refer to, and incorporate, the 2009
International Property Maintenance Code.
§ 13-3.2. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [1973 Code § 11-3.2;
Ord. No. 20-1986 § 2]
Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 13-3.3. Saving Clause. [1973 Code § 11-3.3; Ord. No. 20-1986 § 3]
Nothing in this section or in the Basic Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquitted, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in subsection 12-3.2 of this section; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy or any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
section.
§ 13-3.4. Right to Appeal. [2007 Code § 12-2.2; Ord. No. 4-2012 § 2]
The following provisions of the "2009 International Property Maintenance
Code" are hereby deleted, added, changed or supplemented to read as
follows:
Section 111 Right of Appeal. There is hereby appointed an appeal official
who shall be the Township Manager.
Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the
Enforcing Officer, in any matter relative to the interpretation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of the Housing Code may appeal the
decision or interpretation to the Township Manager.
The appeal must be filed with the Township Manager in writing, requesting
a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
twenty (20) days after receipt of the ruling or decision of enforcing officer.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Township Manager shall set a time and
place for a hearing and shall give the petitioner notice thereof. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and to
show cause why such ruling or decision of the Enforcing Officer should be
modified or withdrawn.
After such hearing, the Township Manager shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the ruling or decision of the Enforcing Officer depending upon his
findings as to whether the provisions of this subsection and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with.
The proceedings of such hearing, including the findings and decisions of the
Township Manager, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered
§ 13-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3.4
1:285
as a matter of public record in the office of the Building Department. Such
record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Manager may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction,
as provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Whenever the Township Manager finds that an emergency exists, which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
subsection, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon written
petition to the Township Manager, shall be afforded a hearing within fortyeight
(48) hours. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to
whether the provisions of this subsection and of any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Township Manager
shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 13-3.5. (Reserved) [Former subsection 13-3.5, Licensing,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code
§ 11-3.5, Ord. No. 20-1986, Ord. No. 17-1988, Ord. No. 10-1999 and
Ord. No. 37-2005 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
4-2012.]
§ 13-4. DUTY TO REMOVE SNOW AND ICE; ENFORCEMENT.
[Added 10-20-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2015]
a. Duty of Owners.
1. It shall be the duty of the owner of any residential lot, parcel of land
or real property in the Township abutting or bordering on the
sidewalks of a public street to remove or cause to be removed all
snow and ice from the sidewalk area in front of or bordering upon
the owner's lands within 24 hours of the cessation of any storm or
fall of snow or ice, as determined by the Director of the Department
of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard, such
as the National Weather Service reports. Said snow or ice shall be
so removed so that an unobstructed portion of the sidewalk area is
open and cleared to a width of at least three feet.
2. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any nonresidential
lot, parcel of land or real property in the Township abutting or
bordering on the sidewalks of a public street to remove or cause to
be removed all snow and ice from the sidewalk area in front of or
bordering upon the owner's lands within 12 hours of the cessation
of any storm or fall of snow or ice, as determined by the Director of
the Department of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective
standard, such as the National Weather Service reports. Said snow
or ice shall be so removed so that an unobstructed portion of the
§ 13-3.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 13-4
1:286
sidewalk area is open and cleared to a width of at least three feet.
The owners of any premises used for any nonresidential purposes
shall, in addition to the removal of snow and ice on sidewalks,
remove or cause to be removed any and all snow and ice from
parking lots, walkways and any other areas used by their
customers or employees.
3. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of any parking lot
which is open to the public or to which the public is invited and
which contains special parking spaces for the use of persons who
have been issued a placard or wheelchair symbol license plates
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq., to be responsible for assuring
that access to these special parking spaces and to curb cuts or
other improvements designed to provide accessibility for
handicapped persons is not obstructed.
(a) If snow or ice is obstructing such special parking space, curb
cut or other improvement designed to provide accessibility for
the handicapped on a residential lot, same shall be removed
within 24 hours of the cessation of any storm or fall of snow or
ice, as determined by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard, such as
the National Weather Service reports.
(b) If snow or ice is obstructing such special parking space, curb
cut or other improvement designed to provide accessibility for
the handicapped on a nonresidential lot, same shall be
removed within 12 hours of the cessation of any storm or fall of
snow or ice, as determined by the Director of the Department
of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective standard,
such as the National Weather Service reports.
4. Ice which is so frozen as to make removal impractical shall either
be treated with rock salt or other chemicals which will thaw the ice
sufficiently to permit removal or be thoroughly covered with sand,
ashes or cinders.
5. In the case of condominium developments, the condominium
association may designate, in writing, primary and secondary
walkways which shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Department of Public Works. Any walkways not specifically
designated in writing and approved as secondary walkways shall be
presumed to be primary walkways. Snow shall be removed from all
primary walkways within 24 hours and shall be removed from all
secondary walkways within 72 hours of the cessation of any storm
or fall of snow or ice as determined by the Director of the
Department of Public Works, based upon a reasonably objective
standard, such as the National Weather Service reports, and, if
same cannot be wholly removed from such primary and secondary
walkways, sand, salt or other proper substance shall be sprinkled
§ 13-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-4
1:287
Chapter 14
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 14-1. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM
FIRE SAFETY CODE.
§ 14-1.1. Local Enforcement Authority. [1973 Code § 10-13.1; Ord.
No. 24-1985 § 1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the
established limits of Fire Districts No. 1 and No. 2, Aberdeen Township.
thereon so that such primary and secondary walkways shall be safe
for travel.
b. The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his designee, shall
be primarily charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this
section with respect to public streets and shall cause prosecutions for
violations thereof to be instituted before the Judge of the Municipal
Court with all reasonable dispatch. In addition, the Director of the
Department of Public Works and the Police Department shall have
concurrent authority to enforce the provisions of this section with
respect to public streets. The Director of the Department of Public
Works, or his designee, shall be primarily charged with the enforcement
of the provisions of this section with respect to private property and
commercial, industrial and multifamily properties and shall cause
prosecutions for violations thereof to be instituted before the Judge of
the Municipal Court with all reasonable dispatch. In addition to the
Director of the Department of Public Works, and/or his designee, and
the Police Department shall have concurrent authority to enforce the
provisions of this section with respect to private property and
commercial, industrial and multifamily properties. The applicable
enforcement authority or any department with concurrent enforcement
authority shall not be required to serve a violation notice or like
correspondence to violators of the provisions of this section and shall
have the right to immediately issue summonses to any violators of the
provisions of this section.
c. In cases where the owner has failed and/or refused to remove said snow
and/or ice or has failed to provide for the covering of any icy patches
within the time frames provided by this section, the applicable
enforcement authority or his designee shall have the power to cause the
said snow or ice to be removed or covered, as the case may be, the sole
cost and expense of which shall be borne by the owner, which shall be a
lien against the property collectible in the same manner as real
property taxes.
§ 13-4 ABERDEEN CODE § 14-1.2
1:288
§ 14-1.2. Agency Designation. [1973 Code § 10-13.2; Ord. No.
24-1985 § 2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the respective Bureau of Fire Prevention
established by the Board of Fire Commissioners of Fire Districts No. 1 and
No. 2 within the limits established by ordinance. (See subsections 14-2.1
and 14-2.2 of this Code)
§ 14-1.3. Duties. [1973 Code § 10-13.3; Ord. No. 24-1985 § 3]
The local enforcement agencies shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Uniform Fire Code and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of their Fire
Districts, other than owner-occupied one and two-family dwellings, as
follows:
a. Fire District No. 1: Beginning at the Matawan Creek where the same is
intersected by the westerly line of State Highway Route No. 35 running
thence (1) southeasterly along the westerly side of State Highway
Route No. 35 to the boundary line of the Borough of Keyport; thence (2)
following the boundary line in the Borough of Keyport southerly to
Lloyd Road; thence (3) along Lloyd Road to Line Road; thence (4) along
Line Road along the boundary lines of Hazlet Township and Holmdel
Township to the Marlboro Township line; thence (5) northwesterly
along the Marlboro Township line to the boundary line of the Borough
of Matawan; thence (6) generally northerly and generally easterly the
several courses along the boundary line of the Borough of Matawan to
Matawan Creek; thence (7) along Matawan Creek in a generally
northeasterly direction to the place of beginning.
Beginning at the corner common to the Township of Aberdeen and
the Township of Marlboro and in the easterly outline of the Township
of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey; thence (1)
northeasterly along the boundary line of the Township of Old Bridge,
County of Middlesex, to its intersection with the Borough of Matawan
at the Matawan-Old Bridge Road; then (2) southeasterly and southerly
along the boundary line of the Borough of Matawan its several courses
to the northerly boundary of the Township of Marlboro; thence (3)
westerly along the boundary line of the Township of Marlboro to the
place of beginning.
b. Fire District No. 2: Beginning at the Matawan Creek where the same is
intersected by the westerly line of State Highway Route No. 35; running
thence (1) southerly along Matawan Creek to the boundary line of the
Borough of Matawan; thence (2) westerly and northwesterly along the
boundary line of the Borough of Matawan to the boundary line of the
Township of Old Bridge in the County of Middlesex; thence (3)
northeasterly along the boundary line of the Township of Old Bridge
and Whale Creek to Raritan Bay; thence (4) easterly and southeasterly
along the shore line of Raritan Bay to Matawan Creek; thence (5)
southwesterly along Matawan Creek to the point or place of beginning.
§ 14-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.4
1:289
§ 14-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [1973 Code § 10-13.4; Ord. No. 24-1985
§ 4]
Each local enforcing agency established by subsection 14-1.2 above shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 14-1.5. Organization. [1973 Code § 10-13.5; Ord. No. 24-1985 § 5]
Each local enforcing agency established by subsection 14-1.2 above shall
be a part of the Fire District and shall be under the supervision of the
Board of Fire Commissioners. Such funds as may be necessary to support
the operations of the agency shall be appropriated to the Fire District each
year or shall be raised by the district in the manner provided by law.
§ 14-1.6. Appointments, Term of Office, Removal. [1973 Code
§ 10-13.6; Ord. No. 24-1985 § 6]
§ 14-1.7. Board of Appeals. [1973 Code § 10-13.7; Ord. No. 24-1985
§ 7; Ord. No. 34-2005 § 2]
All appeals shall be made to the Monmouth County Construction Board of
Appeal.
§ 14-1.8. Additional Required Inspections and Fees. [1973 Code
§ 10-13.8; Ord. No. 24-1985 § 8; Ord. No. 34-2005 § 3]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
Ord. No. 15-1978 — Smoke Alarm — Fee shall be paid to inspecting fire
districts:
a. Appointment of Fire Official. Each local enforcing agency shall be under
the direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the
Board of Fire Commissioners of fire districts No. 1 and No. 2,
respectively.
b. Term of Office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of four (4) years.
c. Inspectors and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by
each Board of Fire Commissioners upon the recommendation of the
Fire Official.
d. Removal from Office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by their respective Board of Fire
Commissioners for inefficiency or misconduct. Each inspector or
employee to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard
by the appointing authority or a designated hearing officer.
§ 14-1.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 14-1.8
1:290
§ 14-1.9. Permits. [1973 Code § 10-13.9; Ord. No. 24-1985 § 9: Ord.
No. 1-2002 § 5; Ord. No. 34-2005 § 4]
The fees for permits required by the Uniform Fire Code are established
below:
Type 1 $42.00;
Type 2 $166.00;
Type 3 $331.00;
Type 4 $497.00;
Type 5 Reserved
§ 14-1.10. Non-Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. No. 1-2002 § 6; Ord. No.
17-2014]
In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life hazard uses shall register with the Bureaus of Fire
Prevention in each of the two areas of the Township. These uses shall be
inspected once per year and pay the annual fee set forth in the following
schedule:
Square Feet Amount
0 - 1,000 $40.00
1,001 - 2,000 $45.00
2,001 - 3,000 $50.00
3,001 - 4,000 $55.00
4,001 - 5,000 $60.00
5,001 - 6,000 $65.00
6,001 - 7,000 $70.00
7,001 - 8,000 $75.00
8,001 - 9,000 $80.00
9,001 - 10,000 $85.00
1. Requests for a CSDCMAC received more than ten (10) business days
prior to the change of occupant: thirty-five ($35.00) dollars;
2. Requests for a CSDCMAC received four (4) to ten (10) business days
prior to the change of occupant: seventy ($70.00) dollars; and
3. Requests for a CSDCMAC received fewer than four (4) business days
prior to the change of occupant: one hundred twenty-five ($125.00)
dollars.
Ord. No. 15-1979 — Certificate of Occupancy; Commercial and
Industrial — shall be forty ($40.00) dollars to the Township of
Aberdeen.
§ 14-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.10
1:291
Square Feet Amount
10,001 - 11,000 $90.00
11,001 - 12,000 $95.00
12,001 square feet and over that are not
defined as a life hazard use in N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et
seq. as amended.
$100.00
§ 14-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICTS.
§ 14-2.1. Fire District No. 1. [1973 Code § 2-23.1]
District No. 1 shall be and the same hereby is established and designated as
follows:
"The Commissioners of Fire District No. 1 in the Township of Aberdeen and
County of Monmouth," District No. 1 shall comprise all of that portion of the
Township bounded and described by the following two tracts:
Beginning at the Matawan Creek where the same is intersected by the
westerly line of State Highway Route No. 35 running thence (1)
southeasterly along the westerly side of State Highway Route No. 35 to the
boundary line of the Borough of Keyport; thence (2) following the boundary
line in the Borough of Keyport southerly to Lloyd Road, thence (3) along
Lloyd Road to Line Road; thence (4) along Line Road along the boundary
lines of Hazlet Township and Holmdel Township to the Marlboro Township
line, thence (5) northwesterly along the Marlboro Township line to the
boundary line of the Borough of Matawan; thence (6) gradually northerly
and generally easterly the several courses along the boundary line of the
Borough of Matawan to Matawan Creek; thence (7) along Matawan Creek
in a general northeasterly direction to the place of beginning.
Beginning at the corner common to the Township of Aberdeen and the
Township of Marlboro and in the easterly outline of the Township of Old
Bridge, County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey; thence (1) northeasterly
along the boundary line of the Township of Old Bridge, County of Middlesex,
to its intersection with the Borough of Matawan at the Matawan-Old Bridge
Road; thence (2) southeasterly and southerly along the boundary line of the
Borough of Matawan its several courses to the northerly boundary of the
Township of Marlboro; thence (3) westerly along the boundary line of the
Township of Marlboro to the place of beginning.
§ 14-2.2. Fire District No. 2. [1973 Code § 2-23.2]
District No. 2 shall be and the same is hereby established and designated as
follows:
"The Commissioners of Fire District No. 2, in the Township of Aberdeen and
County of Monmouth," District No. 2 shall comprise all of that portion of the
township bounded and described as follows:
§ 14-1.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 14-2.2
1:292
Beginning at the Matawan Creek where the same is intersected by the
westerly line of State Highway Route No. 35; running thence (1) southerly
along Matawan Creek to the boundary line of the Borough of Matawan;
thence (2) westerly and northwesterly along the boundary line of the
Borough of Matawan to the boundary line of the Township of Old Bridge in
the County of Middlesex; thence (3) northeasterly along the boundary line
of the Township of Old Bridge and Whale Creek to Raritan Bay; thence (4)
easterly and southeasterly along the shore line of Raritan Bay to Matawan
Creek; thence (5) southwesterly along Matawan Creek to the point or place
of beginning.
§ 14-3. AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
§ 14-3.1. Restrictions on Grills, Barbecues or Similar Devices. [Ord.
No. 3-2007 § II]
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
PUBLIC WORKS
a. In all residential units in which two (2) or more families reside, the
following conditions and/or restrictions shall be prohibited:
1. No grill, barbecue, stove or similar device burning wood, charcoal,
paper or any flammable gas or liquid shall be stored or used on, or
under, any balcony of any structure. This prohibition will not apply
to electric grills.
§ 14-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3.1
1:293

ARTICLE I
Divisions Of The Department Of Public Works
§ 16-1. DIVISIONS ESTABLISHED. [New]
a. The following Divisions have been established under the Department of
Public Works:
1. Division of Sanitation and Recycling;
2. Division of Streets and Roads;
3. Division of Buildings and Grounds;
4. Division of Park Maintenance;
5. Division of Water and Sewer;
6. Division of Public Works; and
7. Division of Public Property.
b. Supervision. All Divisions shall be under the control and supervision of
the Director of the Department of Public Works and the Township
Manager.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:295

ARTICLE II
Functions Of The Division Of Sanitation And Recycling
§ 16-2. GARBAGE COLLECTION DISTRICT.
§ 16-2.1. Established. [1973 Code § 2-28.1; Ord. No. 24-1978; Ord.
No. 6-1991]
There is hereby set off, created and established as a garbage collection
district, to be designated as Garbage Collection District No. 1, the lands
and territories situate within the corporate boundaries of the Township of
Aberdeen, County of Monmouth and State of New Jersey.
§ 16-2.2. Responsibility for Garbage Removal. [1973 Code § 2-28.2;
Ord. No. 24-1978; Ord No. 6-1991]
The Township Council shall provide for the collection, removal and disposal
of garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter or material in accordance with
the terms and conditions set forth in an agreement between the Township
of Aberdeen and the contractor responsible for the collection and removal
of the material, and in addition, the Township Council may establish such
reasonable rules and regulations consistent with the agreement as it may
deem necessary or expedient.
Editor's Note: See Section 3-17, Restrictions on Placement of Solid Waste
Receptacles.
§ 16-2.3. Assessments: Manner of Collection; Amount. [1973 Code
§ 2-28.3; Ord. No. 24-1978; Ord No. 6-1991]
There shall be raised, by levying and collecting, at the same time and in
the same manner as other Township taxes, within the limits of the garbage
collection district, sufficient monies to provide for the payment of the cost
of removing and disposing of the garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter
from the district.
§ 16-2.4. Costs to Be a Lien on the Lands. [1973 Code § 2-28.4; Ord.
No. 6-1991]
All monies assessed and levied as aforesaid shall be a lien upon the lands
and premises against which they shall be assessed, in the same manner
that taxes are made a lien against lands in the Township of Aberdeen, and
the payment thereof shall be enforced with the same time and in the same
manner and by the same proceedings as the payment of taxes is enforced
within the Township.
§ 16-2.5. Assessments; Applicability; Exceptions. [1973 Code
§ 2-28.5; Ord. No. 6-1991]
The cost of collecting, removing and disposing of garbage, rubbish and
other refuse material shall be raised by assessing and levying against
§ 16-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.5
1:297
those residences, apartments and dwellings as provided for in the contract
between the Township and the garbage collector within the limits of the
Garbage Collection District No. 1. Condominiums are excluded from this
garbage collection district and shall provide for cost of collecting, removing
and disposing of garbage, rubbish and other refuse material, individually.
§ 16-3. RECYCLING COORDINATOR. [1973 Code § 16-3; Ord. No.
6-1987 § 3; Ord. No. 2-2010]
§ 16-4. COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
§ 16-4.1. Findings. [1973 Code § 2-29.1; Ord. No. 28-1980,
Preamble; Ord. No. 2-2010]
By reason of the growing problem of solid waste disposal and its impact
on our environment, conservation of recycling materials have become an
important public concern. There is an increasing necessity to conserve our
material resources. The collection of newspapers, corrugated cardboard,
clean mixed paper, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans, glass bottles and
a. Established. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created
and established within the Township of Aberdeen.
b. Manager or Designee. The Recycling Coordinator shall be the Township
Manager or his designee.
1. Duties of the Recycling Coordinator shall include, but are not
limited to: the preparation of annual or other reports as required by
the State and County agencies regarding local solid waste and
recycling programs, reviewing the performance of local schools
and municipal agencies in conducting recycling activities, periodic
review of local residential and business recycling practices and
compliance, review and recommendation on local subdivision and
site plan submittals and local construction and demolition projects
for appropriate waste disposal and recycling provisions.
2. The Recycling Coordinator shall be required to comply with the
Certification Requirements for Municipal Recycling Coordinators,
as established by the State of New Jersey. The Recycling
Coordinator shall have completed or be in the process of
completing the requirements for certification as a "Certified
Recycling Professional" (CRP) no later than January 13, 2012, as
required by the New Jersey Recycling Enhancement Act.
c. Rules and Regulations. The Township Manager or his designee, subject
to the approval of the Township Council, shall establish and promulgate
reasonable rules and regulations as to the manner, days and times for
the collection, sorting, transportation, sale and/or marketing of the
recyclable materials in order to encourage the preservation of material
resources while minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the
Township of Aberdeen.
§ 16-2.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-4.1
1:298
jars, and pourable plastic bottles, for recycling purposes from residences
in the Township of Aberdeen will foster and promote the general public
welfare.
§ 16-4.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 2-29.2; Ord. No. 28-1980, § 1;
Ord. No. 4-2007 § III; Ord. No. 2-2010]
As used in this chapter:
ALUMINUM CANS — shall mean all disposable cans made of aluminum
used for food or beverages. Specifically excluded are aluminum foils, pie
tins, trays cookware and other aluminum products.
CLEAN MIXED PAPER — shall mean high grade bond paper, mixed office
and school papers, such as stationery, construction paper and writing
tablets, including computer printouts, magazines, gift wrapping paper, soft
cover books, junk mail and single layer cardboard (chipboard). Specifically
excluded are carbon papers, hard cover books (unless cover and binder
are removed), paper cups and plates, food wrappers or any other paper
contaminated by direct contact with food products, and paper products
used for personal hygiene, such as tissues.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS — shall include all
asphalt, concrete, tree stumps, brush, land clearing debris, pallets, waste
lumber and other material generated from construction and demolition
projects.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — shall mean layered cardboard including a
waffled section between the layers, of the type commonly used to make
boxes and cartons. Specifically excluded are waxed cardboard and any
cardboard contaminated by direct contact with food, such as pizza boxes.
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS — shall mean transparent or translucent
containers made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, used for
the packaging or bottling of various products. Specifically excluded are
dishware, light bulbs, window glass, ceramics and other glass products.
NEWSPAPER — shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint, and includes any inserts which are normally
included in the newspaper. Specifically excluded are any pages of the
newspaper used for household projects, or used for cleanup of pet waste.
PERSON — shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
POURABLE PLASTIC CONTAINERS — shall mean plastic bottles where the
neck is smaller than the body of the container, and is limited to plastic
resin type #1 PET and plastic resin type #2 HDPE. Specifically excluded are
other resin types (#2 through #7) and non-bottle plastic containers such
as margarine tubs and other consumer items and packages, such as film
plastics, blister packaging, boxes, baskets, toys and other products.
§ 16-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4.2
1:299
SOLID WASTE — shall mean all garbage and rubbish normally produced
by the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and
disposed of by private or public pickup.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — shall mean all disposable cans made of tin,
steel or a combination of metals including, but not limited to, containers
commonly used for food products. Specifically excluded are cans which
contain toxic products, such as paints and oils.
§ 16-4.3. Interlocal Services Agreement. [1973 Code § 2-29.3; Ord.
No. 28-1980, § 2; Ord. No. 2-2010]
Pursuant to the Interlocal Service Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the Township
Council is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement the form of which
is annexed hereto and made a part hereof by and among the municipalities
to be determined.
§ 16-4.4. Mandatory Separation of Recyclable Materials. [1973 Code
§ 2-29.5; Ord. No. 28-1980 § 4; Ord. No. 2-2010]
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and
occupants of residential properties, of business and industrial
properties and of private or public and government institutions and
buildings, in the Township to separate newspapers, corrugated
cardboard, clean mixed paper, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans,
glass bottles and jars, and pourable plastic bottles, ("designated
recyclables"), from all other solid waste produced by such residences
and establishments, for the separate collection and ultimate recycling
of such materials.
b. Residences, businesses and institutions provided with recyclables
collection service by municipal forces or through municipal contract
shall place all designated recyclables in the appropriate containers at
curbside or other area(s) in the manner and schedule as regularly
published and distributed by the municipality.
c. Any multi-family complex, business or institution not provided
recyclables collection service by municipal forces or through municipal
contract shall be responsible for arranging the appropriate separation,
storage, collection and ultimate recycling of all designated recyclables.
d. Any multi-family complex, business or institution which is not provided
recyclables collection service by municipal forces or through municipal
contract shall provide the municipality with, at a minimum, an annual
report describing arrangements for both solid waste and recyclables
collection services, including the size, number and location of storage
containers, frequency of pickup service, the name and address of any
contractor hired to provide such service, and phone and other contact
information for the contractor.
§ 16-4.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-4.5
1:300
§ 16-4.5. Bundling Regulations. [1973 Code § 2-29.6; Ord. No.
28-1980, § 5; Ord. No. 2-2010]
Such newspapers and cardboard shall be compacted and shall be tied
securely in bundles not exceeding fifty (50) pounds in weight with a rope
or cord sufficient in strength to facilitate handling. Such bundles shall be
placed separately at the curb for collection as provided in the garbage
ordinance prior to the collection.
§ 16-4.6. Violation for Unauthorized Persons to Collect Newspapers.
[1973 Code § 2-29.8; Ord. No. 28-1980, § 7; Ord. No. 2-2010]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person not authorized by the
Township to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
newspapers at the curb as provided by this section.
§ 16-4.7. Certain Separate Newspaper Drives Allowed. [1973 Code
§ 2-29.9; Ord. No. 28-1980, § 8; Ord. No. 2-2010]
This section is in no way intended to prohibit separate newspaper drives
by outside charitable organizations on days other than those designated for
collection by the Township.
§ 16-4.8. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 2-29.12; Ord. No. 28-1980,
§ 11; Ord. No. 2-2010]
§ 16-5. RECYCLING.
§ 16-5.1. Mandatory Separation.
a. The Police Department, the duly appointed Municipal Recycling
Coordinator, the Monmouth County Health Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer and any duly designated agent of the Township are
hereby jointly and severally empowered to inspect solid waste and
recycling arrangements and compliance at local residences,
businesses, schools and institutions, and to enforce the provisions of
this section, by issuance of warnings, notices, summonses and
complaints. A typical inspection may consist of sorting through
containers and opening bagged solid wastes to detect the presence of
recyclable materials.
b. The authorized inspector may, in his or her discretion, issue a warning
rather than a summons following an initial inspection, with a follow up
visit to determine compliance within a stated period of time.
a. Separation of Recyclable Materials from Solid Waste. It shall be
mandatory for all persons, who are owners, lessees and occupants of
residential property, to separate newspapers, mixed paper and
cardboard, leaves, glass bottles and jars, pourable plastic bottles,
aluminum cans and tin and bimetal cans as hereinafter defined from all
other solid waste produced by such residence for collection and
§ 16-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5.1
1:301
ultimately recycling of said materials. Mixed paper shall be put out in a
closed container or clear plastic bag. Cardboard shall be broken down,
bundled and tied.
1. The following bulky recyclables shall not be placed with solid waste
at the curbside or in containers provided for waste collection and
transportation to a disposal facility; concrete, asphalt, brick, block,
tree stumps, tree limbs over three (3) inches in diameter, metal
appliances or bulk metal items larger than one (1) cubic foot and/or
heavier than five (5) pounds.
2. Automotive and other vehicle or wet cell batteries, used motor oil
and antifreeze shall not be disposed as solid waste. Such items are
to be kept separate from other waste materials and recyclables,
and brought to local service stations, scrap yards, or publiclyoperated
recycling facilities designed and permitted to handle such
products.
3. Common, nonrechargeable dry cell batteries, commonly labeled A,
AA, AAA, C, D and 9-Volt, may be disposed with regular municipal
solid waste; however, rechargeable dry cell and button batteries
still contain significant amounts of various toxic metals, including
mercury, and shall be separated and brought to retail outlets or
publicly-operated recycling facilities providing specific
arrangements for the proper packaging and shipment of
rechargeable and/or button batteries to appropriate processing
facilities.
4. Computers, computer monitors and other related electronic
hardware, as well as analog and digital televisions, are prohibited
from being placed with other solid waste for disposal. These and
other electronic devices shall be kept separate and brought to
retail outlets or publicly-operated recycling facilities providing
specific arrangements for shipment of these items to appropriate
processing facilities.
b. Business and Industrial Property; Institutions. It shall be mandatory for
all owners, lessees and occupants of business and industrial property
and of private, public and governmental institutions and buildings, to
separate newspapers, mixed paper and cardboard, leaves, glass bottles
and jars, pourable plastic bottles, aluminum cans and tin and bimetal
cans from all other solid waste produced by nonresidential
establishments for collection and the ultimate recycling of the
materials.
c. Construction and Demolition Materials.
1. The municipality shall issue construction and demolition permits
only after the applicant has provided a Debris Management Plan
identifying the estimated number and types of containers to be
used for the handling of all solid wastes and recyclables generated
§ 16-5.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-5.1
1:302
§ 16-5.2. (Reserved)
§ 16-5.3. Collection by Authorized Persons. [1973 Code § 16-4; Ord.
No. 6-1987 § 4; Ord. No. 2-2010]
The Township may use municipal personnel to collect recyclable material
set forth herein at curbside and/or from a drop-off center and shall sell the
recyclable material if a market exists therefor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq.
during the project, and arrangements for the proper disposition of
the generated materials.
2. A refundable deposit of one hundred ($100.00) dollars shall be
submitted with the Debris Management Plan, which will be
returned after the completion of the project and submittal of
appropriate records documenting the quantity and disposition of
solid wastes and recyclables. Inadequate or incomplete
documentation may result in the forfeiture of some or all of the
required deposit.
d. Used Oil Collection Sites. In accordance with existing State regulations
(N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil retailers and motor vehicle
reinspection stations with used oil holding tanks shall accept up to five
(5) gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil from
cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles and shall post a sign informing the
public that they are a used oil collection site.
e. Liquid and Hazardous Waste Exclusions.
1. No liquids of any type shall be placed with recyclables, or with solid
waste for collection and disposal.
2. No chemicals, liquid paints, pesticides, herbicides, reactive
polishes or cleansers, cleaning or automotive products, or other
hazardous wastes shall be placed with recyclables, or with solid
waste for collection and disposal.
f. Provision and Labeling of Recycling Containers.
1. All apartment and other multi-family complexes, businesses,
schools and other public and private institutions shall provide
separate and clearly marked containers for use by residents,
students, employees, customers or other visitors, for trash and the
various types of recyclables, as appropriate.
2. Any company or agency providing dumpsters, roll off or other
containers to any apartment or other multi-family complex with
shared disposal and recycling areas, or to any business, school or
other institution, or for any construction/demolition project, shall
clearly mark such container for trash or for specific recyclables, as
may be appropriate.
§ 16-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5.3
1:303
The Township may elect to enter into agreements with qualified persons or
corporations authorizing them to collect the recyclable material at curbside
or from a drop-off center and to sell the recyclable material provided the
amount of money realized exceeds the cost of collection.
§ 16-5.4. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [1973
Code § 16-5; Ord. No. 6-1987 § 5; Ord. No. 2-2010]
Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Township
once placed on the curbside or brought to a drop-off center.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
Township to pick up or cause to be picked up the recyclable material as
defined herein. Each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 16-5.5. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Material by Resident. [1973
Code § 16-6; Ord. No. 6-1987 § 6; Ord. No. 2-2010]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who is owner,
lessee or occupant of a residential or nonresidential property may donate or
sell the recyclable material, as defined herein, to any person whether or not
operating for profit. The person, however, shall not pick up the recyclable
materials at curbside or at a municipal drop-off center without prior written
permission from the Township Manager, or his delegated representative, to
make such collection.
§ 16-5.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 16-7; Ord. No.
6-1987 § 7; Ord. No. 2-2010]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
section, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be
punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine not to exceed five hundred
($500.00) dollars or up to ninety (90) days in jail, or both, except that
the maximum fine or penalty for the failure to comply with any provision
of this section, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
shall not exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars for the first offense. As an alternate
penalty, a convicted person may be ordered to perform community service
in the recycling program for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. Each
day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
§ 16-6. (RESERVED)
§ 16-7. HOURS OF COLLECTION.
§ 16-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 10-2013]
As used in this section:
§ 16-5.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-7.1
1:304
§ 16-7.2. Hours of Collection. [Ord. No. 10-2013]
§ 16-7.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 10-2013]
Any person, vendor, contractor, company, organization or entity violating
any provisions of this section, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than five hundred ($500.00) dollars nor exceeding twentyfive
hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for each offense.
§ 16-8. through § 16-9. (RESERVED)
a. Solid waste shall mean all garbage and rubbish normally produced by
the occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and
disposed of by private or public pickup.
b. Recyclables shall mean those materials which would otherwise become
solid waste, and which may be collected, separated or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
c. Person shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, entity or political subdivision of this State subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
d. Litter shall mean small amounts of waste product that has been
improperly disposed of in the street.
a. Solid waste and recyclables collected from all residential property may
take place in the Township of Aberdeen only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through Saturday. The
collection of solid waste and recyclables from residential property at
any time other than between the hours referenced in this section is
prohibited.
b. Solid waste and recyclables collected from all industrial and
commercial property, as well as property owned by the Matawan-
Aberdeen Regional School District, may take place in the Township of
Aberdeen only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., prevailing
time, Monday through Saturday, except on legal holidays when
collection shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The
collection of solid waste and recycles from industrial and commercial
property at any time other than between the hours referenced in this
section is prohibited.
c. This section applies to any person providing solid waste and/or
recyclable collection services to any property within the Township of
Aberdeen.
d. This section shall not apply to street sweepers or street cleaners used to
clear litter from the street.
§ 16-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-8
1:305

ARTICLE III
Functions Of The Division Of Streets And Roads
§ 16-10. through § 16-19. (RESERVED)
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-10
1:307

ARTICLE IV
Functions Of The Division Of Buildings And Grounds
§ 16-20. through § 16-29. (RESERVED)
§ 16-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-20
1:309

ARTICLE V
Functions Of The Division Of Park Maintenance
§ 16-30. through § 16-39. (RESERVED)
§ 16-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-30
1:311

ARTICLE VI
Functions Of The Divisions Of Water And Sewer
PART 1
Division of Water Utility
§ 16-40. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 13-4.1]
As used in this Article:
DIRECTOR — shall mean the Director of Public Works.
DIVISION — shall mean the Division of Water.
INSPECTOR — shall mean the person or persons duly authorized by the
Township Manager to inspect and approve the service branches and their
connection to the water works system.
PUBLIC WATER MAIN — shall mean a main in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SERVICE BRANCH — shall mean the extension from the water meter to the
water main.
WATER WORKS — shall mean all facilities for the distributing and treating
of water.
§ 16-41. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 16-41.1. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 13-4.2a]
The public water supply shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this section and any other applicable sections, and such
auxiliary or supplementary rules and regulations conformable thereto, as
may be promulgated by the Director with the approval of the Township
Manager.
§ 16-41.2. Committing Nuisance on Water Works Ground. [1973
Code § 13-4.2b]
No person shall deposit filth or commit a nuisance of any kind upon grounds
set apart for the use of the Township water works. Punishment under this
subsection shall not relieve an offender of civil liability for any damage
caused by his unlawful acts.
§ 16-41.3. Fixed Pressure Not Guaranteed. [1973 Code § 13-4.2c]
The Division of Water does not guarantee consumers full volume, fixed
pressure or an effective, continuous supply of water, such matters being
subject to the varying conditions which may affect the operation and
maintenance of the mains, services, pumping stations, wells and other parts
of the water works system.
§ 16-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-41.4
1:313
§ 16-41.4. Adherence to Rules and Regulations Required. [1973
Code § 13-4.2d]
The Director is authorized to discontinue service for failure to comply
with any portion of this section or the rules and regulations authorized
thereunder.
§ 16-42. WATER MAIN INSTALLATION.
§ 16-42.1. Approval. [1973 Code § 13-4.3a]
All water main extensions to the Township water works system shall be
approved by the Township Council.
§ 16-42.2. Sizes of Mains; Materials. [1973 Code § 13-4.3b]
The sizes of the mains and the materials to be used in all water main
construction now or hereafter proposed shall in every case be as set forth
by the Township Manager.
§ 16-42.3. Mains in Unapproved Streets Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 13-4.3c]
No extension shall be authorized in any new subdivision or other tract of
ground unless the same is to be located in a dedicated street, the location
of such street having been approved by the Township Council.
§ 16-42.4. Inspection; Fees. [1973 Code § 13-4.3d]
The party requesting and providing for the main extension shall be subject
to the payment of a reasonable fee covering the cost of reviewing the plans
for and the inspection cost of the water main improvement, as may be
determined by the Township Manager.
§ 16-42.5. Extension. [1973 Code § 13-4.3e]
No water main extension shall be approved for less than one-half the entire
frontage of the applicant's property, and the necessary length from an
existing main to that frontage.
§ 16-43. SERVICE BRANCHES.
§ 16-43.1. Installation of Service Branch. [1973 Code § 13-4.4a;
Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No.
6-1996]
When a service branch is to be installed, the tap connection from the water
main to the customer's house shall be the responsibility of the owner. In
addition, the owner shall be supplied with a meter by the Water Division for
which the owner shall pay a charge dependent upon the size of the meter
as hereinafter set forth. The meter supplied by the Water Division shall
§ 16-41.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-43.1
1:314
remain the property of the Division. The owner or his agent will install the
line under the supervision of the Division following the set specifications for
connections of the Division. No water service branch shall be used for water
supply service without a water meter, except those branches intended and
used solely for fire protection purposes, which shall be subject to the rules
and regulations as may be promulgated by the Director.
§ 16-43.2. Location of Property Served. [1973 Code § 13-4.4b; Ord.
No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996]
No service branch shall be authorized to serve any premises unless such
premises abuts a public street or road in which a distribution main has
been installed across at least one-half the entire abutting frontage of the
premises to be served; provided, that when an existing plotted lot does not
abut on a public road, the Director may permit the properties to be served
by a water main of sufficient size to adequately serve the properties, after
first receiving a photostatic copy of a recorded utility easement in which the
main is to be installed and after receiving a signed agreement embodying
the terms of the main extension as prescribed by the Director.
§ 16-43.3. Building Permits. [1973 Code § 13-4.4c; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996]
No permit for the construction of a building intended for human occupancy
shall be issued by the Construction Official until the Division of Water has
certified the availability of Township water, or the Department of Health
having jurisdiction over the same has approved some other source.
§ 16-43.4. Requirements of Service Branches and Meters. [1973
Code § 13-4.4d; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No.
17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996]
The Director shall establish minimum requirements and standards for the
installation of service branches and meters. Applications for water service
must include full information as to the size, occupancy and commercial
or manufacturing process to be served, except in the case of branches to
vacant property preceding highway improvements.
§ 16-43.5. Water Branches Not to Be Laid in Sewer Trenches. [1973
Code § 13-4.4e; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No.
17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996]
No water service branch shall at any time be laid in the same trench with
a sewer connection. In extreme cases, shelving may be permitted, in which
case the shelf shall be eighteen (18) inches wide and the water service pipe
so staked as to prevent its slipping into the sewer trench.
§ 16-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-43.6
1:315
§ 16-43.6. Interconnected Service Branches. [1973 Code § 13-4.4f;
Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No.
6-1996]
When any parcel of property is supplied through two (2) or more
interconnecting water branches, each branch shall be equipped with a
check valve so set that water can flow into but not out of the premises. Each
branch shall also be equipped with a separate meter.
§ 16-43.7. Replacement of Service Branches. [1973 Code § 13-4.4g;
Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No.
6-1996]
When a service branch is installed, the Division shall repair and maintain
it or replace it with a branch of the same size from the main to, and
including, the curb cock, without charge, except that where the property
owner desires a service pipe of a size different from the existing branch, he
shall make application and pay for it in the same manner as for a new water
service connection.
§ 16-43.8. Maintenance from Curb Cock to Premises. [1973 Code
§ 13-4.4h; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995;
Ord. No. 6-1996]
The portion of a water branch from the curb cock or meter pot into the
premises served shall be maintained in proper condition by the owner.
Repairs shall be promptly made. Failure to repair a leak in the time allotted
on notice shall be sufficient cause to justify the Division in discontinuing the
service. When service has been discontinued for failure to repair leaks, it
will not be restored until the Division has been notified and is satisfied, after
inspection, that repairs have been properly completed.
Owners are required to properly maintain the meter pit or curb box. Owners
must keep the curb box or meter pit exposed and accessible at all times.
If Water Department personnel cannot access a box or pit, or must repair,
replace, locate or complete any additional work beyond normal meter
reading, the owner will be billed according to the hourly labor and
equipment rate schedule.
§ 16-43.9. Street Opening Permit. [1973 Code § 13-4.4i; Ord. No.
6-1996]
No street opening shall be permitted unless the owner shall have first
obtained a street opening permit.
§ 16-43.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-43.10
1:316
§ 16-43.10. Meter Prices. [1973 Code § 13-4.4j; Ord. No. 11-1980;
Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996]
Meter Size Meter Charge
5/8" $221.25
5/8"-3/4" $221.25
1" $275.85
2" $585.00
All other size meters will have to be ordered according to the request of
the applicant and the charges absorbed by the applicant.
§ 16-43.11. Stopped Meters. [1973 Code § 13-4.4k; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 9-1981; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 6-1996; New]
If a meter or a remote stops, billing will be based upon the quarterly usage
from the same quarter from the prior year until the meter is fixed. Owners
are required to provide access to the meter for Water Department personnel
in order to service the meter.
§ 16-44. CONNECTIONS.
§ 16-44.1. Unauthorized Water Connection Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 13-4.5a; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
No person, other than an employee or other authorized agent of the
Division, shall open any street, lane, alley or other public place for water
supply purposes, tap any pipe or make attachments to any water pipe
belonging to the Township without the written permission of the Director.
§ 16-44.2. Buildings to Have Separate Taps and Meters. [1973 Code
§ 13-4.5b; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
No plumber or other person shall connect water into more than one building
from one tap in a main, except where such installation is determined to
be for a single purpose in the best interest of the system, and where such
exceptions are clearly defined in the rules promulgated by the Director of
Public Works. Every water branch supplying a building shall be provided
with a meter to measure the consumption of water.
§ 16-44.3. Connecting Unused Pipes or Altering Existing Pipes.
[1973 Code § 13-4.5c; Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
No plumber or other person shall make any attachments to an old pipe or
other fixture which has been shut off by the rules of the water works, or
which is out of use, without having first obtained a permit to do so, nor shall
any plumber or other person make any alteration in any way of the conduit
pipes or other fixtures attached to the water works so as to conduct water
§ 16-43.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-44.3
1:317
into adjoining premises, without a written permit to do so, signed by the
proper officer of the Division.
§ 16-44.4. Connection Fees. [1973 Code § 13-4.5d; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 12-2000; Ord. No. 13-2002;
Ord. No. 21-2006; Ord. No. 17-2007 § II; Ord. No. 15-2014]
An original connection or tap fee shall be paid by the owner, in accordance
with the following schedule. Installation shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
Class I: Residential dwelling, apartment units, townhouses, trailers, highrise,
garden apartment (per unit): $3,126.00
Class II: Boarding homes, nursing homes, hospitals, hotels and motels (per
unit): $1,240.50
Other Than Residential: All classes of user other than residential shall pay
a connection charge based upon their estimated daily average water usage
as determined by the Division Engineer. The charge per 1,000 gallons per
day of water usage will be $24.81. In no case shall the connection charge
be less than the charge for a one-family residential unit.
The Division Engineer's estimate of average daily usage shall be the basis
for determining the initial connection charge for all users in the "other than
residential class"; however, the applicant and the Division shall mutually
agree to a review of the connection charge and adjustment thereto upward
or downward based upon the actual water usage for a period not less than
one (1) year after full occupancy or utilization of the facilities connected to
the Division's water system.
§ 16-45. METERS.
§ 16-45.1. Meters Required. [1973 Code § 13-4.6a; Ord. No.
11-1980]
All water service branches shall be metered, except such branches as are
connected with sprinkler systems for fire protection and which have no
outlets other than sprinkler heads. Meter readings shall be used to calculate
charges, but the Director shall be authorized to estimate charges based on
prior consumption when it is apparent that a meter has not been operating
properly, or that it has been removed or tampered with or the Division is
unable to read meter.
§ 16-45.2. Number of Meters. [1973 Code § 13-4.6b; Ord. No.
11-1980]
The supply of water from the service connection may be measured by one
(1) or more meters. If more than one (1) meter is used, they shall be set in
an area not under the control of any tenant and accessible to the Division at
all times. Where a building contains four (4) or more dwelling units or one
§ 16-44.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-45.2
1:318
or more commercial units and the supply is measured by a single meter or
master meter, the average unit water consumption shall be determined by
dividing the number of units into the total metered water consumption; the
water charge per unit shall then be computed on the basis of the average
unit water consumption and the water bill computed by multiplying the
number of units times the unit water charge.
§ 16-45.3. Application for Meter. [1973 Code § 13-4.6c; Ord. No.
11-1980]
When it is necessary to install a meter or meters on an existing service
branch which has never been metered, the application must be made by the
owner or his agent. All meters shall become and remain the property of the
Division. After a meter has been installed and placed in service, it shall be
fully maintained in proper condition by the Division, without charge, except
that in the case of damage resulting from the neglect of the user a charge
determined by the Director shall be made.
§ 16-45.4. Setting of Meters. [1973 Code § 13-4.6d; Ord. No.
11-1980]
Meters shall be installed on water service branches as soon as is practical
after installation of the branch, and in every case prior to the final
inspection required by the building code having jurisdiction. Meters shall
be properly set in accordance with the specifications of the Director, in
a convenient location readily accessible for reading and maintenance and
shall be properly protected from damage.
§ 16-45.5. Distance from Highway. [1973 Code § 13-4.6e; Ord. No.
11-1980]
No meter shall be set more than seventy-five (75) feet back from the
property line of the highway. Where a meter is located outside a building, it
must be set in a frostproof box or a pit of approved type.
§ 16-45.6. Unlawful Removal of Meter. [1973 Code § 13-4.6f; Ord.
No. 11-1980]
No person, other than an authorized employee of the Division of Water,
shall remove or tamper with a meter without the permission of the Director.
When a meter has been unlawfully removed or tampered with, or the seal
on the meter has been disturbed in any manner, it shall be unlawful to
use water supplied by the service branch to which the meter was attached.
Where a meter is found to have been unlawfully tampered with or removed,
the owner shall pay for the estimated amount of the water used, plus the
cost of repairs to the meter, together with any penalties imposed by law.
§ 16-45.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-45.7
1:319
§ 16-45.7. Division to Have Access to Meter. [1973 Code § 13-4.6g;
Ord. No. 11-1980]
Authorized employees of the Division shall have the right, at any reasonable
time, to enter any premises where a meter is installed, for the purpose
of examining or testing the same on the premises or for the purpose
of removing the same from the premises for examination, repair or
replacement.
§ 16-45.8. Inspection of Meters. [1973 Code § 13-4.6h; Ord. No.
11-1980]
The Director shall be authorized to fix reasonable charges for the removal,
testing and reinstallation of water meters performed at the request of the
consumers.
§ 16-45.9. Remote Meter Registers. [1973 Code § 13-4.6i; Ord. No.
11-1980]
The Director may, at the request of any consumer and upon payment by
such consumer of the prescribed charge, install a remote meter register
which will permit the reading of the consumer's water meter without
entering the building in which the meter is located, or which will permit the
reading of the meter by entering some portion of the building designated
by the consumer, provided, the location of the remote meter register shall
be subject to the approval of the Director in order to insure that it will be
reasonably accessible to the meter reader.
§ 16-45.10. Charges. [1973 Code § 13-4.6j; Ord. No. 11-1980]
The Director is authorized to fix reasonable charges for pipe, cocks, meters,
metering devices, fittings, remote meter registers and appurtenances to be
furnished for water service branch installations, and to establish standard
specifications therefor.
§ 16-46. WATER FOR TEMPORARY USE.
§ 16-46.1. Permits. [1973 Code § 13-4.7a]
Where water is required for temporary use in connection with building,
highway or other construction, or for any other temporary operation, on
premises not supplied or insufficiently supplied with metered water,
application shall be made to the Division for a special permit to use water
from a fire hydrant or other available source. All arrangements for such use
shall be approved by the Director.
§ 16-46.2. Use of Water Without Permit. [1973 Code § 13-4.7b]
It shall be unlawful to use or be connected to use water from a fire hydrant
or other available source unless a properly authorized temporary use permit
§ 16-45.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-46.2
1:320
is securely attached to the connection in a conspicuous place near the point
of connection. This shall not apply to service branches for new construction.
§ 16-46.3. Charge for Unmetered Water. [1973 Code § 13-4.7c]
Unmetered water shall be paid for on the basis of meter rates, according to
the estimated amount used or to be used. The Director shall be authorized
to provide by rule for the method of fixing charges in the case of particular
types of unmetered uses.
§ 16-46.4. Resale of Water Prohibited. [1973 Code § 13-4.7d]
No person shall sell water obtained from the water works system, except
persons specifically permitted to do so by the Director.
§ 16-47. APPLICATIONS FOR WATER SERVICE.
§ 16-47.1. Application to Be Made by Owner. [1973 Code § 13-4.8a;
Ord. 11-1980]
Application for water service shall be made by the owner of the premises
to be supplied, or by his authorized agent. Water will be turned on by an
authorized employee of the Division after the application has been duly
filed at the Division office and approved by the Director. Owner shall pay
an application fee with each application in accordance with the schedule
hereinafter set forth.
§ 16-47.2. Applicant to Be Free of Indebtedness to Water Works.
[1973 Code § 13-4.8b; Ord. No. 11-1980]
No application for water service will be allowed and no water will be
supplied to any applicant or consumer where it is apparent that the
applicant or consumer is indebted to the Division for water supplied, work
done, material furnished or penalties imposed. This subsection shall apply
whether the indebtedness was incurred at the premises for which
application is made or at any other premises supplied by the Division within
or without the Township limits.
§ 16-47.3. Transferability. [1973 Code § 13-4.8c; Ord. No. 11-1980]
Applications are not transferable.
§ 16-47.4. Separate Applications Required. [1973 Code § 13-4.8d;
Ord. No. 11-1980]
A separate application for water service must be made for each water
connection, including fire service.
§ 16-48. WATER RATES.
§ 16-46.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-48.1
1:321
§ 16-48.1. Township of Aberdeen Water Rates. [1973 Code § 13-4.9a;
Ord. No. 16-1978; Ord. No. 7-1980; Ord. No. 3-1982; Ord. No.
4-1990; Ord. No. 1-1992; Ord. No. 23-1992; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord.
No. 15-1997; Ord. No. 13-2004; Ord. No. 19-2007 § II; Ord. No.
7-2013]
a. Water rates are herby established as follows:
1. A quarterly minimum charge for the first 7,000 gallons which
includes a water service charge:
Meter Size Quarterly Minimum Charge
5/8" & 1" $94
2" $139
4" $270
6" $529
8" $1,041
2. A charge of $7.30 per 1,000 gallons is established for usage of
7,001 to 20,000 gallons per quarter.
3. A charge of $8.90 per 1,000 gallons is established for usage of
20,001 gallons and over per quarter.
b. Annual fire protection charges shall be determined as follows:
Connection Size Annual Charge
1" $101
2" $116
4" $467
6" $1,050
8" $1,831
The annual fire protection charge shall be charged to all users having lines
supplying water for a private water-sprinkler system or hydrant(s).
c. For residential usage only there shall be a ten (10%) percent reduction
to residents over sixty-five (65) years of age, and to those residents less
than sixty-five (65) years of age who are permanently and totally
disabled according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act,
or disabled under any Federal law administered by the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs if the disability is rated sixty (60%)
percent or higher, and that permanently and totally disabled resident
either is annually eligible to receive assistance under the
Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled program, or has a
total income not in excess of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars per year
exclusive of benefits under any one of the following: the Federal Social
§ 16-48.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-48.1
1:322
§ 16-48.2. Surplus Water Consumed Outside Township Limits. [1973
Code § 13-4.9b; Ord. No. 16-1978; Ord. No. 7-1980; Ord. No. 3-1982;
Ord. No. 4-1990; Ord. No. 1-1992; Ord. No. 23-1992; Ord. No.
17-1995; Ord. No. 15-1997]
§ 16-49. PAYMENT OF BILLS.
§ 16-49.1. Unlawful Taking of Water. [1973 Code § 13-4.10; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
No person shall take water from any private hydrant or from any cistern
which has been supplied in full or in part with Township water, unless
permission for such taking is obtained from the Director and payment is
made for the water taken.
§ 16-49.2. Time of Payment. [1973 Code § 13-4.10b; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
Water bills shall ordinarily be rendered at intervals of three (3) months, but
the Director shall be authorized to provide in special cases, or in certain
classes of accounts for billing at shorter intervals. Water bills shall be paid
on or before the date stated on the bill which date shall not in any case
be less than thirty (30) days from the date of billing. The Director may
grant an extension of time for payment, not to exceed forty-five (45) days
from the due date, without penalty, in cases of indigency, relief and similar
conditions, after investigation. Partial payments may be accepted, but bills
must be paid in full before the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period.
§ 16-49.3. Service Charge for Nonpayment. [1973 Code § 13-4.10c;
Ord. No. 11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
Water bills shall be due when mailed. If not paid by the date stated on
the bill, a penalty in the amount of eight (8%) percent shall be added to
the first one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00) dollars of the bill, and a
Security Act; any other program of the Federal government; or any
pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political
subdivisions or agencies thereof for persons not covered under the
Federal Social Security Act.
a. General Consumers. The rates that are established as the fair, equitable
and reasonable rates which shall be charged for the sale of water
furnished by the water works of the Township for domestic and
commercial purposes for consumers outside of the Township limits shall
be the rates that are charged to Township residents to which shall be
added a surcharge of twenty (20%) percent.
b. Bulk Consumers. Where the Township, by written agreement, has
provided for the sale of surplus water in bulk through a master water
meter, the water charge shall be as from time to time determined by
resolution of the Township Council.
§ 16-48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-49.3
1:323
penalty of eighteen (18%) percent shall be added to the balance of the bill.
If not paid by the date stated on the notice for the expiration of the grace
period or the date to which extended, the Director shall have authority to
shut off the water. No water shall be supplied in any premises shut off for
indebtedness until the same is fully paid, to which shall be added a twentythree
($23.00) dollar service charge for water turn-on. This subsection shall
apply regardless of whether or not there has been a change of ownership or
possession of the premises or a change in the name in which the account is
carried.
§ 16-49.4. Assessing Charges. [1973 Code § 13-4.10d; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995]
The Director shall assess and collect proper charges for water material
supplied and work done. Any owner of real estate premises installing or
maintaining water service connections shall be considered as accepting and
as agreeing, in particular, to be liable for all water and service charges for
such premises, whether the accounts for such premises are carried in the
name of such owner or the name of tenants or other persons.
§ 16-49.5. Additional Charges. [1973 Code § 13-4.10; Ord. No.
11-1980; Ord. No. 17-1995; Ord. No. 18-2000 § I]
In addition to the fees and charges hereinabove set forth, the following
service charges shall be paid when applicable.
Service Charge
New account fee $15.00
Search fee $10.00
Follow-up/Continuation of Search $2.00
Turn-on/off $23.00
Turn-on/off after hours $80.00
Rereading charge $23.00
Customers may have each meter reread
twice a year at no charge. Any further
requests for the same meter will be billed.
Final reading $23.00
Application fee $50.00
Meter test — 5/8" $50.00
Meter test — 1" $75.00
Meter test — greater than 1" $50.00 + cost of company
to come in and test
§ 16-49.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-49.5
1:324
Service Charge
If meter is tested and it is reading correctly
or slower, customer will be responsible for
charge. If meter is reading faster,
department will absorb cost.
Returned checks $20.00
Reconnect remote $60.00
Frozen meter replacement (inside only) $60.00 + cost of meter
Change from inside to remote (by customer
request)
$60.00 + cost of meter
Change from inside to pit (by customer
request)
Cost of material + labor +
equipment
Delinquency charge 8% of 1st $1,500; 18% on
balance of bill
Field service charges* (hourly):
Front end loader $75.00
Backhoe $50.00
Service truck $35.00
2 yd. dump truck $35.00
6 yd. dump truck $50.00
Jet truck $75.00
Vactor truck $75.00
Welding truck $75.00
Air compressor/jackhammer $35.00
Water pump and hose $15.00
Utility truck with tools $50.00
Generator and lights $25.00
Superintendent $60.00
Operator $44.00
Laborer $44.00
*Plus all parts and road restoration costs. The above labor rates will be
charged at time and one-half after 3:00 p.m. on weekdays and all day on
Saturday. Labor rates will be double time on Sunday and double time and
one-half on holidays.
The normal business hours for the services above are Monday - Friday
between 7:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
§ 16-50. WATER EMERGENCIES.
§ 16-49.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-50.1
1:325
§ 16-50.1. Existence of Water Emergency. [1973 Code § 13-5.1]
Emergencies from time to time arise, requiring the conservation of water
in the interests of public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township. When such emergency exists, as determined by resolution
adopted by the Township Council, the Township Council may, for the
protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
Township, proclaim the existence of a water emergency, and prescribe
regulations to:
§ 16-50.2. Proclamation; Publication. [1973 Code § 13-5.2]
The proclamation of the emergency shall be conclusive thereof on all
persons and users upon the filing of the same in the office of the Township
Clerk and the publication thereof at least once in an official newspaper
circulating in this Township.
The regulations set forth in the proclamation, and any subsequent
regulations made and published, upon filing thereof in the office of the
Township Clerk, shall become part hereof, the same as if specifically
incorporated and set forth herein.
§ 16-50.3. Compliance with Emergency. [1973 Code § 13-5.3]
Every owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises or any
person who uses the building or premises shall, upon the proclamation and
promulgation of the regulations as stated in subsection 16-11.1, be bound
by these regulations and conform and comply with them in the use of water
and the maintenance of the water service connections and equipment.
§ 16-50.4. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 13-5.4]
The following rules shall apply:
a. Prohibit or restrict the use of water for any purpose not necessary to
the health, safety and welfare of the public;
b. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies;
c. Reduce consumption by users;
d. Prevent waste for the period of duration of such emergency.
a. Every owner of buildings and premises connected with the water supply
shall maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes,
fixtures and connections, in good order and repair, whereof there shall
be no waste of water.
b. Every owner of any building or premises connected with the water
supply shall make or cause to be made necessary repairs to prevent the
waste of water.
§ 16-50.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-50.4
1:326
§ 16-50.5. Repairs by Township. [1973 Code § 13-5.5]
Whenever an owner shall file or refuse to make repairs so as to prevent the
waste of water, then the Township reserves the right to make such repairs
and to charge the cost thereof to the owner in the same manner as other
water charges are made, as by the statutes and ordinances provided.
§ 16-51. IMPOSITION OF LIENS.
§ 16-51.1. Service Charges as a Lien. [1973 Code § 13-6.1; Ord. No.
16-1992; Ord. No. 6-1994; New]
c. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises
connected with the water supply shall immediately notify the owner, or
his agent, of any defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections,
whereby water is being wasted.
d. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any such building or premises
shall notify the Township Water Department or Police Department of
any waste occurring by reason of defective water service pipes, fixtures
or connections.
e. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person, in charge of any
building or premises connected with the Township water supply, shall
admit thereto the authorized agents and employees of the municipality
for the purpose of inspecting the water service pipes, fixtures and
connections.
f. Every owner and water user, during the period of a water emergency,
shall be upon notice of any waste of water due to defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections, and of the regulations
promulgated under the proclamation. It shall be the duty of the owner
to forthwith make or cause to be made repairs necessary to prevent
such waste.
g. All users of water from the water supply by and under any contract,
ordinance or statute, are bound by the provisions hereof and of the
regulations promulgated under any proclamation.
a. If any charge due to the Division of Water Utility for the use of sewers,
drains, water or other services connected therewith remains in arrears,
the Division Head or an employee of the Township so designated by the
Division Head shall file with the Township officer charged with the duty
of the collection of tax arrearages, a statement showing such
arrearages, and from the time of such filing, the water, sewer or other
charges shall be a lien upon the real estate to which the service was
furnished and in connection with which the charges were incurred to
the same extent as taxes or a lien upon real estate in the Township.
Such a lien shall be superior and paramount to the interest in such
parcel except the lien of municipal taxes, and shall be on a parity with
and deemed equal to the lien on such parcel where such parcel is
§ 16-50.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-51.1
1:327
§ 16-51.2. Collector Designated. [1973 Code § 13-6.2; Ord. No.
16-1992; New]
The Tax Collector of the Township is hereby designated as the collector of
any and all service charges due from the property owner pursuant to the
terms of subsection 16-51.1. The enforcement of service charges by the Tax
Collector shall be in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14B-45.
§ 16-51.3. Notice of Discontinuation of Service and Liability for
Damages. [1973 Code § 13-6.3; Ord. No. 16-1992]
§ 16-51.4. Cumulative and Concurrent Rights and Remedies. [1973
Code § 13-6.4; Ord. No. 16-1992]
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair
the rights and powers of the Township as provided by law with regard to the
collection of service charges owed to the Township.
§ 16-52. through § 16-59. (RESERVED)
situate for taxes thereon due in the same year and not paid when due,
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42.
b. The service charges shall be a lien upon the premises until paid and,
until such time, the Township shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof with interest, costs and penalties as the Township has
by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate including, but not
limited, to the sale of tax sale certificates.
a. The Township will exercise every precaution to give reasonable notice
before any discontinuation of water service, but will not be liable for
any loss, damage or other claim based on or arising out of the stopping
or restricting of such water service. Any water fixture subject to
damage by the sudden discontinuation of water supply shall be properly
protected against such damage by the owner or operator of such
fixture, provided that notice, except in cases of emergency, is given by
the Township.
b. All persons having boilers within their premises not supplied by a tank
or cistern are hereby cautioned against collapse of such boilers in case
of interruption or discontinuance of service, regardless of cause. In
such case, the Township will not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered.
§ 16-51.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-52
1:328
PART 2
Division of Sewer and Stormwater Utility
§ 16-60. DIVISION OF SEWER AND STORMWATER UTILITY
CREATED.
§ 16-60.1. Establishment; Control. [1973 Code § 13-1.1; Ord. No.
21-1996 § 1; Ord. No. 13-2007 § I]
A Division of Sewer and Stormwater Utility of the Department of Public
Works (the "Department") is hereby created in and for the Township, which
Department shall be under the control and supervision of the Township
Manager.
§ 16-60.2. Scope. [1973 Code § 13-1.2; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-1; Ord.
No. 13-2007 § II]
§ 16-60.3. Definitions. [1973 Code § 13-1.3; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-2;
Ord. No. 16-1998 § 1; Ord. No. 13-2007 § III]
As used in this section:
CUSTOMER — shall mean the party contracting for sewer service to a
property as hereinafter classified.
a. Sewer Utility. It is the purpose of this section to empower the Township
of Aberdeen, through the Department, to perform all such reasonable
and necessary functions in connection with providing sewage
collection, disposal and treatment as afforded to the Township by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq., without limitation, and the
collection of fees therefor. The provisions of this section subject to the
ability of the Township to provide sewage service to the extent
permitted by law and in accordance with the terms and conditions of
any existing contracts which are legally binding upon the Township.
b. Stormwater Utility. It is also the purpose of the Township of Aberdeen
to comply with the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93, which requires every
municipality in the State to prepare and implement a stormwater
management plan to establish the minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for major development as set forth in
Chapter XXV, subsections 25-5.24 and 25-5.25 of the Township Code.
a. Residential classes shall mean:
1. Single-family residential dwellings, comprised of a building under
one roof owned by one or more parties, and occupied by a singlefamily
residential unit.
2. Multi-family residential dwellings, being
(a) A duplex or double house having a solid vertical partition wall,
making it capable of divided ownership;
§ 16-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.3
1:329
(b) A building owned by one party or more than one party
consisting of more than one apartment and using in common
one hall and one entrance;
(c) A building owned by one party or more than one party having a
number of apartments and one or more means of entrance.
b. Commercial, industrial and institutional uses.
c. Combination residential and commercial, industrial, and institutional
uses.
DIRECTOR — shall mean the Director of the Department of Public
Works of the Township.
LICENSED OPERATOR — shall mean the duly appointed operational
administrator of the sewer utility and in particular shall be understood
to be the Township agent, servant or employee in charge of the dayto-
day operation, installation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer
facilities operated by the Department of Public Works, Division of
Utilities and as may hereafter be necessary in connection with any
additional facilities hereafter constituting part of the Township's
sewage system. Such operator shall be properly licensed and qualified
by the State of New Jersey to perform the necessary functions
attendant to this portion.
PHYSICAL CONNECTION — shall mean any connection, cross
connection, by-pass valve, pipeline, or any like device which permits or
may permit any flow of wastes from any source into the sewage system
operated by this utility.
SEWAGE — shall mean the water-carried wastes created in and carried,
or to be carried, away from residences, hotels, apartments, schools,
hospitals, commercial establishments, office complexes, industrial
establishments, or any other public or private building, together with
such surface or ground water and industrial wastes as may be present.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — shall mean the plants, structures and other real
and personal property acquired, constructed or operated, or to be
acquired, constructed or operated by the sewer utility, including
sewers, conduits, pipelines, mains, pumping and ventilating stations,
plants and works, connections, outfalls, compensating reservoirs, and
any and all other plants, structures, conveyances, and other real and
personal property, and rights therein, and appurtenances necessary
or useful and convenient for the collection, treatment, purification or
disposal in a sanitary manner of any sewage, liquid or solid wastes,
night soil or industrial wastes.
SEWER UTILITY — shall mean the sanitary utility of the Township,
operated by the Department acting pursuant to the direction of the
Township through its elected and appointed officials, and performing all
functions pertaining to the collection and treatment of sewage, and as
may hereafter be necessary in connection with any additional facilities
hereafter constituting part of the Township's sewage system.
§ 16-60.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-60.3
1:330
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DEFINITIONS19 — Unless specifically
defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding
definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — shall mean the geographic depiction of
the boundaries for Costal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA
Cores and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
1.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — shall mean those areas
within boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:8E-5B.
2.
3. COMPACTION — shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and
civic uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including
housing and access to public transportation.
4.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — shall mean an agency designated
by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s).
The county review agency may either be:
(a) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority
to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(b)
5.
DEPARTMENT — shall mean the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
6.
DESIGNATED CENTER — shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as Designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
7.
DESIGN ENGINEER — shall mean a person professionally qualified
and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services
that may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of
project requirements, creation and development of project design
and preparation of drawings and specifications.
8.
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the division of a parcel of land
into two (2) or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any
building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any
use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land
9.
19.Editor's Note: See also subsection 25-5.24b, Stormwater Management Control Definitions.
§ 16-60.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.3
1:331
or extension of use of land, by any person, for which permission
is required under the Municipal Land Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity
reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal
review of any activity exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving water body or to a particular point along a receiving
water body.
10.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — shall mean an area or
feature which is of significant environmental value, including but
not limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites;
habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of
contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well
head protection and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of
endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
11.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation
and conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
12.
EROSION — shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or
rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
13.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — shall mean a surface that has been
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water.
14.
INFILTRATION — shall mean the process by which water seeps
into the soil from precipitation.
15.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — shall mean any "development" that
provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land.
Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of
impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock
or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
16.
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean any city, borough, town, Township, or
village.
17.
NODE — shall mean an area designated by the State Planning
Commission concentrating facilities and activities which are not
organized in a compact form.
18.
§ 16-60.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-60.3
1:332
NUTRIENT — shall mean a chemical element or compound, such
as nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
19.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
20.
POLLUTANT — shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste,
incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil,
grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those
regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42
U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue
discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or
surface waters of the State, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
21.
RECHARGE — shall mean the amount of water from precipitation
that infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
22.
SEDIMENT — shall mean solid material, mineral, or organic, that
is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its
site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
23.
SITE — shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development
is to occur or has occurred.
24.
SOIL — shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material
of any origin.
25.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — shall mean an area
delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State
Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of
the State's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
26.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — shall mean the geographic
application of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's
goal and statewide policies, and the official map of these goals and
policies.
27.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow
removal equipment.
28.
§ 16-60.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.3
1:333
STORMWATER RUNOFF — shall mean water flow on the surface of
the ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
29.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — shall mean an excavation
or embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater
runoff. A stormwater management basin may either be normally
dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water
in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with
wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands).
30.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — shall mean any
structural or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process,
program, or other method intended to control or reduce
stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or
control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater
or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
31.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — shall mean a flood hazard area,
which may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas,
but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
32.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — shall mean a neighborhood given priority
access to State resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment
Authority.
33.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — shall mean a zone designated by
the New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New
Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et. seq.
34.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — shall mean previously
developed portions of areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) at the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores,
or Nodes;
(a)
(b) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores, or Nodes;
(c) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(d)
35.
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground
water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the
State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
36.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — shall mean an area that is inundated
or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
37.
§ 16-60.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-60.3
1:334
§ 16-60.4. Authorization to Adopt Rules and Procedures. [1973
Code § 13-1.4; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-3; Ord. No. 13-2007 § IV]
The Township Council of the Township of Aberdeen is hereby empowered
to adopt, by resolution, such portions of the current rules and regulation
the Township of Aberdeen Sewer Utility as it deems proper and necessary
in order to enable the Department to perform the purposes enumerated
herein and as set forth within Section 5-24, Stormwater Control and 5-25
Stormwater Management Plan, and any additional rules. In addition, the
Township is hereby empowered to retain the professional services of such
sanitarian, engineer or other expert as the Township shall determine
necessary for the purposes of establishing appropriate rules and regulations
affecting the installation, maintenance, repair and control of plumbing and
drainage of buildings and connection thereof to the facilities of the sewer
utility and for compliance with the Stormwater Management Plan and
Stormwater Control requirements. These rules and regulations may be
adopted by the Township by resolution or ordinance and may by reference,
incorporate other codes, statutes and/or regulations as appropriate or
required by law.
§ 16-60.5. Adoption of Rules and Procedures. [Ord. No. 16-1998 § 2]
The rules and procedures as established for the operation of the sewer
system are hereby adopted by the Township as the rules and procedures
for the operation of the Township's Sewer Utility. The rules and procedures
for the operation of the sewer system are hereby incorporated herein by
this reference thereto. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181,
ten (10) copies of the rules and procedures have been placed on file in the
Office of the Municipal Clerk of the Township of Aberdeen and in the office
of the Township's Department of Public Works, Division of Utilities, for the
examination of the public so long as this ordinance is in effect.
§ 16-60.6. Reservation of Powers. [1973 Code § 13-1.6; Ord. No.
21-1996 § 2-5; Ord. No. 13-2007 § V]
To the extent not specifically set forth herein, the Township Council of
the Township of Aberdeen specifically reserves unto itself all those certain
powers, rights and responsibilities as set forth at length in N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1 et seq., which provisions may be deemed by the Township
necessary for the operation of the Sewer and Stormwater Utility.
UTILITIES COLLECTOR — shall mean the duly appointed employee of
the Township authorized to collect fees and charges and to process
applications for sewer service.
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapt for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 16-60.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.7
1:335
§ 16-60.7. Right of Access. [1973 Code § 13-1.7; Ord. No. 21-1996
§ 2-6]
The Township, through the Department or otherwise, shall have a right
of access to any customer's premises and to all equipment and property
of the Township at reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters,
inspecting, repairing or replacing equipment used in connection with the
supplying of sewer services, or for the removal of equipment or property.
The customer shall obtain for the Township all necessary permission from
tenants or others for access to equipment or property. Customers shall not
permit access to meters or other Township property except by authorized
employees of the Township or other authorized State or local inspectors.
§ 16-60.8. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 13-1.8; Ord. No.
21-1996 § 2-7; New; Ord. No. 13-2007 § VI]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section or
any succeeding ordinances or resolutions pertaining to the subject matter
of this section which might be enacted or adopted shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars, or by imprisonment for
a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or both. Each and every day that any
violation continues shall be deemed to be and shall be a separate offense,
separately punishable as aforesaid. Violations of the stormwater plan shall
be governed by subsection 25-5.24k and as set forth in the Aberdeen Land
Development Code.
§ 16-60.9. Collection of All Charges; Interest. [1973 Code § 13-1.9;
Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-8]
All connection, user, and other fees and charges set forth in this chapter
shall draw the same interest from the time that they became due as taxes
upon real estate in the Township and shall be a lien upon the premises
connected until paid. The Township shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof, with interest, cost and penalties as it has for all collection
of taxes upon real property.
§ 16-60.10. Bond Required; Work to Be Guarded; Restoration of
Disturbed Public Property. [1973 Code § 13-1.10; Ord. No. 21-1996
§ 2-9]
Each contractor or other person performing work on Township public
property for the purpose of installing sanitary sewer connections shall post
a bond acceptable to the Township. All work shall be adequately guarded
with barricades, lights and other measures for protection to the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, curbs and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Township.
§ 16-60.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-60.11
1:336
§ 16-60.11. Permit Required for Connection to Public Sewer. [1973
Code § 13-1.11; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-10]
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto without first
obtaining a written permit from the Director.
§ 16-60.12. Application for Sewer Service. [1973 Code § 13-1.12;
Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-11]
§ 16-60.13. Approval of Application. [1973 Code § 13-1.13; Ord. No.
21-1996 § 2-12]
Approval of an application for a sewer connection can only be made if it
has been determined that a sewer main approved by the Township exists in
front of the applicant's property or in the public right-of-way. The main shall
extend the length of the applicant's property and if it does not so extend it
shall be extended at the applicant's expense in accordance with Township
specifications.
§ 16-60.14. Tampering with Utility Property. [1973 Code § 13-1.14;
Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-13]
No person or persons shall in any manner, without permission, connect or
disconnect or tamper or interfere with any property of the Township such
as pipes or conduits, meters, valves, instruments or other accessories or
property.
§ 16-60.15. Refusal to Connect; Inadequate Sewer Service. [1973
Code § 13-1.15; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-14]
a. Sewer service connection shall be made upon written application to the
Director on forms furnished by the Director and signed by the owner of
the property or by a duly authorized agent.
b. No application for service will be accepted for installation between
December 15 and April 15, unless the property owner agrees to pay the
additional cost that may be incurred because of adverse weather
conditions during this period.
c. All inspection fees for the connection into the sewer system shall be
paid by the applicant pursuant to the rate schedule in place at the time
of the application.
a. The Department may refuse to connect to any customer's piping system
or to supply sewer services to a system if the system has not been
designed or installed in accordance with the applicable regulations or if
any parts of the piping system have not been installed at sufficient
depth to prevent freezing.
b. The Township shall not be responsible for any inadequacy of sewer
service should the customer make alterations, changes or additions to
§ 16-60.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.15
1:337
§ 16-60.16. Complaints. [1973 Code § 13-1.16; Ord. No. 21-1996
§ 2-15]
Complaints concerning the character of the service furnished or the reading
of meters or bills rendered shall be made at the Department office to the
Director, in writing. A record of such complaints will be maintained by the
Department to show the names and addresses of the complainants, dates
and nature of the complaints and the action taken thereon.
§ 16-60.17. Sewer Utility Established. [1973 Code § 13-1.17; Ord.
No. 21-1996 § 2-16]
The existing publicly owned and operated sanitary sewer system of the
Township shall be operated by the Township as a Sewer Utility of the
Township of Aberdeen. Such Sewer Utility shall hereafter be referred to
as the Sewer Utility, which shall be operated by the Department of Public
Works, under the control of the Director.
§ 16-60.17A. Stormwater Utility Established. [Ord. No. 13-2007 § V]
The management and implementation of all requirements under the
Township's Stormwater Management Plan under subsection 25-5.25 and
Stormwater Control Ordinance under subsection 25-5.24 of the Township's
Revised General Ordinances shall be operated by the Township as a
Stormwater Utility in conjunction with the Sewer Utility. Such utility shall
hereinafter be referred to as the Sewer and Stormwater Utility, which shall
be operated by the Department, under the control of the Director.
§ 16-60.18. Sewer Utility Fund. [1973 Code § 13-1.18; Ord. No.
21-1996 § 2-17]
All future revenue and the accounting therefor from the Sewer Utility shall
be on a dedicated utility basis in conformance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:4-33, 34 and 35. All monies derived from the operation of the Sewer
Utility and any other monies applicable to its support shall be segregated
and kept in a separate fund which shall be known as the Sewer Utility Fund,
and all disbursements for the operation and maintenance of the Sewer
Utility shall be taken from the Sewer Utilities Fund.
§ 16-60.19. Budget. [1973 Code § 13-1.19; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-18;
Ord. No. 13-2007 § VI]
The dedicated budget of the Sewer and Stormwater Utility shall include
appropriations for operating expenses, capital improvements, debt service
and for the portion of all other deferred charges and statutory expenses as
may be required.
an existing system without notifying the Director in advance of any
proposed alterations, changes or additions. In case of defective service,
the customer shall not interfere with meters or other property of the
Township, but shall immediately notify the office of the Director.
§ 16-60.15 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-60.20
1:338
§ 16-60.20. Connection to Public Sewer Required. [1973 Code
§ 13-1.20; Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-19]
The owners of all houses, buildings and properties constructed after the
enactment of this section, situated within the Township, and abutting on
any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may
in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Township, are
hereby required at their expense to connect all sanitary and other plumbing
facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with all of the
pertinent ordinances of the Township, prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
§ 16-60.21. Connection of Existing Facilities to Public Sewer
Required: Time Limit. [1973 Code § 13-1.21; Ord. No. 21-1996
§ 2-20]
The owners of all houses, buildings and properties existing at the time
of the enactment of this section, and having approved private sanitary
sewer facilities, will be required at their expense to connect all available
sanitary and other plumbing facilities directly with the proper public sewer
where such connections are considered necessary in accordance with the
rules, regulations and ordinances of the Township and of the County Board
of Health. Such connectors shall be made in accordance with all of the
pertinent ordinances of the Township within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the date of the official notice to do so.
§ 16-60.22. Unlawful Connections and Uses. [1973 Code § 13-1.22;
Ord. No. 21-1996 § 2-21; Ord. No. 15-1997]
§ 16-60.23. Sewer User Charges. [Ord. No. 22-2006 § 2]
The Township Council is hereby authorized to establish the charges and
fees for sewer and incidental services to be provided by the Sewer Utility.
The schedule of charges shall be hereby fixed and established for the
collection, disposal and treatment of sanitary sewage material collected in
public sanitary sewers located within the Township to be charged to all
customers of the Sewer Utility and properties served by the public sewage
collection system located within the Township of Aberdeen, as set forth in
Exhibit A.
a. Sump Pumps. It is a violation for any person or user of this system to
connect or discharge, by any means, into the system any materials,
chemicals or drainage other than sanitary sewage. The Director shall
serve notice to such persons or users to remove such discharge
immediately.
b. Broken Lines. The Director shall also serve notice to a user of the Sewer
Utility having broken service lines that cause infiltration into the
system to repair same no later than ten (10) days from the service of
notice pertaining to such violation.
§ 16-60.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60.24
1:339
§ 16-60.24. Stormwater Management and Plan. [Ord. No. 13-2007
§ VII]
The Stormwater Utility shall be maintained and operated in accordance
with subsection 25-5.24 and subsection 25-5.25 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township or Aberdeen or as required by law.
§ 16-61. CONNECTION TO SEWER.
§ 16-61.1. Time Limit. [1973 Code § 13-2.1]
The owner of each property along the line of any sewer now or hereafter
constructed or acquired in the Township by the Township shall connect each
building on such property with a sewer prior to the connection date with
respect to the building.
§ 16-61.2. Connection Specifications. [1973 Code § 13-2.2]
Every connection required by this section shall be made with cast iron and
soil pipe from inside the building to a point not less than five (5) feet outside
the building. From this point to the sewer main case iron pipe calked and
leaded or asbestos cement pipe with slip joint rubber gaskets may be used.
All pipes must be not less than four (4) inches in diameter.
§ 16-61.3. Order to Connect. [1973 Code § 13-2.3]
Upon receipt by the Township Department of Health of notification from the
Township that any sewer is available to serve buildings on any properties in
the Township, the Department of Health shall order the owner of property
along the line of the sewer to connect each building in such property with
the sewer in accordance with the terms of this section.
§ 16-61.4. Notification to Connect. [1973 Code § 13-2.4]
The Department of Health shall designate one of its proper officers to
give notice to the owner of property with respect to which an order is
issued pursuant to subsection 16-61.3 of this chapter. The notice shall be
addressed to the owner of the property as the name of the owner appears
in the last tax duplicate of the Township and by the street address if a
street address exists, and shall state that by order of the Department of
Health the owner is required to connect each building on the property with
a sewer in accordance with the terms of this section, on or before the
connection date with respect to such building or, if such connection date
shall have passed, within thirty (30) days after service of such notice as
hereinafter provided, and the notice shall also describe the penalty which
may be imposed hereunder for failure to comply with the notice and order in
accordance with the terms of this section. The notice may be served on the
owner personally or by leaving it at his usual place of abode with a member
of his family above the age of eighteen (18) years. The notice may also be
served within or without the limits of the Township by mailing the same by
§ 16-60.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-61.4
1:340
registered mail to the last known post office address of the owner as the
same appears on the last tax duplicate with the Township.
§ 16-61.5. Enforcement and Penalties. [1973 Code § 13-2.5]
Any person who shall not comply with any order issued in accordance with
the provisions hereof within thirty (30) days after notice by the proper
officer of the Department of Health as hereinabove provided, shall, upon
complaint by the secretary of the sewerage authority or any other person
and upon conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
and shall also forfeit and pay an additional fine of ten ($10.00) dollars for
each day of delay, after the expiration of the period of thirty (30) days, in
which the provisions of the order or notice are not complied with. Penalties
under this section may be enforced in the municipal court of the Township
in the manner provided by law.
§ 16-61.6. Installation and Connection of Toilets to Sewer. [1973
Code § 13-2.6]
The owner of any building located anywhere in the Township in which a
sewer is now constructed or shall be hereafter constructed shall prior to the
connection date with respect to such building:
§ 16-61.7. Connection by Township.
If the owner of any property shall fail to make any connection or installation
required by subsection 16-61.6 within the time herein required, the
Township may proceed to make such connection or installation, or cause
the same to be made, and charge and assess the cost thereof against such
property, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 to 40:63-64. (1973 Code § 13-2.7]
§ 16-62. CRITERIA FOR DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL OR
COMMERCIAL SEWAGE INTO SYSTEM.
§ 16-62.1. Application Filed. [1973 Code § 13-3.1]
All applications for the discharge of wastes other than those exempted
under subsection 16-62.4 of this chapter shall be filed with the Chief
Engineer and approved prior to the completion of the connection.
a. Install a toilet in such building unless a toilet is installed therein; and
b. Shall connect such building and the toilet therein with such sewer.
The connection shall be made in the same manner as stated in
subsection 16-61.2.
§ 16-61.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-62.2
1:341
§ 16-62.2. Application Information. [1973 Code § 13-3.2; Ord. No.
24-1980; New]
All applications for permission to discharge or continue to discharge into
the sewers or laterals tributary thereto, wastes, other than normal domestic
sewage from toilets, baths, showers, wash bowls and sinks, shall be in
writing duly verified and under oath, and shall contain complete information
as required by the rules and regulations of the Division of Sewer Utility.
§ 16-62.3. Waste Conditions and Requirements. [1973 Code
§ 13-3.3; Ord. No. 24-1980; New]
Before any waste other than those exempted under subsection 16-62.4 shall
be permitted to enter the sewers or laterals tributary thereto, it shall meet
the following conditions and requirements as set forth in the rules and
regulations of the Division of Sewer Utility.
§ 16-62.4. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 13-3.4; New]
The following shall apply:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow or cause to be
discharged any surface, underground or rain water into any sewer or
house connection and to connect or allow to be connected any privy
vault or cesspool with any sewer or house connection.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow or cause to be
discharged any waste, other than domestic sewage from toilets, baths,
showers, wash bowls and sinks, into the sewers or laterals tributary
thereto unless an application for the discharge of such wastes has been
duly approved by the Division of Sewer Utility.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge septic material into any
manhole sewer interceptors, collectors or pumping stations or other
transmission devices transmitting domestic sewerage which are owned
or maintained by the Township.
d. Under no circumstances shall any of the following be discharged into
any sewers or laterals tributary thereto:
1. Gasoline, naptha, petroleum products or any substance which may
create an explosion hazard in the system.
2. Oils, fats, or grease except as may result from household, hotel or
restaurant operation.
3. Surface or rain water from yards, areas, courts, cellars, drains or
roofs.
4. Rubbish, ashes, cinders or garbage.
5. Milk, brewery or distillery waste in any form.
§ 16-62.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-62.4
1:342
§ 16-62.5. Inspection. [1973 Code § 13-3.5]
Readily accessible means shall be provided by the owner, tenant or
occupant of any premises to allow the Chief Engineer or his representatives
to make periodic examination and determination of the volume, character
and concentration of waste being discharged into the sewers or laterals
tributary thereto.
§ 16-62.6. Prevention of Injurious Waste Discharge. [1973 Code
§ 13-3.6; New]
The Township shall reserve the right to stop and prevent at any time the
discharge into the sewers or laterals tributary thereto of any waste which
may injure the sewers or adversely affect sewage treatment or which is
not in conformity with the requirements and standards now or hereafter
established, and may, at any time without notice and without recourse,
sever the connection and cause removal of any sewer or drain through
which such waste may be discharged.
§ 16-62.7. Grease Traps. [New]
6. Any waste or substance which shall cause or result in:
(a) Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the
materials of construction to impair the strength or durability of
any sewer structure.
(b) Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer
structure.
(c) Restriction of hydraulic capacity of sewer structure.
(d) Restriction of normal inspection or maintenance of sewer
structure.
(e) Placing of unusual demands on the sewage treatment
equipment or process.
(f) Limitation of effectiveness of the sewage treatment process.
(g) Danger to public health and safety.
(h) Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
a. Grease interceptors shall be provided at all restaurants, factories, office
buildings and other locations where food is being prepared and oil and
grease has the capacity of entering the sanitary sewer system.
Where grease has the capability of entering the sanitary sewer system,
a grease interceptor or trap shall be provided. The trap or interceptor
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Township in compliance
with the State Uniform Construction Code and the Rules and
Regulations. The interceptor or trap shall be sized for the maximum
§ 16-62.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-62.7
1:343
discharge to be expected during peak operating periods as per the
selection table in the Rules and Regulations. The interceptor shall be
preceded by a flow control device to prevent the interceptor or trap
from exceeding its design capacity. The interceptor or trap shall be
installed at a location where it is readily accessible for maintenance by
the owner and periodically inspected by Township personnel. A cover
shall be installed for inspection and maintenance purposes. The grease
interceptor or trap shall be either a commercial steel manufactured unit
specifically for grease interception or a concrete chamber. The design,
capacity and size of grease interceptors shall be prepared and signed
by a New Jersey Licensed Engineer and submitted to the Township
Engineer and Plumbing Subcode Official for approval.
b. All grease interceptors require maintenance and cleaning. Experience
will show the optimum cleaning cycle, but generally each interceptor
should be cleaned on a weekly or monthly basis. Existing grease
interceptors of very limited capacity may require cleaning on a daily
basis. The use of enzymes or other chemicals to attempt to keep the
grease in suspension shall not be used. These compounds only deposit
the grease down stream from the trap in the sanitary sewer system. Any
blockages caused by the illegal use of these chemicals will be removed
by the party responsible at their cost. The owner of an interceptor must
show evidence to the Township personnel during the periodic
inspection that the interceptor has been cleaned on a regular basis.
This evidence will include either a contract for yearly cleaning and
evidence the contract is in force or an invoice for each cleaning event. If
the Township personnel finds during their semi-annual inspection that
the interceptor is not being properly maintained and grease is entering
the Township system, the owner will be responsible to clean the
Township system or the Township will perform the work and bill the
owner. If there is continued evidence of lack of maintenance at a facility,
the Township reserves the right to disconnect the violator from the
sewer system. All costs to disconnect and reconnect will be borne by
the property owner.
c. All restaurants and any establishment with food preparation facilities
where grease has the capacity of entering the sanitary sewer system
shall be required to pay an annual permit fee of one hundred ($100.00)
dollars. The fee is payable at the time the initial permit is issued and
thereafter on January 1st of each year. The Township personnel shall
make an initial inspection when the facilities are constructed and will
make thereafter two (2) inspections per year. If a facility is a constant
problem for the Township, and the owner is not cooperating with the
Township in finding a solution to the grease problem, and making the
necessary modifications to their facilities, and the Township personnel
are required to make repeated inspections, then the Township will
charge a fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each inspection above the initial
two (2) covered by the permit fee until the problem is solved. Invoices
showing that the facilities are being properly maintained shall be made
available to Township personnel for review during inspections.
§ 16-62.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 16-63
1:344
§ 16-63. through § 16-69. (RESERVED)
§ 16-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-63
1:345

ARTICLE VII
Functions Of The Division Of Public Works
§ 16-70. MAKING AND SELLING OF LIQUID CHEMICAL/BRINE
MATERIAL. [Ord. No. 13-2013]
Public Works Department is authorized to make liquid chemical/brine
material for the purpose of pre-wetting and anti-icing roads in the
Township. The use of is advantageous for the use of snow and ice removal.
Public Works Department is authorized to sell the sale liquid chemical/brine
material for the sum of .55 a gallon to other municipalities or public entities
pursuant to a shared services agreement.
§ 16-71. through § 16-79. (RESERVED)
§ 16-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-71
1:347

ARTICLE VIII
Functions Of The Division Of Public Property
§ 16-80. through § 16-89. (RESERVED)
§ 16-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-80
1:349
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Editor's Note: For regulations prohibiting the deposit of snow, ice
or brush on public streets, see Section 3-2 Litter, subsection 3-.10,
Prohibiting the Deposit of Snow, Ice, Brush in Streets; for
regulations requiring sidewalk sweeping, see subsections 3-2.7 and
3-2.8.
§ 19-1. EXCAVATIONS IN PUBLIC STREETS.
§ 19-1.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 12-10.1]
As used in this chapter:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — shall mean the Township Manager or his
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
EXCAVATION — shall mean any opening in the surface of a public place
made in any manner whatsoever.
FACILITY — shall mean pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault,
manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, poleline,
anchor, cable, junction box, transformer or any other material structure or
object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not which is
or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along,
across, over or under any public street.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk,
grass plot, park, square, plaza or any other similar public property owned
or controlled by the Township and dedicated to public use.
SUBSTRUCTURE — shall mean any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole,
vault, buried cable or wire, or any other similar structure located below the
surface of any public place.
UTILITY — shall mean a private company or corporation or municipal
department engaged in providing a particular service to the general public.
§ 19-1.2. Excavation Permit. [1973 Code § 12-10.2; Ord. No.
12-1986]
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any public place or to make or cause
§ 16-80 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-1.2
1:350
to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any public place for
any purpose or to place, deposit or leave upon any public place any earth
or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the
free use of the public place, unless such persons shall first have obtained
an excavation permit therefor from the Administrative Authority as herein
provided.
No road opening permits will be issued from December 1 to March 15,
except for emergency repairs, as determined by the Administrative
Authority. All trenches must be completed within two (2) weeks of opening
roadways. All openings must be closed before December 15. No trenches
shall be opened after December 15, even though Administrative Authority
issued permit prior to December 15. No roads are to open on Saturday
or Sunday, except for emergency repairs, as determined by Administrative
Authority.
§ 19-1.3. Permit Application and Issuance. [1973 Code § 12-10.3;
Ord. No. 4-1981]
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application on a form
provided by the Administrative Authority for the issuance of an excavation
permit is submitted to the Administrative Authority. The written application
shall state the name and address and principal place of business of the
applicant, the authority of the applicant to occupy the public place for
which the permit is sought, the location and dimensions of the installation
or removal and the approximate size of the excavation to be made, the
purpose of the facility and the approximate time which will be required to
complete such work, including backfilling such excavation and removing
all obstructions, material and debris. The amount of time permitted to
complete such work shall not exceed ten (10) days. No excavation shall
remain open overnight without the expressed written consent of the
Administrative Authority. All excavations conducted during the working
day will be backfilled and made passable during the evening hours. An
extension of time may be granted by the Administrative Authority for good
and sufficient reasons. The application when approved and signed by the
Administrative Authority, shall constitute a permit.
An annual blanket permit for the purpose of placing, replacing or repairing
any fire hydrant or public utility pole within a public place where the
opening does not exceed six (6) square feet in area may be issued by the
Administrative Authority.
No excavation permits shall be issued unless evidence is given by the
permittee that he has contacted the existing utility companies and
requested a markout of the existing utilities in the area. No excavation work
shall be permitted to begin until the Administrative Authority has inspected
the area of the proposed excavation and has ascertained that all utility
markouts have been obtained.
§ 19-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.4
1:351
§ 19-1.4. Inspection and Permit Fees; Surety Bond; Exceptions.
[1973 Code § 12-10.4; Ord. No. 4-1981; Ord. No. 12-1986; Ord. No.
3-1988; Ord. No. 3-2005]
Fees shall be charged by the Administrative Authority for the issuance of an
excavation permit. The fee for each application and permit shall be charged
at the following rate(s):
a. Permit Fee (nonrefundable):
1. Excavation up to 500 square feet: $150
2. Excavation over 500 square feet: $300
b. Cash Bond. To be posted by contractor or homeowner and held by the
Township for one (1) year from the date the excavation trench is
inspected and approved.
1. Excavation up to 500 square feet: $1,000
2. Excavation over 500 square feet: $5,000
c. Inspection Fees. The Township shall furnish and the permittee shall pay
for an inspector for each day from the time any pavement, street,
roadway, curb or sidewalk is opened or until the construction has been
restored, in the opinion of the superintendent of public works, to the
condition is previously existed.
1. Excavation up to 500 square feet: $500
2. Excavation over 500 square feet: $1,000 minimum of $1.75 square
foot, whichever is higher
Remaining balance to be returned to applicant after inspection of
trench opening for release of cash bond.
d. Utilities. Public utilities operated under the supervision of the Public
Utilities Commission, public utilities holding a franchise from the
Township and other governmental agencies which desire to obtain
permits under the provisions of this chapter may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting permit fees by the administrative authority but
shall post a bond, which may be the bond of the public utility solely, in
the penal sum of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars running in favor of
the Township and file it with the Township Clerk. The bond shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this
chapter in respect to each street opening. The utility shall post a
construction observation escrow deposit of five thousand ($5,000.00)
dollars which deposit will be used by the Township to cover all
inspection costs. The escrow shall be replenished as necessary to
maintain a five thousand ($5,000.00) dollar balance quarterly.
In lieu of the filing of the certificate of insurance for bodily injury and
property damage, the public utility may file with the Township Clerk,
§ 19-1.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-1.4
1:352
§ 19-1.5. (Reserved)
§ 19-1.6. Insurance. [1973 Code § 12-10.6]
A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish the Administrative Authority satisfactory evidence in writing
that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the
performance of the excavation work and the period of the excavation permit
public liability insurance of not less than one hundred thousand
($100,000.00) dollars for any one (1) person and three hundred thousand
($300,000.00) dollars for any one (1) accident and property damage
insurance of not less than fifty thousand ($50,000.00) dollars duly issued
by an insurance company authorized to do business in this State. The
policies of insurance shall name the Township of Aberdeen as an additional
insured under the policies. Permittee will further submit a surety bond or
a completed works insurance policy guaranteeing the restoration of the
excavation in a good and safe condition as near as may be to its original
condition as determined by the Administrative Authority for a period of
twelve (12) months after work has been done, usual wear and tear accepted.
§ 19-1.7. Protective Measures and Routing of Traffic. [1973 Code §
12-10.7; Ord. No. 4-1981]
at the same time the bond is filed, a letter certifying that it is a selfinsurer
and exempt from the necessity of obtaining an insurance policy
pursuant to the provisions of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
a. Guard Lights. It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an
excavation in or upon any public place to place and maintain barriers
and warning devices necessary for the safety of the general public as
follows:
Barriers and warning lights shall conform to the requirements set forth
in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (M.U.T.C.D.) Warning
lights to indicate a hazard to traffic shall be in use from one-half hour
before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise on the next day.
b. Traffic Flow. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure
that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions
shall be maintained at all times as near normal as practical so as to
cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the
adjacent properties and to the general public.
1. When traffic conditions permit, the Administrative Authority may
by written approval permit the closing of streets and alleys to all
traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his opinion it is
necessary. The written approval of the Administrative Authority
may require that the permittee give notification to various public
agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written
approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. The permittee
shall route and control traffic including its own vehicles as directed
§ 19-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.7
1:353
§ 19-1.8. Clearance for Vital Structures. [1973 Code § 12-10.8]
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water
gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital
equipment as designated by the Administrative Authority.
§ 19-1.9. Protection of Traffic and Pedestrians. [1973 Code §
12-10.9]
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic
at all street intersections where possible, and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. If any excavation is
made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall
be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide
enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent
sidewalk, a passageway of at least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be
maintained along such sidewalk line.
§ 19-1.10. Abandonment of Substructures. [1973 Code § 12-10.10]
Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment
of service lines designated to serve single properties, the person owning,
using, controlling or having an interest therein shall, within thirty (30) days
after such abandonment, file with the Administrative Authority a statement
by the Township Police Department. The following steps must be
taken before any street may be closed or restricted to traffic:
(a) The permittee must receive the approval of the Township
Police Department.
(b) The permittee must notify the Chief of the Fire Department
and First Aid Squad of any street closed.
(c) Upon completion of the construction work, the permittee must
notify the Police Department, the Fire and First Aid
Departments before traffic is redirected to its normal flow.
(d) Where a flagman or flagmen are deemed necessary by the
Administrative Authority and/or the Police Department, they
shall be furnished by the permittee at his own expense. If, in
the opinion of the Administrative Authority or the Police
Department, the permittee is not maintaining sufficient traffic
operation, a Township Police Officer may be directed to
perform such traffic direction by the Administrative Authority
and the cost of same will be borne by the permittee.
2. Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the
construction operation to alert traffic within a public street, and
cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic,
in accordance with the instructions of the Administrative Authority.
§ 19-1.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-1.10
1:354
in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned.
If the abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes in
the way, of an installation of the Township or any other public body, which
installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove
such abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the
course of excavation for construction of the facility by the Township or any
other public body.
§ 19-1.11. Protection of Adjoining Property. [1973 Code § 12-10.11]
The permittee shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations
and taking other measures suitable for the purpose; and each permittee
shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner as to avoid
unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and
occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate
measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable, in the performance of
the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris. Between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. he shall not use, except with the express written
permission of the Administrative Authority or in case of an emergency
as herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing
noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighboring property.
§ 19-1.12. Care of Excavated Material. [1973 Code § 12-10.12]
The following shall apply:
a. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench,
or in any street, shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area
being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated
material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley,
the Administrative Authority shall have the authority to require that the
permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul
it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's
responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
b. All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform to the
safety requirements for shoring, bracing and ladders in trenches in
accordance with State Trench and Tunnel Construction Safety Orders,
as they now or may hereafter exist.
c. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified
by the Administrative Authority. Whenever necessary, in order to
expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the dirt nuisance, toe boards or
§ 19-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.12
1:355
§ 19-1.13. Responsibility for Clean-Up. [1973 Code § 12-10.13]
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all rubbish, excess earth, rock or other debris resulting from such work.
All clean-up operations at the location of such excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the Administrative Authority. From time to time, as may be
ordered by the Administrative Authority and in any event immediately after
completion of such work, the permittee shall, at his own expense, clean up
and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from such
work and, upon failure to do so within twenty-four (24) hours after having
been notified to do so by the Administrative Authority, the work may be
done by the Administrative Authority and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee. The permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the
surety bond provided hereunder.
§ 19-1.14. Protection of Watercourses. [1973 Code § 12-10.14]
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one (1) foot in width from
the face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an
intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and be at all
times maintained.
The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water,
muck, silt, slickings, or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting
from slicking or other operations and shall be responsible for any damage
resulting from his failure to so provide.
§ 19-1.15. Breaking Through Pavement. [1973 Code § 12-10.15]
The following rules shall apply:
bins may be required by the Administrative Authority to prevent the
spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
a. Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations
will be required by the Administrative Authority to confine pavement
damage to the limits of the trench.
b. Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required by the
Administrative Authority when the nature of the work or the condition
of the street warrants. When required, the depth of the cut shall not be
less than one (1) inch in depth; however, depths greater than (1) one
inch may be required by the Administrative Authority when
circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the
Administrative Authority outside of the limits of the excavation over
cave-outs, overbreaks and small floating sections.
§ 19-1.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-1.15
1:356
§ 19-1.16. Backfilling. [1973 Code § 12-10.16; Ord. No. 12-1986]
c. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Administrative
Authority when the use endangers existing substructures or other
property.
d. Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or joint.
e. Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks,
and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
f. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
g. Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
h. Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be
required by the Administrative Authority.
i. The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement damage existing
prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that
may be unstable, in which case the permittee shall remove and pave the
area.
a. All backfilling shall be done with a clean cohesionless soil, such as sand
or gravel, free from lumps and stone, or, if approved by the
Administrative Authority, other material of equivalent compacting
qualities. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall
not be used in the backfill. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that
will permit the restoration of the surface to a density condition not less
than that existing prior to excavation, unless otherwise specified.
Backfill is required to be placed in lifts no greater than three (3) feet in
depth if a Hydro Hammer or other heavy compactor is to be used;
where hand compaction is to be done, the depth of the lift is limited to
four (4) inches. In the latter case the number of men backfilling shall
not exceed the number engaged in compacting. The Administrative
Authority may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soiltesting
laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in
soil mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation is not
being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be
permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material meets the
minimum requirements as prescribed by the Administrative Authority.
All expenses of such tests shall be borne by the permittee.
b. Backfilling of a trench above five (5) feet shall be filled with quarry
blend stone two (2) inch aggregate. Any backfilling below five (5) feet
shall be subject to the approval of the Administrative Authority
consistent with paragraph a. above. Prior to the installation of
bituminous surfaces, ninety-five (95%) percent compaction of backfill
materials must be achieved. Backfilling a trench requires replacement
of all removed material with dirty stone, except for six (6) inches of sand
§ 19-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.16
1:357
§ 19-1.17. Surface Restoration. [1973 Code § 12-10.17; Ord. No.
4-1981]
§ 19-1.18. Surface Restoration; Pavement Type. [1973 Code §
12-10.17.1; Ord. No. 4-1981]
around piping. Black topping shall be (6) inches of stabilized base and
one and one-half (1 1/2) inches of top. All cuts to be sealed between new
and old black top. All trenches shall be cut square and out to width of
widest part of trench.
Prior to backfilling a trench, either the Road Foreman or the
Construction Official must be notified.
a. Permanent resurfacing of the street excavation shall be made by the
permittee.
b. In special situations allowed by the Administrative Authority the
permittee may maintain temporary pavement for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days after all backfilling is completed. Any temporary
pavement used shall be kept safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic as
directed by the Administrative Authority. Temporary paving of a quality
unacceptable to the Administrative Authority shall be removed and
replaced with acceptable material of the type designated by the
Administrative Authority.
a. Prior to the placement of the base course of pavement and the surface
course, the subgrade shall be inspected and approved by the
Administrative Authority. All excavations shall be restored as follows:
1. A minimum of four (4) inches of bituminous stabilized base course,
mix no. 5 or other mix design approved by the Administrative
Authority shall be installed as a base course, the surface of this
course being one and one-half (1/2) inches below the existing
finished surface surrounding the excavation.
2. Over the aforementioned base course, a minimum of one and onehalf
(1/2) inch FABC Type I, mix no. 5 pavement shall be used as the
finished riding surface.
The material shall be placed and compacted in lift thickness
directed by the Administrative Authority. No material shall be
placed without the proper equipment for placement and
compaction being present on the site prior to the beginning of
work. The equipment required to restore the roadway surface shall
be dictated by the size of the opening and shall be designated by
the Administrative Authority.
Any surface restoration, including the pavement surface which is
not completed in accordance with the Administrative Authority's
direction, shall be removed and replaced acceptable to the
Administrative Authority.
§ 19-1.16 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-1.19
1:358
§ 19-1.19. Trenches. [1973 Code § 12-10.18]
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing ordinances or regulations or as may be specified
by the Administrative Authority. No greater length shall be open for
pavement removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all
other operations without the written permission of the Administrative
Authority.
§ 19-1.20. Excavation Time Limits. [1973 Code § 12-10.19]
Excavations shall be completed as follows:
§ 19-1.21. Emergency Action; Permit. [1973 Code § 12-10.20]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property, or
for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided
that the person making such excavation shall apply to the Administrative
Authority for such a permit on the first working day after such work is
commenced.
§ 19-1.22. Inspections; Enforcement. [1973 Code § 12-10.21]
The Administrative Authority shall make such inspections as are reasonably
necessary to the enforcement of this section. The Administrative Authority
shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules
and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out
the intent of this section.
§ 19-1.23. Liability of Township. [1973 Code § 12-10.22]
The section shall not be construed as imposing upon the Township or
any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the Township or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
a. Prompt Completion. After an excavation is commenced, the permittee
shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work
covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such
work so as not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon more than
is reasonably necessary.
b. Emergency Work Time Limits. When traffic conditions, the safety or
convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that
the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the
Administrative Authority shall have full power to order, at the time the
permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee twenty-four (24) hours a day, to the end that
such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 19-1.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1.23
1:359
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance
of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 19-1.24. Excavations by Township. [1973 Code § 12-10.23]
The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any excavation work
under the direction of competent Township authorities by employees of the
Township or by any contractor of the Township performing work for and in
behalf of the Township necessitating openings of excavations in streets.
§ 19-1.25. Return of Security. [1973 Code § 12-10.24; Ord. No.
4-1981]
Following the completion of the excavation and restoration of the roadway
surface acceptable to the Township, an inspection will be made by the
Administrative Authority to determine whether the roadway surface has
been restored in an acceptable manner. Once the Administrative Authority
has determined that the restoration is acceptable, he will notify the
applicant and return the permit fees posted under subsection 19-1.4 herein.
The amount returned shall be less any additional costs incurred by the
Township to make the roadway safe, make repairs, perform traffic direction,
emergency repairs, erection of barricades, inspection by the Township
Engineer or other municipal authorities and any and all other work
performed during the excavation or restoration of the roadway for which
the Township has incurred an expense. The permit fee will be returned
no sooner than thirty (30) days following the acceptance of the roadway
restoration by the Township. This time period will be considered sufficient
to assure that the roadway restoration and compaction of the subgrade has
been sufficient and no setting of the roadway surface occurs.
It shall be the obligation of the permittee to notify the Administrative
Authority of his requests for final inspection required for the return of a
permit fee and/or surety bond.
§ 19-1.26. Reopening of Paved Streets. [1973 Code § 12-10.25; Ord.
No. 12-1986; Ord. No. 3-1988; Ord. No. 16-1995]
Any roads which have been resurfaced or reconstructed shall not be
reopened for a period of five (5) years, except in emergency situations, as
determined by Administrative Authority.
§ 19-2. HEIGHT OF BRUSH AND HEDGES AT INTERSECTIONS.
§ 19-2.1. Height and Location Restriction. [1973 Code § 4-5.1]
All persons owning or leasing lands lying within the geographical limits of
the Township shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing on
the lands within ten (10) feet of any roadway and within twenty-five (25)
feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a height of not more than
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet.
§ 19-1.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-2.2
1:360
§ 19-2.2. Notice to Remove. [1973 Code § 4-5.2]
If any person owning or leasing lands lying within the geographical limits of
the Township shall fail, refuse or neglect to cut the brush, hedges and other
plant life to a height of not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet within
ten (10) days of receipt, by registered mail or personal service of notice to
that effect from the Manager of the Township, the Township may provide for
the cutting of the brush, hedges or other plant life by or under the direction
of the proper officer.
§ 19-2.3. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 4-5.3]
The Manager is hereby empowered to administer and enforce the provisions
of this section with respect to any and all streets and roads, owned and
maintained by the Township.
§ 19-2.4. Removal by the Township. [1973 Code § 4-5.4]
In all cases where brush, hedges or other plant life is cut from any lands in
the Township by or under direction of the Chief of Police of the Township,
the Manager shall certify the cost of the cutting to the Township Council
which shall examine the certificate and if found correct shall cause the cost
to be charged against the lands, or in the event that such cost is excessive,
to cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against the lands. The
amount charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner
as taxes.
§ 19-3. (RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Section 19-3, Sight Triangles, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 31-2005, was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 9-2007.
§ 19-4. OUTSIDE DINING.
§ 19-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
a. Food service establishment shall mean a facility established primarily
for the preparation and service of food and drink on the premises,
which shall include restaurants, bakeries, ice cream parlors, taverns,
delicatessens, and similar establishments.
b. Outside dining shall mean the utilization of sidewalk space beyond the
building line to accommodate the serving of food and drink to patrons of
a food service establishment, immediately fronting on that sidewalk
space, which space is separated from the pedestrian area of the
sidewalk by bollards.
§ 19-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4.1
1:361
§ 19-4.2. Requirements for Operation. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
No outside dining is permitted within the Township unless and until the
owner or operator of a food service establishment has fully complied with
and continues to comply with all of the criteria set forth in this chapter.
§ 19-4.3. When Permitted. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
Outside dining is permitted within the Township from May 1st through
October 1st each year.
§ 19-4.4. Where Permitted. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
Outside dining is permitted where the sidewalk space fronting the building
of a food service establishment is a minimum of 10 feet wide. Outside dining
shall not be permitted to project into a sidewalk more than half the width
of said sidewalk or more than eight (8) feet into a sidewalk, whichever is
less. The remaining public portion of the sidewalk must remain free for
pedestrian and emergency access.
§ 19-4.5. Regulations. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
§ 19-4.6. Zoning Permit. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
c. Bollards shall mean short vertical, non-permanent, movable posts
designed to separate a portion of the sidewalk area.
a. Bollards must be placed on the perimeter of the sidewalk area where
outside dining is permitted to separate said area from the public
portion of the sidewalk.
b. No planters, flower boxes, menu stands, decoration items or the like
may protrude into the public portion of the sidewalk.
c. All bollards, tables, chairs and any other items associated with outside
dining shall be removed from the sidewalk at the close of each business
day.
a. The owner or operator of a food service establishment seeking to have
outside dining must apply for a zoning permit. If the operator of a food
service establishment is a tenant, the zoning permit application must
include a letter from the landlord or property owner stating that the
tenant is permitted to operate outside dining on the property.
b. The zoning permit application must comply with all rules and
regulations regarding zoning permit applications in the Township; it
must be detailed and include a copy of the site plan showing the
location of the proposed outside dining as well as the dimensions of the
tables, chairs and the location of the bollards.
§ 19-4.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 19-4.6
1:362
§ 19-4.7. Insurance Required. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
The food service establishment seeking to have outside dining shall file with
the Township Building Department, a certificate of liability insurance in the
minimum amount of one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars, naming
the Township of Aberdeen as an additional insured, which policy shall be
kept in full force during the operation of the outside dining.
§ 19-4.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
Any person, firm, corporation, or business violating any of the provisions of
this section, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than fifty ($50.00) dollars nor exceeding one thousand ($1000.00) dollars,
and each and every day in which said violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 19-4.9. Suspension. [Ord. No. 8-2013]
The Township may require a food service establishment to temporarily
suspend its outside dining and remove all tables, chairs and other items
associated with its outside dining in the event there is an emergency or if
the Township is conducting any work which requires the suspension of the
outside dining.
Chapter 20
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 20-1. AIR POLLUTION CODE.20
§ 20-1.1. Findings. [1973 Code § 14-1]
It is hereby declared by the Township Council that pollution of the
atmosphere by smoke, cinders, soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors,
dust and other contaminants is a menace to the health, welfare and comfort
of the residents of the Township and a cause of substantial damage to
property. For the purpose of controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution,
it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to minimize air
pollution as herein defined and prohibit excessive emission of the same, to
establish standards governing the installation, maintenance and operation
of equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion which are a source
c. The zoning permit application must be reviewed and approved by the
Township Zoning Officer with the advice of the Police and Fire
Departments.
d. Once the zoning permit is approved, the approval is for the life of the
business.
20.The power to provide air pollution regulations is part of the police power granted by
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, 30.
§ 19-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.1
1:363
or potential source of air pollution, and in furtherance of this purpose to
cooperate and coordinate these efforts with the State Department of Health,
Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 20-1.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 14-2]
As used in this section:
AIR POLLUTION — shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere
of one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are,
or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant
life, or to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of
life or property throughout the Township as shall be affected thereby, and
excludes all aspects of employer - employee relationship as to health and
safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — shall mean those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides, or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — shall mean any furnace, boiler, water
heater, device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still, or
other apparatus, or a group or collections of such units in the process of
fuel-burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment
shall be considered incinerators as herein defined and not as fuel-burning
equipment under this definition. Ovens, stoves, or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATORS — shall mean any device, apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing, or salvaging by fire any material or
substance, including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris, or
scrap or facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — shall mean a property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPEN BURNING — shall mean any fire wherein the products of combustion
are emitted into the open air and are not directed through a stack or
chimney.
OPERATOR — shall mean any person who has care, custody, or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner.
OWNER — shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care,
or control of any premises or part thereof including but not limited to a
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary,
including but not limited to: executor, administrator, trustee, receiver,
guardian, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or
any part of any premises, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
§ 20-1.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 20-1.2
1:364
responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased
or subleased.
REFUSE — shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible waste (except
body wastes) and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish,
yard trimmings, leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — shall mean Ringelmann's Scale for
Grading the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of
Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator, or device for the measurement of
smoke density which is approved by the State Department of Health of the
State of New Jersey, as the equivalent of the Ringlemann's Scale.
RUBBISH — shall mean solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, and shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes, leather,
rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry, and other similar
materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — shall mean any business, trade, or industry
engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or
material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping
containers, or drums.
SMOKE — shall mean gas-borne and air-borne particles arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — shall mean solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business,
trade, or industry, and shall include but not be limited to plastic products,
carton, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders,
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 20-1.3. Prohibition of Air Pollution. [1973 Code § 14-3]
a. General Regulation. No person or owner of property, and no person
having possession or control of property, shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit, to be emitted into the open air substances in such quantities as
shall result in air pollution. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to the use of economic poisons.
b. Open Burning. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit, open
burning of refuse or plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open
burning except as provided in Subsection 20-1.3c.
c. Open Burning of Trade Waste. The open burning of trade waste is not
prohibited where no other known method of disposal can be used
without hazard to health or property and the required affidavit has been
filed with and approved by the Commissioner of the New Jersey State
Department of Health in accordance with Chapter II, Section 1.4 of the
New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
§ 20-1.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.3
1:365
§ 20-1.4. Incinerator Regulations. [1973 Code § 14-4]
§ 20-1.5. Inspections and Right of Entry. [1973 Code § 14-5]
d. Smoke. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit, smoke from any
fuel-burning equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker
than No. 1 of the Ringlemann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open
air. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade
or appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringlemann
Smoke Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three
(3) minutes in any fifteen (15) consecutive minutes.
a. Smoke Emissions. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit, smoke
from any incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringlemann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air;
or emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringlemann
Smoke Chart.
b. New Fires. The provisions of paragraph a., above, shall not apply to
smoke emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringlemann Smoke
Chart, for a period of no longer than three (3) consecutive minutes; or
to emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
which is not greater than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the
Ringlemann Smoke Chart, for a period no longer than three (3)
consecutive minutes.
c. Visible Particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
d. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used, any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
e. Limitation on Time of Operation. No person shall operate, and no owner
or operator of any building in the Township shall permit the operation
of, an incinerator prior to 7 a.m. or after 5 p.m. of any day and all
operation shall be completely terminated by 5 p.m., including complete
extinction of the fire and removal of material in a safe manner from the
firebox to a noncombustible container; provided that by special permit,
the Air Pollution Control Officer may, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare
of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
§ 20-1.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 20-1.5
1:366
a. Inspections Authorized. All buildings and premises subject to this
chapter are subject to inspection from time to time by the Air Pollution
Control Officer or his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and
areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such
inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the
premises are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that
inspections may be made at other times if:
1. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
2. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection
during other than the prescribed hours;
3. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
b. Emergency Inspections. Emergency inspections may be authorized
without warrant if the Air Pollution Control Officer has reason to believe
that a condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health,
or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required
to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render
ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition.
Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in time
of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32.
Where the Air Pollution Control Officer or his duly authorized
representatives is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or
prevented by the owner, occupant, or operator from conducting an
inspection of the premises such person shall be in violation of this
section and subject to penalties hereunder.
c. Search Warrant or Access Warrant. The Air Pollution Control Officer
may upon affidavit, apply to the Municipal Judge for a search warrant
setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that
provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of
the section may exist on the premises, including one or more of the
following:
1. That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Air Pollution Control Officer for periodic
inspections or premises of the type involved.
2. That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash,
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this section exist.
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
or system, types of incinerators, particular use of premises or other
factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
§ 20-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.5
1:367
§ 20-2. REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS TO CLEAN UP HAZARDOUS
WASTE.
§ 20-2.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 17-9.1; Ord. No. 31-1992]
As used in this chapter:
ACT OF GOD — shall mean any act exclusively occasioned by an
unanticipated, grave natural disaster without the interference of any human
activity.
DISCHARGE — shall mean any intentional or unintentional action or
omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of hazardous substances into any waters
which flow within the jurisdiction of this Township or any land within the
jurisdiction of this Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — shall include any items used to extinguish or
prevent any hazardous material fire or to stop or contain any leak, release
or spill involving any hazardous material, which cannot be reused or cannot
be replenished without cost after that particular incident. These expendable
items include but are not restricted to fire-fighting foams, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums,
protective equipment and clothing, including but not limited to chemical
protective suits, chemical protective gloves, goggles, and any other such
items owned or controlled by the Township.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — shall mean any
material, solid, liquid or gas listed as such under the National Fire
Protection Association Guide of Hazardous Materials or the Department
of Transportation Guide Book; any environmental hazardous substance on
the environmental hazardous substance list adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 34:5A-4; any elements and compounds, including but not limited
to petroleum products, which are defined as such by the NJDEPE after
public hearing; and which shall also be read to include the list of hazardous
substances adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Pub. L. 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act
of 1977, Pub. L. 95-217 (33 U.S.C. Section 1252 et seq.); the list of toxic
pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA pursuant to Section 307 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act; the list of hazardous substances
If the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the matters set fort in
the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant
permitting access to and inspection of that part of the premises on
which the nuisance or violation may exist.
d. Emergency Powers. This section is to be liberally construed to
effectuate the purposes herein described. Nothing herein is to be
construed as repealing or abridging the emergency powers of any
agency of government except to the extent expressly set forth herein.
§ 20-1.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 20-2.1
1:368
adopted by the EPA pursuant to Section 101 of the "Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980," Pub.
L. 96-510 (42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq.); any hospital or medical waste
including but not limited to syringes, bandages and discarded
pharmaceutical products; and any other such material warranting removal
or cleanup in the opinion of the officials of the Township; provided, however,
that sewage and sewage sludge shall not be considered as hazardous
substances for the purposes of this section.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT — shall mean any county or municipality, or
any office, agency, division, or instrumentality thereof.
PERSON — shall include public or private corporations, companies,
associations, societies, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies,
individuals, the United States, the State of New Jersey and any of its
political subdivisions or agents.
PETROLEUM OR PETROLEUM PRODUCTS — shall include oil or petroleum
of any kind and in any form, including but not limited to oil, petroleum,
gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse, oil mixed with other
wastes, crude oils, and substances or additives to be utilized in the refining
or blending of crude petroleum or petroleum stock in this state.
TOWNSHIP — shall mean, for the purposes of this section, to include
the employees, agents, officers, officials, volunteer organizations and
supporting units of the Township of Aberdeen.
VEHICLE — shall mean any motorized equipment, registered or
unregistered, including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles,
trucks, tractor trailers, construction equipment, farm machinery,
watercraft, aircraft and trains.
VESSEL — shall mean any container, drum, box, cylinder, tank or other
contrivance that is practically capable of being used as a means to hold,
contain, carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or not the
container was manufactured for the containment of a hazardous material.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — shall mean any duly incorporated
volunteer fire, ambulance, first aid, emergency or rescue company or squad,
located in the Township of Aberdeen.
§ 20-2.2. Purpose. [1973 Code § 17-9.2; Ord. No. 31-1992]
a. This section provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of,
any and all equipment utilized by the Township and for costs expended,
without regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating, controlling,
or containing any incident in which a hazardous substance or material
is involved in a discharge, fire or explosion, or where the potential
thereof exists, or for the prevention of same.
b. This section entitles the Township to reimbursement for the expenses
incurred for the wages (regular or overtime) paid to its employees,
agents, or servants as a result of an incident, including but not limited
to a discharge, fire or explosion involving a hazardous substance or
§ 20-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.2
1:369
§ 20-2.3. Hazardous Substances; Prohibition of Discharge. [1973
Code § 17-9.3; Ord. No. 31-1992]
§ 20-2.4. Responsibility for Reimbursement to the Township for
Expendable Items. [1973 Code § 17-9.4; Ord. No. 31-1992]
Reimbursement to the Township of Aberdeen for any expendable items used
shall be made by the following parties:
material, as well as the costs of medical and hospital treatment for
injuries incurred by agents, servants and employees of the Township.
c. This section also provides for a penalty for violation of the section for
either committing a discharge or for the failure to report the same to
the Township.
a. The discharge of hazardous substances or materials is prohibited. This
section shall not apply to the discharge of hazardous substances or
materials pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a
Federal or State permit.
b. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge, or becomes
aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the effective date
of this section, shall immediately notify the Township of Aberdeen
Police Department at 732-566-2054, or by using the 911 emergency
system once it becomes available to the Township.
c. Whenever any hazardous substance or material is discharged, the
Township may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the
removal of such discharge.
d. Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance, or who has
failed to report a discharge, or who is in any way responsible for any
hazardous substance which has been or shall be removed by the
Township, shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all cleanup and removal costs, wages (regular and overtime)
paid, and any and all costs of medical and hospital treatment for
injuries incurred by the agents, servants and employees of the
Township.
e. An act or omission caused solely by war, sabotage, or God, or a
combination thereof, shall be the only defense which may be raised in
any action arising under the provisions of this section.
a. The owner or operator of, or person responsible for, any vehicle
accountable for any discharge of hazardous materials;
b. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
materials involved in any fire or discharge on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, and whether accidental or through
negligence;
§ 20-2.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 20-2.4
1:370
§ 20-2.5. Reimbursement to the Township for Services Rendered.
[1973 Code § 17-9.5; Ord. No. 31-1992]
§ 20-2.6. Time Limit for Payment. [1973 Code § 17-9.6; Ord. No.
31-1992]
§ 20-2.7. Penalties. [1973 Code § 17-9.7; Ord. No. 31-1992; New]
Any person, owner or operator responsible for any incident involving a
discharge, fire or explosion involving hazardous substances or materials,
who fails to reimburse the Township of Aberdeen within the time set forth
in this section, shall be subject to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section
1-5. The minimum penalty shall be not less than one hundred ($100) dollars
c. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any
discharge of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or
through negligence; or
d. Any person responsible for any fire or discharge of hazardous materials
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
a. Any person responsible for any discharge involving a hazardous
substance or material must provide reimbursement for services
rendered by any recovery company or towing company or for other
technical assistance called for by the Township to handle such an
incident.
b. In the event that a vehicle has been responsible for an incident, it shall
be impounded, where possible, by the Township Police Department
until such time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the
responsible official in conjunction and in cooperation with the
Township, and until such time as arrangements have been made to
reimburse the Township and the towing company for their expenditures
under the terms of this section.
a. The person, owner or operator responsible for any incident involving
the discharge, fire or explosion of hazardous substances or materials
shall reimburse the Township for the full price of all necessary
expendable items, plus costs associated with stopping, controlling or
containing such a discharge, fire or explosion within forty-five (45) days
after receipt of an invoice from the Township setting forth expenses
incurred to date resulting from the aforesaid incident.
b. The Township shall utilize its best efforts to collect costs hereunder, and
shall reimburse its agents or the local units or volunteer organizations
for amounts collected. In the event that the Township is not able to
collect the costs or only a portion thereof, the Township shall not be
responsible to its agents or the local units or volunteer organizations
for the full amount of same.
§ 20-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.7
1:371
per day. The person responsible for committing a discharge, or who fails to
report the discharge, will be liable for the same penalties.
§ 20-2.8. Disposition of Funds. [1973 Code § 17-9.8; Ord. No.
31-1992]
A local government unit or volunteer organization responding to an
emergency caused by an incident involving the discharge, fire or explosion
of hazardous substances or materials in the Township shall keep a detailed
record of the costs attributable thereto, and shall certify that record to
the Township Council. Subject to the provisions of subsection 20-2.6b,
any reimbursement collected by the Township for such incidents shall be
credited to the appropriate funds of each local government unit or volunteer
organization from which monies were expended in responding to the
emergency.
§ 20-3. FRACKING WASTE. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015]
§ 20-3.1. Definitions.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING — The drilling technique of expanding existing
fractures or creating new fractures in rock by injecting water, often with
chemicals, sand, or other substances, and often under pressure, into or
underneath the surface of the rock for purposes including, but not limited
to, well drilling and natural gas exploration and production. The term
"hydraulic fracturing" shall include "fracking," "hydrofracking,"
"hydrofracturing," and other colloquial terms for this drilling technique.
§ 20-3.2. Byproducts.
No wastewater, wastewater solids, sludge, drill cuttings or other byproducts
resulting from hydraulic fracturing for the purpose of natural gas
exploration or production may be treated, discharged, disposed of, applied
to a roadway or otherwise released into the environment, or stored in the
Township of Aberdeen.
§ 20-3.3. Enforcement.
a. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this section, upon
conviction before a Municipal Court Judge of the Township of Aberdeen,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,500 in the discretion of
Municipal Court Judge.
b. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this section, the
Township Attorney, or his or her designee, may commence an action in
the Superior Court of New Jersey to enjoin a person or entity that has
violated this section and for any other appropriate remedies at law or
equity.
§ 20-2.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 20-3.4
1:372
§ 20-3.4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
section and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 20-3.5. Severability.
If any portion or clause of this section is declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, same shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other part or portion of this section.
§ 20-3.6. Effective Date.
The effective date of this section shall be 20 days after its final passage by
Township Council and approval by the Mayor at the time and in the manner
provided by law.
Chapter 21
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
The power to regulate soil removal is included within the general
police power granted by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29, 30.
§ 21-1. FINDINGS. [1973 Code § 12-1]
The Township Council finds that the uncontrolled and unregulated
excavation, filling and removal of soil has resulted and will result in
conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare,
deterring substantially the efforts of the Township to promote and
effectuate the general purpose of Township planning.
§ 21-2. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 12-2]
As used in this chapter:
MOVE — shall mean to dig, excavate, remove, deposit, fill, grade, replace,
level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour of land or to
transport or supply the same.
REDISTRIBUTION — shall mean any change or alteration in the grade of
any property.
SOIL — shall mean earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt,
without regard to the presence or absence of organic matter.
§ 21-3. PERMIT REQUIRED. [1973 Code § 12-3]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil has been taken, except
in connection with the construction or alterations of a building on such
premises, and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
procured permission therefor from the Township Manager.
§ 20-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:373
§ 21-4. APPLICATIONS. [1973 Code § 12-4]
The Township Manager shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Secretary of the Planning Board an
application requesting such permission, and until the following have been
observed:
A map of the premises showing the present contour lines of the premises
and the proposed contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from
such intended removal of soil in relation to the topography of the premises
must also accompany the application.
The proposed contour lines and proposed contour grades shall be subject
to the inspection and approval of the Township Engineer and the Township
Planning Board.
No such permission for soil removal shall be issued until such map has been
filed and until the proposed contour lines and grades have been approved
by the Township Engineer and the Planning Board.
§ 21-5. CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION. [1973 Code § 12-5]
In acting on the application, the Township Manager shall be guided by the
following factors.
Soil erosion by water and wind.
Drainage or sewerage problems.
Soil fertility.
Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting roads and lands.
Land values and uses.
Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated, adjusted
and harmonious physical development of the Township.
If, after considering the above factors, the Township Council determines
that the proposed removal or redistribution of soil will not be detrimental to
the health, safety or welfare of the Township or its inhabitants, the Council
shall issue the necessary permit.
§ 21-6. APPEAL. [1973 Code § 12-6]
The applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Township Council from
a denial for such a permit by the Township Manager provided the appeal is
filed in writing with the Township Clerk within ten (10) days from the date
of the denial.
§ 21-4 ABERDEEN CODE § 21-7
1:374
§ 21-7. BOND REQUIREMENTS. [1973 Code § 12-7]
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall file with the Township Manager a bond with
satisfactory surety, the amount to be determined after report of the
Township Engineer and the Planning Board as to necessities and
requirements in the undertaking, and shall be conditioned as follows.
That the permittee will complete the work authorized by the permit in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter.
That the applicant will repair any public street, structure or land which may
be damaged as a result of the work authorized by the permit.
That the owner or applicant will pay the cost of inspection and supervision
incurred by the Township Engineer in examination and inspection during
the progress of soil removal.
§ 21-8. REGULATIONS. [1973 Code § 12-8]
Soil removal or redistribution conducted under a permit issued under this
chapter shall be in accordance with the following regulations:
Operations shall be conducted so that there shall not be no sharp declivities,
pits or depressions.
The area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to
conform with the contour lines and grades.
The top layer of soil to a depth of four (4) inches shall not be removed from
the premises, but shall be set aside and respread over the premises when
the rest of the soil has been removed.
§ 21-9. EXCEPTIONS. [1973 Code § 12-9]
These exceptions shall be noted:
Nothing within the chapter shall prohibit the transportation of topsoil into
the Township of Aberdeen from another municipality.
Soil may be transported from one lot to another within an area owned or
developed by one (1) person.
Chapter 22
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 22-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT;
PURPOSE; METHODS OF RECYCLING FLOOD LOSSES.
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.1
1:375
§ 22-1.1. Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of the Township of Aberdeen,
of Monmouth County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 22-1.2. Findings of Fact.
§ 22-1.2. Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Aberdeen are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 22-1.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-1.4
1:376
§ 22-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD — Is the land
within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood related
erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation, the special flood related erosion
hazard area will be designated a Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 22-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:377
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built in the case
of a building in a coastal high hazard area to have the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above
the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear
walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In Areas of Coastal High Hazard
"elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 22-2 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-2
1:378
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:379
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)21 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
21.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C.A. § 3501 et seq.
§ 22-2 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-2
1:380
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 22-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 22-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Aberdeen, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 22-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
b.
a. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Aberdeen,
Community No. 340312, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
25, 2009, revised June 20, 2018.
2. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s) 34025CIND1B,
34025CIND2B, 34025C0020F, 34025C0028F, 34025C0029F,
34025C0036G, 34025C0037F, 34025C0038F, 34025C0039F, whose
effective date is June 20, 2018.
b. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 1
Aberdeen Square, Aberdeen, New Jersey.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3.3
1:381
§ 22-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days for each
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Aberdeen
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 22-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 22-3.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 22-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
§ 22-4. ADMINISTRATION.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
b. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Aberdeen, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 22-3.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-4.1
1:382
§ 22-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 22-3.2.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to: plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 22-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 22-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 22-4.3.1. Permit Review.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 22-5.2.2; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
d. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed development
alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood damage.
e. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood
level in accordance with § 22-5.4.2d.
§ 22-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4.3.2
1:383
§ 22-4.3.2. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 22-3.2, Basis For Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer §§ 22-5.2.1, Specific Standards,
Residential Construction, and 22-5.2.2, Specific Standards, Nonresidential
Construction.
§ 22-4.3.3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
§ 22-4.3.4. Alteration of Watercourses.
§ 22-4.3.5. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries.
Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 22-4.4.
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 22-4.1c.
c. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 22-5.4.2a, b1 and b2 are met.
d. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control section and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
§ 22-4.3.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-4.4
1:384
§ 22-4.4. VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
§ 22-4.4.1. Appeal Board.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Township of
Aberdeen shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Construction Official in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
c. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Municipal Court as provided
in New Jersey law.
d. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and,
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
§ 22-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4.4.1
1:385
§ 22-4.4.2. Conditions for Variances.
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
e. Upon consideration of the factors of § 22-4.4.1d and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
f. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 22-4.4.1d1
through 11 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 22-4.4.1d or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 22-4.4.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-5
1:386
§ 22-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 22-5.1. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
§ 22-5.1.1. Anchoring.
§ 22-5.1.2. Construction Materials and Methods.
§ 22-5.1.3. Utilities.
§ 22-5.1/4. Subdivision Proposals.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
b. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to
be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
d. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5.1/4
1:387
§ 22-5.1.5. Enclosure Openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 22-5.2. Specific Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 22-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, or in § 22-4.3.2, Use of Other Base Flood Data, the
following standards are required:
§ 22-5.2.1. Residential Construction.
§ 22-5.2.2. Nonresidential Construction.
In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall:
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
d. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five
acres (whichever is less).
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or above base
flood elevation; and
b. Within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
§ 22-5.1/4 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-5.2.2
1:388
§ 22-5.2.3. Manufactured Homes.
§ 22-5.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 22-3.2 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
a. Either:
1. Have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to the level of the
base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM to have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two feet if no depth number is specified), and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures;
b. Or:
1. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 22-4.3.3b2.
a. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 22-5.1.1b.
b. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base
flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If § 22-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 22-5, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
§ 22-5.2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5.3
1:389
§ 22-5.4. Coastal High Hazard Area.
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 22-3.2. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and
hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
§ 22-5.4.1. Location of Structures.
§ 22-5.4.2. Construction Methods.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/10 of a foot at any
point.
a. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of the
mean high tide.
b. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except in an
existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
a. Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on piling or columns so that the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the piling or
columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level, with all space
below the lowest floor's supporting member open so as not to impede
the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided or in
§ 22-5.4.2d.
b. Structural Support.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
2. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto shall
be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement due to
the effects of wind and water loading values, each of which shall
have a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year
(100-year mean recurrence interval).
3. There shall be no fill used for structural support.
c. Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for the
construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for compliance with the provisions of § 22-5.4.2a, b1 and b2.
d. Space Below The Lowest Floor.
§ 22-5.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 22-5.4.2
1:390
§ 22-5.4.3. Sand Dunes.
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones VE and V on the
community's DFIRM which would increase potential flood damage is
prohibited.
§ 22-6. Violations and Penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions.
Chapter 23
1. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls,
open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as provided for
in this section.
2. Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening shall
be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that they are
intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Breakaway walls shall be designed for a safe loading resistance of
not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use
of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading of 20
pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by
local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs
proposed meet the following conditions.
(a) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
(b) The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water load
acting simultaneously on all building components (structural
and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall
be those required by applicable state or local building
standards.
3. If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be used
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage and not
for human habitation.
4. Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the local administrator for approval.
§ 22-5.4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-6
1:391
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Editor's Note: Chapter XXV, Land Development is a complete
compilation and codification of the Land Development Ordinances
adopted by the Township Council of the Township of Aberdeen.
Chapter XXV contains the 1981 Land Development Ordinance as
amended by ordinances adopted through January 1, 2007.
Amendments to the 1981 Land Development Ordinance are noted
in the source history following the section or subsection that was
amended.
§ 25-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 25-1.1. Title.
A comprehensive ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and the
uses and locations of buildings and structures; regulating and restricting
the height and bulk of buildings and structures and determining the area of
yards, courts and other open spaces; regulating and restricting the density
of population; dividing the Township of Aberdeen into districts for such
purposes; adopting a map of said Township showing boundaries and the
classification of such districts; establishing a Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment; and prescribing penalties for the violation of its
provisions.
§ 25-1.2. Short Title.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Land
Development Chapter of the Township of Aberdeen."
§ 25-1.3. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare,
and in furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives:
To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
To provide adequate light, air and open space;
§ 22-6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-1.3
1:392
To ensure that the development of the Township of Aberdeen does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the County and the State as a whole;
To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, and preservation of the environment;
To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies;
To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and
open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements;
To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities
and routes which result in congestion or blight;
To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such
development and to the more efficient use of land; and
To promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning
practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to provide for
maximum utilization of renewable energy sources.
§ 25-1.4. Interpretation of Standards.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or
required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or
resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other laws,
rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are
imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such other laws,
rules, regulations or resolutions shall control.
§ 25-1.5. Prohibited Uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited.
§ 25-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.6
1:393
§ 25-1.6. Time of Compliance.
All requirements shall be met at the time of the erection, enlargement,
alteration, moving or change in use of the principal use. The provisions
of this chapter shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether
or not the entire structure or structures were involved in the erection,
enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
§ 25-2. DEFINITIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS.
§ 25-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 20-1982; Ord. No. 6-1984; Ord. No.
8-1985; Ord. No. 11-1985; Ord. No. 20-1987; Ord. No. 6-1988; Ord.
No. 1-1991; Ord. No. 18-1996; Ord. No. 5-2007 §§ 1,2]
For the purpose of this chapter, certain phrases and words are herein
defined as follows: words used in the present tense include the future;
words used in the singular number include the plural number and vice
versa; the word "used" shall include arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used; the word "lot"
includes the word "plot" and "premises"; the word "building" includes the
word "structure", "dwelling" or "residence"; the word "shall" is mandatory
and not discretionary. Any word or term not defined herein shall be used
with a meaning as defined in Webster's Third New International Dictionary
of the English Language, unabridged (or latest edition). Moreover,
whenever a term is used in this Ordinance which is defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq., unless specifically defined to the contrary in this
Ordinance.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — shall mean a building,
structure or use which is customarily associated with and is subordinate
and incidental to the principal building, structure or use and which is
located on the same lot therewith. An accessory building attached to the
principal building shall comply in all respects with the requirements
applicable to the principal building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — shall mean the Construction Code
Enforcement Official of the Township of Aberdeen, Monmouth County, New
Jersey.
AFFORDABLE, RENTAL — shall mean all shelter costs including utilities
shall not exceed thirty (30%) of gross income.
AFFORDABLE, SALES — shall mean mortgage payments, property taxes,
insurance and homeowners' association fees shall not exceed twenty-eight
(28%) percent of gross income.
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — shall mean any change
in or additions to the supporting members of a building such as walls,
columns, beams, girders, posts or piers.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — shall mean a building or portion thereof used
to house small rides for children and young adolescents, electronic video
§ 25-1.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:394
games, pinball and/or virtual reality games, indoor miniature golf and/or
amusement games of skill and chance.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the application form and
all accompanying documents required by this Ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
BASEMENT — shall mean that portion of a building partly below and partly
above grade, where the ceiling averages four (4) feet or more than four (4)
feet above the finished grade where such grade meets the outside walls of
the building.
BEDROOM — shall mean a room planned or used primarily for sleeping
accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom or living room.
BILLBOARD — shall mean any structure or portion thereof on which
lettered or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes other than
on a building or its grounds, giving the name and occupation of the user of
the premises, the nature of the business conducted therein or the products
primarily sold or manufactured therein.
BODY SHOP — shall mean the land and buildings designed and used for
the structural and/or cosmetic repair of passenger, farm or commercial
vehicles. Body shops, as independent uses, are prohibited in all districts of
the Township.
BUILDING — shall mean any structure or portion thereof having a roof
supported by such things as columns, posts, piers or walls and intended for
the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE — shall mean the square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured on a
horizontal plane around the periphery of the foundations and including
the area under the roof of any structure supported by columns but not
having walls (such as porches, etc.), as measured around the outside of the
outermost extremities of the roof above the columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — shall mean the vertical distance measured to the
highest point from the average elevation of the finished grades at the
foundation along all sides of the building, provided that if the finished grade
is higher than the pre-development grade at any point beneath the building,
then the building height shall be measured from an elevation no higher than
one (1) foot above the highest point of the pre-development grade beneath
the building. In all cases where this chapter provides for height limitations
by reference to a specified height and a specified number of stories, the
intent is to limit height to the specified maximum footage and the specified
number of stories within said footage.
CAMPER — shall mean:
A self-propelled, vehicular structure built as one (1) unit on a chassis
and designed for temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or
a.
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:395
CELLAR — shall mean that portion of a building partly or wholly below
grade, where the ceiling averages less than four feet above the finished
grade where such grade meets the outside walls of the building.
CHANNEL — shall mean a natural or man-made depression or perceptible
extent with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct flowing water
either continuously or periodically.
CHURCH — shall mean for the purposes of this chapter, any house of
worship associated with a religious organization including but not limited to
a meeting house, synagogue, mosque or temple.
CLUSTER SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — shall mean a
development technique based on a gross dwelling unit density for the entire
tract in the zoning district in which it is located and allowing the lot size
for detached dwellings to be reduced or individual segments to have higher
densities so long as the gross density is not exceeded.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — shall mean an open space area within or related
to a site designated as a development and designed and intended for the
use of residents and owners of the development. Common open space may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary
and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development.
COMMON PROPERTY — shall mean a parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water or a combination of land and water, together with the improvements
thereon, and designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment
shared by the residents and owners of a development. Common property
may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are
necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the
development.
CONDITIONAL USE — shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — shall mean an apartment or townhouse building(s)
where each dwelling unit is individually owned by respective housekeeping
units while common property is collectively owned and maintained by all
residents of the building(s).
CRITICAL AREAS — shall mean: 1) any land having a topographic slope of
fifteen (15%) percent grade or greater; and/or 2) any land which lies within
a one hundred (100) year flood plan; and/or and wetlands.
other short-term uses and which contain cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities.
An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities and
used for travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term use and
designed to be attached to the body of another vehicle for transporting
from one (1) location to another.
b.
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:396
DENSITY — shall mean the permitted number of dwelling units per gross
area of lot to be developed.
DESIGN FLOOD OR BASE FLOOD — shall mean the flood having a one (1%)
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two (2)
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or
any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required.
DWELLING — shall mean a structure or portion thereof which is used
exclusively for human habitation.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — shall mean a dwelling containing more than
two (2) dwelling units that may be located on top of each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — shall mean a dwelling which is
designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) family and surrounded
by open space or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by
any means.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — shall mean a one (1) family dwelling in a row
of at least three (3) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by a fire resistant wall.
DWELLING UNIT — shall mean a room or series of connected rooms
designed for permanent residency containing living, cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for one (1) housekeeping unit. The dwelling unit shall be
self-contained and shall not require passing through another dwelling unit
or other indirect route(s) to get to any other portion of the dwelling unit,
nor shall there be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit.
FARM — shall mean a lot of at least five (5) acres, excluding residential
structures and grounds, gainfully used for the growing and harvesting
of crops and/or the raising, breeding and training of livestock, including
truck and fruit farms, nurseries and greenhouses, dairies and livestock
produce, except that poultry farms and commercial piggeries are prohibited
absolutely in all zone districts within the Township, and containing buildings
normally incidental to farming such as: barns, packing, grading and storage
buildings for produce raised on the premises, except that commercial
processing of produce (such as cooking, freezing or canning) shall not be
permitted; buildings for keeping of permitted livestock; and garages for the
keeping of equipment and trucks used in farm operations.
FIRST FLOOR AREA — shall mean the area of the first floor as calculated
measuring the outside dimensions of the building containing only the
residential portion of a dwelling unit and excluding the areas of basements,
garages, carports and breezeways. For a split-level, bi-level or tri-level
dwelling, the area shall be considered to be the sum of the areas of two (2)
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:397
adjoining levels, excluding basements and garages, provided both levels are
connected by permanent, built-in stairs in the interior of the building.
FLOOD FRINGE — shall mean the area between the floodway and the limits
of the flood plain as delineated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — shall mean the floodway and the portions of the
flood fringe which comprise the flood plain.
FLOOD PLAIN — shall mean the area of the flood hazard around brooks,
creeks, rivers, streams, and tidal areas which have been delineated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODWAY — shall mean the channel and portions of the flood hazard area
adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the flood water for based flood.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — shall mean the ratio of the gross floor area
to the area of the lot or tract.
GOLF COURSE — shall mean an area of fifty (50) or more contiguous
acres and containing a full-size professional golf course at least nine (9)
holes in length, each hole not less than three (3) par, together with the
necessary accessory uses and structures, such as club houses and dining
and refreshment facilities, provided the operation of such is incidental and
subordinate to the operation of the golf course.
GRADE — shall mean the slope of a road, path, driveway, swale or other
surface or the average finished ground elevation adjoining a building at
project completion.
GROSS FLOOR AREA (G.F.A.) — shall mean the planned projection of all
roofed areas on a lot multiplied by the number of full stories under each roof
section, provided that the area under any roof overhang of four (4) feet or
less and/or any under roof parking area shall not be included in the G.F.A.
calculation. Basements which satisfy applicable construction definitions of
habitable space are included in the G.F.A. for residential uses.
GROSS TRACT AREA — shall mean the total area included within the
property lines of the lot(s) or parcel(s).
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — shall mean an office maintained in a
residential district and incidental to and part of the residential detached
dwelling on the lot. Such office shall be conducted solely by resident
occupants of the detached dwelling, except that no more than one (1)
person not a resident of the building may be employed on the premises
at the same time, and provided also that no more than four hundred
(400) square feet or the equivalent of the first floor area of the building,
whichever is smaller, shall be used for such purpose; that the gross floor
area for the residence shall remain at least as large as that required in
Section 25-4 for a detached dwelling; that the residential character of the
lot and building shall not be changed; that no occupational sounds shall
be audible outside the building; that no equipment shall be used which
will cause interference with radio and television reception in neighboring
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:398
residences; that the professional office does not reduce the parking and
yard requirements of the detached dwelling; and that there is no exterior
evidence of the professional office other than one (1) unlighted or white
lighted-from-within nameplate sign identifying the home office. The sign
shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and shall be attached flat
against the building or free-standing (if free-standing, no higher than six
(6) feet and set back from all lot lines ten (10) feet). For purposes of this
Ordinance, professional home offices shall be limited to those of a doctor,
chiropractor, podiatrist, osteopath, psychologist, dentist, optometrist,
optician, engineer, architect, planner, lawyer or accountant. Home
professional offices shall be located on arterial or collector roads.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — shall mean one (1) or more persons living
together in one (1) dwelling unit on a non-seasonal basis and sharing living,
sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on a non-profit basis.
INTERESTED PARTY — shall mean in the case of a civil proceeding in any
court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose right to
use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this law or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
law or any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
LIVESTOCK — shall mean domestic animals and fowl including horses,
cows, ponies, and other farm animals but not including dogs, cats or other
animals customarily confined to the residential dwelling. The raising and
keeping of livestock on other than a farm as defined herein is prohibited in
all districts.
LOADING SPACE — shall mean an off-street space or berth on the same
lot with a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading and with fifteen (15) feet of
vertical clearance.
LOT — shall mean any parcel of land legally separated from other parcels or
portions as by a subdivision plat or deed of record, survey map, or by metes
and bounds. No portion of a street shall be included in calculating the lot
boundaries or areas.
LOT AREA — shall mean the area contained within the lot lines of a lot but
not including any portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — shall mean a lot on the junction of and abutting two (2) or
more intersecting streets, where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. All corner lots are considered
to have two (2) front yards, one (1) side yard and one (1) rear yard. Either
street frontage which meets the minimum frontage requirements for that
zone may be considered the lot frontage.
LOT, COVERAGE — shall mean the square footage or other area
measurement by which all buildings and impervious surfaces cover a lot as
measured in a horizontal plane to the limits of the impervious area(s). All
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:399
surfaced parking areas and all required parking areas which are permitted
to remain unsurfaced shall be included in the computation of lot coverage.
LOT, DEPTH — shall mean the shortest distance measured on a horizontal
plane between the front lot line and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line
through the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, FRONTAGE — shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the
same as the lot width, except that on curved alignments with an outside
radius of less than five between the side lot lines measured at the street line
shall not be less than seventy-five (75%) percent of the required minimum
lot width unless a lesser frontage is specified in this chapter.
LOT, INTERIOR — shall mean a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — shall mean any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary
of a lot and the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting
a street.
LOT, WIDTH — shall mean the straight and horizontal distance between
side lot lines at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal
distance from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at
the minimum required building setback line. When the side lot lines are
not parallel, the minimum lot width at the setback line shall not be less
than seventy-five (75%) percent of the minimum lot frontage for the zoning
district in which the lot is located unless a lesser width is specified in this
Ordinance.
MAINTENANCE BOND — shall mean any security acceptable to the
governing body to assure the maintenance of duly approved improvements
installed by the developer after the final acceptance of the improvement and
in accordance with this Ordinance.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — shall mean any subdivision of land not classified
as a minor subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — shall mean a composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the municipality
which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:400
MEAN ELEVATION — shall mean the average of the ground level
measurements computed at the four (4) extreme corner points of any
existing or proposed building.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — shall mean any subdivision of land for the creation
of not more than three (3) lots (two (2) new lots and the remaining parcel),
each fronting on an existing street or streets, and not involving 1) a planned
development, 2) any new street, 3) the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated to subsection 25-9.3 of
this chapter, or 4) not being a further division of an original tract of land
for which previous subdivision(s) have been approved by the Township
within the past two (2) years from the date of the current application for
subdivision and where the combination of the proposed and previously
approved minor subdivision(s) constitute a major subdivision. The original
tract of land shall be considered any tract in existence at the time of
adoption of this amendment as shown on the Township tax maps. Any
readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be classified as a
minor subdivision for purposes of the application submission and review
requirements specified in subsection 25-8.3 of the Land Development
Chapter.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — shall the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
governing body, or any agency created by or responsible to one (1) or more
municipalities, when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
NET HABITABLE FLOOR AREA (N.H.F.A.) — shall mean the finished and
heated area fully enclosed by the inside surfaces of walls, windows, doors
and partitions and having a headroom of at least six and one-half (6 1/2)
feet including working, living, eating, cooking, sleeping, stair, hall, service
and storage areas, but excluding garages, carports, parking spaces, cellars,
half-stories and unfinished attics and basements.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES — shall mean a
building or structure which, in its location upon a lot or in its size, does
not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance for the zone in which it is
located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT — shall mean a lot of record which does not have
the minimum width, frontage or depth or contain the minimum area for the
zone in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING USE — shall mean a use occupying a building,
structure or lot which does not conform with the use regulations for the
zone in which it is located.
OFF-SITE — shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in question
but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — shall mean not located on the property which is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:401
ON SITE — shall mean located on the lot in question, even if the lot contains
more than one principal use or structure.
ON-TRACT — shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — shall mean any parcel or land area or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets, off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land, and provided further that no
portion of the required open space shall include any street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE ORGANIZATION — shall mean an incorporated, non-profit
association operating in a Cluster Single Family Residential Development,
fee simple townhouse development or other development containing
common elements, under recorded land agreement through which a) each
owner is automatically a member; b) each occupied dwelling unit is
automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses
for the association activities and maintenance, including any maintenance
costs levied against the association by the Township; and c) each owner and
tenant has the right to use the common property.
PARKING SPACE — shall mean an area not less than nine (9) feet wide
by twenty (20) feet in length, either within a structure or in the open, for
the parking of motor vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire
lanes and public rights-of-way, except that the length of a parking space
may be reduced to eighteen (18) feet in length, subject to approval by the
Board in those instances where a two (2) foot overhang area exists beyond
a curb or where such overhang does not interfere with any proposed and/
or required landscaping. Moreover, nothing shall prohibit private driveways
for single-family detached dwelling units from being considered off-street
parking areas, provided that no portion of such driveway is situated within
the right-of-way line of the street intersected by such driveway. The width
and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to each other
regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle or driveway.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — shall mean any security in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter which may be accepted in lieu of
a requirement that certain improvements be made including performance
bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety
agreements.
PERMITTED USE — shall mean any use of land or buildings as permitted by
this chapter.
PLAT — shall mean the map of a subdivision or site plan and is used
interchangeably in this chapter with "Plan" and "Site Plan".
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:402
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — shall mean the building containing the principal
use.
PRINCIPAL USE — shall mean the main purpose for which a lot or building
is used.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — shall mean the use of land or buildings by the
governing body of the Township or any officially created authority or agency
thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY — shall mean any utility which is privately owned and duly
regulated by the Public Utilities Commission or owned by a public agency.
RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE — shall mean the growing and harvesting
of plant life for the enjoyment of the residents on the property and not
primarily for commercial purposes. Seasonal fruit and vegetable stands are
permitted under this definition provided such stands meet all applicable
accessory building setback (side and rear) and coverage requirements and
are set back from the front street line at least twenty (20) feet. Seasonal
stands may not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
RESTAURANT — shall mean any establishment, however designated, at
which food is sold for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar
or refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground,
golf course, playfield or park, operated solely by the agency or group
operating the recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of the
facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — shall mean any restaurant, refreshment stand,
snack bar, dairy bar, hamburger stand or hot dog stand where food is served
primarily for consumption at counters, stools or bars outside the building or
primarily for consumption in automobiles parked on the premises, whether
brought to said automobiles by the customer or by employees of the
restaurant, regardless of whether or not additional seats or other
accommodations are provided for customers inside the building. All such
drive-in restaurants and refreshment stands are specifically prohibited in all
districts.
SKETCH PLAT — shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision or site
plan submitted at the request of the applicant for the purpose of
informal discussion.
a.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for consideration
and preliminary approval and which meets all of the requirements of
Section 25-8 of this chapter.
b.
FINAL PLAT — shall mean the final map of all or a portion of the
subdivision or site plan which is presented to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment for final approval in accordance with this
chapter and which meets all of the requirements of Section 25-8 of this
chapter.
c.
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:403
RESUBDIVISION — shall mean the further division of a lot or the
adjustment of a lot line or lines.
RESUBMISSION OF APPROVED PLAT — shall mean the submission of
a plat for which minor subdivision, preliminary subdivision or final
subdivision approval was previously granted but for which the original
approval has expired due to failure to record or, in the case of a preliminary
approval, failure to apply for final approval or for sufficient extensions of
the preliminary approval. The resubmission of an approved plat in no way
binds the Board to approve the plat as submitted.
SERVICE STATION — shall mean lands and buildings providing for the sale
of fuel, lubricants and automotive accessories and maintenance and minor
repairs for motor vehicles, excluding body repairs or painting or the storage
of permanently inoperable or wrecked vehicles.
SETBACK LINE — shall mean a line drawn parallel with a street line or lot
line and drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line
or lot line. The term "required setback" means a line that is established a
minimum horizontal distance from the street line or the lot line and beyond
which a building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the
street line or lot line.
SHOPPING CENTER — shall mean a group of commercial establishments
built on one (1) tract that is planned, developed, owned and managed as an
operating unit. It provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the type
and total size of the stores. The commercial establishments may be located
in one (1) or several buildings, attached or separated.
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — shall mean a triangular shaped
area established in accordance with the requirements of this chapter in
which no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained,
except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
SIGN — shall mean any structure or portion thereof on which any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia
is used to advertise or promote the interest of any person or produce when
the same is placed in view of the general public.
SITE PLAN — shall mean a plan for the specific development of a lot or
lots on which is shown (1) the existing and proposed conditions of the lot
including, but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
flood plains, marshes and waterways, (2) the location of all existing and
proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, means of ingress and egress,
drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting, screening devices, and (3) any other information which may be
reasonable and necessary to make an informed determination on the
application.
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:404
SITE PLAN EXEMPT — shall mean single family and two (2) family
dwellings unless such dwellings include a home occupation. Building
alterations which do not include a change in use, additional parking at
additional building area shall be exempt. Storage yards for inoperable
vehicles, which are owned or leased by the holder of the Aberdeen Township
towing contract, shall be exempt.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — shall mean all site plans for new developments and
those site plans not defined as minor or exempt.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — shall mean a development plan of one (1) or more
lots which (1) proposes building alterations of an existing use, and/or less
than five (5) additional parking spaces, and/or less than five hundred (500)
additional square feet of floor area, and/or a total of not more than ten
percent (10%) additional lot coverage; (2) does not involve any planned
development, any new street or extension of any off-tract improvement
which is prorated between the Township and the developer; and (3) contains
the information reasonably required to make a determination as to whether
the requirements established for approval of a minor site plan had been
met.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Whenever the term "site plan approval" is used in
this chapter, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that the site plan
be reviewed and approved by the Board.
STORY — shall mean that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above it or, if
there is no floor above it, then the surface between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. For the purposes of this chapter:
The interior of the roof shall not be considered a ceiling; rather, the
underside of the highest horizontal surface separating the area above
from the remainder of the structure below shall be considered the
ceiling;
a.
A half-story is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a building,
the floor of which is at least four (4) feet, but no more than six (6) feet
below the plate; and such half-story shall not be used for nonresidential
uses;
b.
The area under a pitched roof at the top of a building shall be
considered a full-story for the purpose of this chapter when the floor
area of said area occupies fifty (50%) percent or more of the total floor
area of the story directly beneath it with a head room of six (6) feet or
more and has access via walk-up stairs from the floor below; and
c.
Cellars and basements shall not be considered stories when considering
the height of a building except, however, that:
A finished basement and/or cellar in nonresidential buildings shall
be considered a story for the purposes of calculating the number of
stories, floor area and parking requirements of this chapter unless
1.
d.
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:405
STREET — shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law R.S. 40:55D-1 et seq. or any prior act authorizing approval
or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — shall mean the edge of the existing or future street rightof-
way, whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the
adopted Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the
street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — shall mean anything constructed, assembled or erected
which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
such location on the ground. The term structure shall be taken to include
building, fence, tank, tower, sign, advertising device, swimming pool or
tennis court.
SUBDIVISION — shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the
meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: 1) divisions of land
found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof, appointed
by the Chairman, to be of agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels
are five (5) acres or larger in size; 2) divisions of property by testamentary
or intestate provisions; 3) divisions of property upon court order including
but not limited to judgments or foreclosure; 4) consolidation of existing
lots by deed or other filed plat; and 5) the conveyance of one (1) or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the Administrative
Officer to conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map of the
Township of Aberdeen. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUPERMARKET — shall mean a retail establishment selling groceries and
related household goods and having at least three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet of gross floor area.
used solely for ancillary storage and/or the housing of mechanical
equipment; and/or
A basement, whether finished or not, shall be considered a "story"
when the distance from grade to the finished surface of the floor
above the basement is more than six (6) feet for more than fifty
(50%) percent of the total perimeter of the building.
2.
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-2.1
1:406
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — shall mean those pools which are not
otherwise permanently installed; do not require water filtration, circulation
and purification; do not exceed eighteen (18) inches in depth; do not exceed
a water surface area of one hundred (100) square feet; and do not require
braces or supports. Portable pools shall not be subject to the requirements
for private residential swimming pools set forth in Section 25-2 of this
chapter.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — shall mean and include
artificially constructed pools, whether located above or below the ground,
having a depth of more than eighteen (18) inches and/or a water surface
of one hundred (100) square feet or more; designed and maintained for
swimming and bathing purposes for use by members of a household and
guests; located on a lot as an accessory use to a detached dwelling; and
shall include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances
thereto.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — shall mean any pool, other than that
classified as a private residential or portable swimming pool, designed to be
used collectively by persons for swimming and bathing purposes, including
pools designed as part of any apartment or townhouse development or
neighborhood or community organization.
TOWNHOUSE — shall mean one (1) building containing at least three (3)
connected dwelling units, where each dwelling unit is compatibly designed
in relation to all other units, but is distinct by such design features as width,
setback, roof design, color, exterior materials, and other design features,
singularly or in combination.
TOWNSHIP — shall mean Township of Aberdeen, Monmouth County, New
Jersey.
TRACT — shall mean an area of land composed of one (1) or more lots
adjacent to one another and having sufficient dimensions and area to make
one (1) parcel of land meeting the requirements of this chapter for the
use(s) intended.
TRAVEL TRAILER — shall mean a vehicular, portable structure built on
a chassis and designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
vacation and other short-term uses and having an outside body width not
exceeding eight (8) feet and a length not exceeding thirty (30) feet and
which may contain cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities.
YARD, FRONT — shall mean an open space extending across the full width
of the lot and lying between the street line and the closest point of any
building on the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street line or the tangent
line of curved street lines. The minimum required front yard depth shall be
the same as the required setback.
YARD, REAR — shall mean an open space extending across the full width
of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the
principal building on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the
§ 25-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2.1
1:407
tangent of curved rear lot lines. The minimum required rear yard depth
shall be the same as the required setback.
YARD, SIDE — shall mean an open space extending from the front yard to
the rear yard and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of
the principal building on the lot. The width of the required side yard shall
be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or
the tangent lines of curved side lot lines.
§ 25-3. ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP.
§ 25-3.1. Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 11-1985; Ord. No. 12-2002 § 1;
Ord. No. 8-2003 § 7; Ord. No. 13-2003 § 7; Ord. No. 11-2010 § 1;
Ord. No. 14-2010; Ord. No. 20-2010; Ord. No. 16-2012 § 7; amended
8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 10-2017; amended 6-21-2018 by Ord. No.
18-2018; 6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Aberdeen is hereby divided
into 21 zoning districts as follows:
Symbol
CR Conservation/Recreation
RA Agriculture & Very Low Density Residential Single-Family
Residential
R-100 Single-Family Residential
R-75 Single-Family Residential
R-70 Single-Family Residential
R-65 Single-Family Residential
R-60 Single-Family Residential
R-50 Single-Family Residential
PC Planned Community Single-Family Residential
APT/TH Apartment/Townhouse Multiple-Family Residential
ARAH Age-Restricted Affordable Housing
IDD-A Inculsionary Development District A
OR Office Residential
NC Neighborhood Commercial
HC Highway Commercial
§ 25-2.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-3.1
1:408
Symbol
RC Regional Commercial
RO Research/Office
MFG Manufacturing
LI Light Industrial
AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay District
AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay Distric
In addition to the designated zoning districts, the following
"Redevelopment Zones" are established and are indicated on the Zoning
Map:
§ 25-3.2. Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 23-1983; Ord. No. 11-1985; Ord.
No. 1-1991; Ord. No. 20-1992; Ord. No. 19-1993; Ord. No. 12-2002
§ 2; Ord. No. 16-2002 § 2; Ord. No. 8-2003 § 7; Ord. No. 13-2003 § 7;
Ord. No. 11-2010 § 2; Ord. No. 14-2010 § 6; Ord. No. 20-2010 § 2;
Ord. No. 16-2012 § 7; Ord. No. 17-2012; Ord. No. 8-2014; Ord. No.
12-2015]
The boundaries of the zoning districts within Aberdeen Township and the
outbound areas of the "Redevelopment Zones" are established on the
"Zoning Map," dated August 1, 2012. (The Zoning Map may be found on file
in the Township offices.)
a. The "PACRP" Planned Adult Community Redevelopment Plan
redevelopment is permitted where indicated on the Zoning Map as an
overlay zone on certain lands in the "RA" Agriculture & Very Low
Density Residential Single-Family Residential and the "R-100" Single-
Family Residential zoning districts.
b. Luxury apartments are permitted where indicated on the Zoning Map
within the "LI" Limited Industrial zoning district in Section I of the
Train Station Redevelopment Area.
c. "IH" Inclusionary Housing redevelopments are permitted where
indicated on the Zoning Map as overlay zones, one as an overlay zone
along County Road on certain lands in the "LI" Limited Industrial and
"CR" Conservation/Recreation zoning districts, and the other as an
overlay zone along Route 35 on certain lands in the "HC" Highway
Commercial zoning district.
d. "The Glassworks" mixed-use inclusionary redevelopment is permitted
where indicated on the Zoning Map along Cliffwood Avenue.
e. A mixed-use inclusionary redevelopment is permitted where indicated
on the Zoning Map on certain lands in the "LI" Limited Industrial zoning
district along Atlantic Avenue in Section II of the Train Station
Redevelopment Area.
§ 25-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3.2
1:409
a. Zoning Map Amendments. (Beginning with Supplement No. 5, Zoning
Map amendments will be listed as follows.)
1. Ordinance No. 8-2014. Approves the Freneau Redevelopment Plan
and amends the Zoning Map to include Block 151-Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4
and Block 149-Lot 1. [Ord. No. 8-2014]
2. Ordinance No. 12-2015. The Commerce and Transportation Center
in the Aberdeen/Matawan Train Station is amended to remove
Block 263, Lot 1 (Aberdeen Township) and Block 3, Lot 1 (Aberdeen
Township) from the Redevelopment Area due to the Recreation and
Open Space restrictions which shall be open to all residents of
Aberdeen Township. [Ord. No. 12-2015]
3. Ordinance No. 10-2017. The Zoning Map of the Township of
Aberdeen is hereby amended to establish the boundaries of the
R-65 Residential zone district such that the following properties
shall be in and permitted to be developed in accordance with the
R-65 Single-Family Residential zone requirements and standards
set forth herein: Block 198, Lots 1 through and including 12; Block
199, Lots 1 through and including 12; and Block 200, Lots 1,2 and
3. The zoning of the properties that was in place at the time of
adoption of the ordinance shall be replaced by the R-65 Residential
Zone. [Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 10-2017]
4. Ordinance No. 17-2018. [Added 6-21-2018 by Ord. No.
17-2018]
(a) There is hereby established the AHO-1 Affordable Housing
Overlay District. The AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay
District shall consist of:
(1) The entire NC (Neighborhood Commercial) zone located
along Lower Main Street identified as Site A on the
Affordable Housing Sites Plan of the Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M Associates, dated May
23, 2018.
(2) Block 155 Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5 - Residential Properties
adjacent to Glassworks identified as Site C on the
Affordable Housing Sites Plan of the Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M Associates, dated May
23, 2018.
(3) Block 231 Lots 2, 3 and 4 - Commercial site along Route 35
identified as Site D on the Affordable Housing Sites Plan of
the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan prepared by
T&M Associates dated May 23, 2018.
(b) There is hereby established the AHO-2 Affordable Housing
Overlay District, which shall consist of the area as shown on
the Township of Aberdeen's Tax Map as:
§ 25-3.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-3.2
1:410
§ 25-3.3. Interpretation of Boundaries.
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow centerlines, railroad
rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on lots of
record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless otherwise indicated
by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in
feet and measured horizontally, and when measured from a street, shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the centerline of
that street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact
location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and
designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each district, and
the district lines extend vertically in both directions from ground level.
§ 25-3.4. Division of Lot in Single Ownership.
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot other than by following
a stream or street, any use permitted in either district may be extended
not more than twenty (20) feet into the adjacent district. A use permitted
in the zoning district so extended shall thereafter be a permitted use in the
extended area. A zoning district line, however, shall be altered only once by
utilizing this section of the chapter, after which the lot use shall be governed
by the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after the
zoning district boundary line adjustment.
§ 25-4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 25-4.1. Supplementary Requirements Applicable to All Zones.
[Ord. No. 20-1990; Ord. No. 11-2002 § 1; Ord. No. 5-2007 §§ 3—6;
Ord. No. 9-2014]
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformity with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from part of
(1) Block 11 Lots 1 and 2 - Industrial site along Lloyd Road
and the Garden State Parkway identified as Site B on the
Affordable Housing Sites Plan of the Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M Associates dated May
23, 2018.
(2) Block 12 Lot 7.01 - Office property along Line Road
identified as Site E on the Affordable Housing Sites Plan of
the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan prepared by
T&M Associates dated May 23, 2018.
5. Ordinance No. 18-2018. Creates the "IDD-A" Inclusionary
Development District A and amends the Zoning Map to include
Block 197, Lot 3.01 in same. [Added 6-21-2018 by Ord. No.
18-2018]
§ 25-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.1
1:411
a lot already occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be effected in
such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this chapter
with respect to the existing building and all yards and other open space
in connection therewith, and so that all resulting lots have adequate
dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located, and so that all lots have frontage on a street.
a. Principal Structures and Uses. Unless otherwise specified for a
particular zoning district, no more than one (1) principal structure or
principal use shall be permitted on one (1) lot.
b. Yards Cannot Be Used by Another Building. No open space provided
around any principal building for the purposes of complying with the
front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal
building.
c. Accessory Buildings.
1. Accessory Buildings as Part of Principal Building. Any accessory
building attached to a principal building shall be considered part of
the principal building, and the total structure shall adhere to the
yard requirements for the principal building regardless of the
technique of connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
2. Accessory Buildings Not to Be Constructed Prior to Principal
Building. No construction permit shall be issued for the
construction of an accessory building prior to the issuance of a
construction permit for the construction of the main building upon
the same premises. If construction of the main building does not
precede or coincide with the construction of the accessory
building, the Construction Official shall revoke the construction
permit for the accessory building until construction of the main
building has proceeded substantially toward completion.
3. Setback. Each accessory building shall be set back from property
lines the minimum distance established in the applicable zoning
district. Where no minimum is established, the setback shall be a
minimum of five (5) feet or a distance equal to one-half (1/2) foot for
each one (1) foot of building height up to the minimum setback
required for a principal building.
4. Height. The maximum height of any accessory building shall be
fifteen (15) feet, unless a lesser height is established in the
applicable zoning district.
5. Location. An accessory building may be erected in side and rear
yard areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed herein, except that if erected on a corner lot, the
accessory building shall be set back from the side street to comply
with the setback line applying to the principal building for that side
§ 25-4.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.1
1:412
street and except further that no livestock shelter shall be erected
nearer than fifty (50) feet to any lot lines.
d. Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots.
1. The lawful use of land or structures existing at the date of adoption
of this chapter, as amended, may be continued although such use or
structure is nonconforming to the provisions specified in this
subsection, as amended, for the zoning district in which such use or
structure is located, except as provided by law.
2. Any nonconforming use or structure which has been changed to a
conforming use or structure shall not be changed back again into a
nonconforming use or structure.
3. Any nonconforming use, structure or lot may change ownership
and continue to function as the same nonconforming use, structure
or lot, provided all other provisions of this chapter and other
applicable laws are met.
4. Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in
sound condition may be made to a nonconforming structure or a
structure containing a nonconforming use.
(a) However, no structure containing a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or structurally
altered in any manner without an appeal for variance relief.
(b) A nonconforming structure may be enlarged, extended,
constructed, or structurally altered if such alteration or
enlargement does not increase the existing nonconformity, or
create a new violation.
(c) A nonconforming structure shall not be reconstructed if
destroyed without an appeal to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
5. Any lot upon which a nonconforming use or structure is located
shall not be reduced in size nor shall any lot already nonconforming
be made more non-conforming in any manner.
6. Any vacant lot existing at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, whose area or dimensions do not meet
the requirements of the district in which the lot is located, may
have a building permit issued for a use permitted for that zoning
district without an appeal to the Board of Adjustment, provided
that:
(a) The lot area shall not be less than ninety-five (95%) percent of
the lot area required for the zoning district;
§ 25-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.1
1:413
(b) The lot dimensions (frontage, width and depth) shall not be less
than ninety-five (95%) percent of the required dimensions for
the zoning district;
(c) The building coverage limit is not exceeded; and
(d) The parking requirements are met.
All other applicable provisions of this chapter shall hold.
7. Any existing lot on which a building or structure is located and
which lot does not meet the applicable minimum lot size
requirement, or an existing structure which violates any yard
requirements, shall be permitted to construct additions to the
principal building and/or construct accessory buildings without an
appeal for variance relief provided:
(a) The existing use(s) on the lot are conforming to the permitted
use(s) stipulated in the Chapter for the lot in question;
(b) The total permitted building coverage, impervious surface
coverage, and floor area ratio stipulated in the Chapter for the
permitted use(s) are not exceeded;
(c) The accessory building and/or addition to the principal
building does not further violate any deficient yard setback(s)
currently existing on the subject lot;
(d) No additional yard setback requirement of the Chapter is
violated and all other applicable requirements of the Chapter
are met.
e. Recyclable Materials Storage.
1. Each application for residential development of fifty or more (50+)
units of single-family housing must include provisions for the
collection, disposition, and recycling of recyclable materials. A
single-family unit shall provide at least twelve (12) feet of floor area
conveniently arranged and located as a holding area for a four (4)
week accumulation of mandated recyclable materials. Such an area
may be within a hidden laundry room, basement, kitchen or garage.
2. Each application for residential development of twenty-five or more
(25+) units of multi-family housing must include provisions for the
collection, disposition, and recycling of recyclable materials. Each
individual unit should provide at least three (3) square feet of floor
area conveniently arranged and located within the dwelling unit as
a holding area for a one (1) week accumulation of mandated
recyclable materials. Such an area may be within a hidden laundry
room, basement, kitchen or garage.
At least one (1) central location shall be provided so that residents
can drop off their source separated recyclables for storage until
§ 25-4.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.1
1:414
§ 25-4.2. "RA" Agriculture and Very Low Density Single-Family
Residential.
collection occurs. A suggested location for these sites would be
near the refuse receptacle units. These could be outdoor recycling
bins located near the refuse units or in a common area of the
condominium units, e.g., near the laundry room. These storage
areas should be easily accessible for the residents of the building
to drop off their materials. They should also be planned with truck
access in mind in order to facilitate loading of materials for delivery
to markets. In a multi-story building, a space provided on each
floor will produce the highest participation rates. The bins shall
be clearly labeled so it is obvious they are for recyclables and not
trash.
3. Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more of land must include
provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable
materials. Each application shall quantify the amount of recyclable
material it will generate as part of its weekly generation, including
newspapers, leaves, white high-grade paper, glass bottles and jars,
aluminum, corrugated cardboard, and tin and bimetal cans. The
application shall provide at least one (1) separated storage area to
contain a week's accumulation of recyclable material. The size and
number of the storage areas will be dependent on the quantity of
recyclable materials generated and frequency of collection of
recyclable materials. The storage area shall be designed for truck
access for a pick-up of materials and will be suitably screened from
view if located outside a building.
f. Critical Areas. All development within the Township of Aberdeen shall
be in accordance with the provisions of subsection 25-6.8, entitled
"Critical Areas."
g. Residential Setbacks. In addition to the specific requirements of the
respective zoning districts, the following requirements shall apply to
any single-family or two-family dwelling unit or multi-family residential
building in any zoning district in the Township of Aberdeen:
1. All residential dwelling units and buildings shall be located a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any existing or proposed
detention or retention basin, pond, lake or other water body or
course, as measured from the edge of the highest topographic
grade associated with or required for said structure or water body
or course.
2. All residential dwelling units and buildings shall be located a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any existing or proposed
sanitary sewage pumping station or treatment plant.
§ 25-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.2
1:415
§ 25-4.3. "PC," "R-100," "R-75," "R-60," "R-50" Single-Family
Residential.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "RA" district is to restrict residential
development to relatively large lots in recognition of the rural
characteristics still prevailing in the Freneau area of the Township. Due
to the absence of public sanitary sewerage facilities in this area, septic
systems are required. Relatively large residential lots are required for
this district in response to the inherently restrictive limitations that the
soil and geologic conditions present for adequate drainage and filtering
of septic effluent.
Cluster Single-Family Residential Developments are permitted in the
"RA" district when connected to public water and sewerage facilities.
The purpose of the Cluster Single-Family provision is to accommodate
pressures for growth while fostering properly coordinated open spaces
and recreational areas, the preservation of flood plain and wooded
areas and an optimum street network within the overall development
design. (See subsections 25-4.3e and 25-6.2.)
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Farms.
2. Detached dwelling units.
3. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
4. Churches.
5. Public schools of elementary and/or high school grade.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted. (See subsection 25-4.3c.)
d. Maximum Building Height. (See subsection 25-4.3d.)
e. Area and Yard Requirements. (See Section 25-4.3e.)
f. Floor Area Minimum. The minimum gross floor area for one-story
detached dwelling shall be one thousand four hundred (1,400) square
feet and one and one-half (1 1/2) stories (including split-level and twostory
detached dwellings) shall be one thousand six hundred (1,600)
square feet.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the above cited districts is to provide for the
continuance of the residential pattern of Aberdeen Township which has
developed with single-family detached dwellings at the various
prevailing densities. In addition, the districts are designed with
reasonable predictability regarding the overall population growth and
the attendant demand for community facilities to accommodate new
residential development expected in the Township.
§ 25-4.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.3
1:416
§ 25-4.3.1. R-65 Single-Family Residential. [Added 8-16-2017 by
Ord. No. 10-2017]
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Detached dwelling units.
2. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
3. Public schools of elementary and/or high school grade.
4. Churches.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Private residential swimming pools. (See subsection 25-5.21 for
standards.)
2. Private residential tool sheds not to exceed ten (10) feet in height.
3. Travel trailers and campers may be parked or stored on the
premises, and their dimensions shall not be counted in determining
the total building coverage. They shall not be used as temporary or
permanent living quarters or used for storage while situated on a
lot.
4. Off-street parking and private garages. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
5. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
6. Home professional offices.
7. Residential agriculture.
8. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
d. Maximum Building Height. No principal building shall exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet, and two and one-half (2 1/2) stories in height, except that
churches and schools shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet and except
further as allowed in subsection 25-6.5.
e. Area and Yard Requirements. The Area and Yard Requirements Table
can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
a. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Detached dwelling units.
2. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
3. Public schools of elementary and/or high school grade.
§ 25-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.3.1
1:417
4. Churches, in accordance with the bulk and yard requirements
herein.
b. Accessory Use Permitted:
1. Private residential swimming pools (See § 25-5.21 for standards).
2. Private residential tool sheds not to exceed 10 feet in height.
3. Travel trailers and campers may be parked or store on the
premises, and their dimensions shall be counted in determining the
total building coverage. They shall not be used as temporary or
permanent living quarters or used for storage while situated on a
lot.
4. Off-street parking and private garages (See § 25-5.12).
5. Fences and walls (See § 25-5.8).
6. Home professional offices.
7. Residential agriculture.
8. Signs (See § 25-5.18).
c. Maximum Building Height. No principal building shall exceed 35 feet
and 2 1/2 stories in height, except that churches and schools shall not
exceed 55 feet and except further as allowed in § 25-6.5.
d. Area and Yard requirements.
1. Bulk Regulations:
(a) Principal Buildings:
(1) Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 65 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: eight feet each.
(6) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(b) Accessory Buildings:
(1) Minimum side and rear yard: three feet.
(2) Minimum distance to principal building: 10 feet.
(c) Maximum Building Coverages:
§ 25-4.3.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.3.1
1:418
§ 25-4.4. "APT/TH" Apartment/Townhouse Multiple-Family
Residential.
(1) Principal buildings: 25%.
(2) Accessory buildings: 7%.
(d) Minimum Gross Floor Areas:
(1) One-story dwelling units: 900 square feet.
(2) 1.5-story dwelling units: 900 square feet.
(3) Split-level dwelling units: 900 square feet.
(4) Two-story dwelling units: 900 square feet.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "APT/TH" district is twofold: 1) The
districts are established in recognition of existing multiple-family
developments in Aberdeen Township; and 2) The "APT/TH" district is
established to provide areas where additional multi-family residential
development can take place.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Garden Apartments. (See subsection 25-5.3 for additional
standards.)
2. Townhouses. (See subsection 25-5.3 for additional standards.)
3. Playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose uses.
4. Offices as Condition Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6.)
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Public and private residential swimming pools. (See subsection
25-5.21 for standards.)
2. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
3. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
d. Density.
1. The total number of dwelling units permitted shall be eight (8)
townhouse units or ten (10) garden apartment units per gross acre/
a combination of townhouses and apartments shall be permitted on
one (1) site. The density shall be calculated on the average of the
number of units allowed for each building type. When a mixture is
used, a minimum of forty (40%) percent of either apartments or
townhouses shall be provided. The density shall be reduced in
§ 25-4.3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.4
1:419
sloping areas. Further, land in wetlands and floodways shall be
excluded in calculating the permitted density.
2. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be computed by
adding the following calculations:
Density allowed X Land acreage in 0 — 14% slopes X 1.0 = Number
of units.
Density allowed X Land acreage in 15 — 19% slopes X 0.5 - Number
of units.
3. No development or improvements shall be placed on slopes of
twenty (20%) percent or greater. Development shall also not occur
on wetlands and floodways except as specified in subsections
25-4.8 and 25-4.12.
4. Land in wetlands and floodways shall not be included in density
calculations. No development shall occur on these lands except as
specified in subsections 25-4.8 and 25-4.12.
e. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height and two and one-half (2.5) stories except where walk-out
basements are provided, the building height at the frontage shall not
exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and three and one-half (3.5)
stories.
f. Area and Yard Requirements.
1. The minimum tract size shall be five (5) acres including the areas of
existing streets and water areas within the tract boundary lines
provided they total no more than two (2%) percent of the tract
area. All plans shall delineate the boundaries of the portion(s) of
the tract devoted to each use.
2. No building shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the future rightof-
way of any existing or proposed public street, and no building
shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a railroad right-ofway.
A minimum building setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be
maintained from any and all other tract boundaries. At least the
first fifteen (15) feet adjacent to any street line and the first ten (10)
feet adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and shall
be planted and maintained in lawn area, ground cover or
landscaped with evergreen shrubbery and separated from the
parking area by curbing.
3. The minimum spacing between buildings shall be as follows:
window wall to window wall: sixty (60) feet; end wall to end wall:
fifty (50) feet; any building face to street curb: forty (40) feet; any
building face to parking area: fifteen (15) feet. No building corner
shall be closer to another building corner than fifty (50) feet.
§ 25-4.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.4
1:420
§ 25-4.5. "NC" Neighborhood Commercial.
4. Land area equal to at least two hundred (200) square feet for each
dwelling unit shall be specified on the site plan and improved by the
developer as active recreation areas for use by the residents of the
development. Such areas shall be an integral part of the
development, and at least one (1) area shall be a minimum of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in size, at least seventy-five (75) feet
wide and have a grade less than five (5%) percent.
g. Gross Floor Area Minimums.
Each additional bedroom shall require that a minimum of two hundred
(200) additional square feet be added to the gross floor area of the
apartment or townhouse.
1. Garden Apartments.
(a) Efficiency unit: 500 sq. ft.
(b) One-bedroom unit: 700 sq. ft.
(c) Two-bedroom unit: 900 sq. ft.
2. Townhouses.
(a) One-bedroom unit: 800 sq. ft.
(b) Two-bedroom unit: 1,000 sq. ft.
(c) Three-bedroom unit: 1,200 sq. ft.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "NC" district is to allow for small areas
throughout the Township where small retail and service businesses may
be located primarily for the convenience of the residents in the
immediate neighborhood. Each designated zone is large enough to
permit an expansion of these convenience centers in anticipation of
continued population growth and increased demand for the goods and
services. It is intended that the addition of more buildings in these
areas be designed to enhance and improve the centers by insuring that
an adequate traffic circulation plan evolves so that each building does
not have its own access point(s) to the highway(s); that building
appearances and signs are compatible; and that parking facilities are
interrelated and capable of common usage where advisable.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Local retail activities including grocery stores having less than
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of gross floor area,
meat markets, seafood markets, delicatessens, bakeries, drug
stores, furniture stores, sporting goods shops, gift shops, hobby
shops, book stores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores,
package liquor stores, pet shops, stationery stores, fabric stores
and florists.
§ 25-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.5
1:421
2. Local service activities including barber and beauty shops, tailors,
dry cleaning and laundering operations, appliance repair shops,
shoe repair shops and upholsterers.
3. Restaurants, bars and taverns.
4. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
5. Professional offices limited to doctors, dentists, architects,
engineers, lawyers, real estate agents, insurance brokers or similar
professional uses.
6. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
7. Public purpose uses.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking and loading. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
4. Temporary construction trailers and one (1) sign not exceeding fifty
(50) square feet, advertising the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and similar data
for the period of construction beginning with the issuance of a
building permit and concluding with the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy or one (1) year, whichever is less, provided said trailer
and sign are on the site where construction is taking place and set
back at least fifteen (15) feet from street and lot lines.
5. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 5,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 50 ft.
Lot width 50 ft.
Lot depth 80 ft.
§ 25-4.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.5
1:422
Side yard In order to encourage an end
product which provides parking,
access and architectural
continuity, even where
development occurs piecemeal
and with diverse ownership,
buildings may be attached and
may be built to the interior side
line(s) in order to be attached.
Attached buildings may include
two (2) walls which must be
keyed to each other. Where
buildings are built to both side lot
lines, the site plan shall be
accompanied by appropriate legal
material and plans showing
properly located loading spaces
and trash receptacles with
permitted access across adjacent
properties. If structures are not
attached, the side yard(s) shall be
ten (10) feet.
Front yard 10 ft.
Rear yard 20 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 10 ft.
Distance to rear line 10 ft.
Distance to other building 15 ft.
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building
30%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
10%
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. Each principal building shall have a
minimum gross floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. One (1) building may contain more than one (1) use, provided that
the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed
the maximum building coverage specified for this district and,
further, that each use occupies a minimum gross floor area of five
hundred (500) square feet.
§ 25-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.5
1:423
§ 25-4.6. "HC" Highway Commercial. [Ord. No. 20-1982; Ord. No.
18-1996; Ord. No. 22-1998 §§ 1,2; Ord. No. 3-2006 § 2]
2. At least the first ten (10) feet adjacent to any street line shall not be
used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in lawn area,
ground cover, or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery and
separated from the parking area by curbing.
3. No merchandise or similar material shall be displayed outside
beyond five (5) feet of any building. No waste or equipment shall be
stored outside.
4. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
5. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles
and driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped
with shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and
maintained in good condition, as outlined in the Aberdeen
Township Maintenance Code.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "HC" district is to provide those uses
serving a regional as well as a local function. The areas are located
along Routes 34 and 35 for regional accessibility and for rendering
services to the traveling public. In all circumstances, the site planning
and building designs are intended to be completed in a compatible
manner with an overall plan for the development of all lands so zoned in
order to coordinate traffic flow, parking needs, building orientation,
landscaping, drainage and similar factors which have a relationship to
development, whether implemented cumulatively over a period of years
or in one (1) major development program.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Retail sales of goods and services.
2. Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs.
3. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
4. Offices and office buildings.
§ 25-4.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.6
1:424
5. Theaters.
6. Department stores.
7. Shopping centers which shall include only those uses enumerated
above and which shall be developed as a single architectural
scheme, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a
period of time.
8. Garden centers engaging in the retail sale of plant material.
Outside storage, sale or display areas shall not exceed four (4)
times the building coverage and shall be used only for storage, sale
and display of living plant material.
9. Bowling alleys.
10. Automobile sales whose principal use is the sale of new
automobiles through franchised dealers. The sale of used
automobiles shall be accessory to and incidental to the principal
permitted use.
11. Car washes as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
12. Service stations as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
13. Public utilities as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
14. Public purpose uses.
15. Storage yards for towed inoperable vehicles as Conditional Uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See subsection 25-6.6i for standards.)
16. Amusement arcades as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6
for additional standards.)
17. Wireless communication antennas on new wireless communication
towers in accordance with the conditions, standards and limitations
specified in subsection 25-6.10 of this chapter.
18. Medical walk-in facilities and medical services as licensed by the
State of New Jersey to include physician's offices that provide:
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Urgent, ambulatory and outpatient surgical facilities;
(b) Well-care visits and/or emergency visits for illness or
accidents;
(c) Accept Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance and/or personal
billing in associated reception/office/filing areas;
§ 25-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.6
1:425
(d) Outpatient physical, occupational and speech therapy, cardiac
rehabilitation by licensed professionals, including CV profile
and nuclear imaging by licensed professionals;
(e) Sleep center testing by licensed professionals, to include
autonomic nervous system testing and urodynamics;
(f) Pain management by licensed professionals;
(g) Diagnostic ultrasound, x-rays, lab work by licensed
professionals, including by not limited to ultrasound, allergy
testing, CV profile, neurodiagnostics, pharmacogenetics
testing, blood work, nerve conduction studies, dizziness and
balance testing;
(h) Outpatient surgical by licensed professionals as licensed by the
State of New Jersey;
(i) For treatment of a variety of ailments or medical needs such as,
but not limited to, podiatry, orthopedics, allergy, oncology,
dialysis, colds, pneumonia, well visits, etc.
19. Dental clinics with dental services as listed: [Added 6-6-2019 by
Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) All dental work required to be done by a licensed dentist or his
staff, including but not limited to x-rays, drilling, cleaning,
extractions, implants, dentures, lab on premises, and any
specialty associated with dental care, e.g., orthodontics,
periodontal;
(b) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated reception/office/filing areas.
20. Adult medical day care as licensed by the State of New Jersey:
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Part-time/full-time (no overnight) residents (i.e. part-time can
be either morning or afternoon; full-time is the entire day);
(b) Services to include active and passive recreation, personal
needs (hair dresser, nail trimming), meals and snacks; all
recreation to be indoors. Patients may not leave the building
unsupervised;
(c) No meals prepared on site; meals provided by outside service
to adult day care patrons;
(d) Residents may be driven to facility or transportation to be
provided by facility;
(e) At least one licensed professional and one aide to be on site
during hours of operation;
§ 25-4.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.6
1:426
(f) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated offices/reception/filing areas.
21. Outpatient, individual or group counseling and rehabilitation.
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Referred by licensed medical personnel for counseling of
alcohol, drug abuse, and health management;
(b) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated offices/reception/filing areas.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
5. Storage yards for towed inoperable vehicles as Conditional Uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See subsection 25-6.6i for standards.)
6. Temporary Construction. Temporary construction trailers and one
(1) sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, advertising
the prime contractor, subcontractor(s), architect, financing
institution and similar data for the period of construction beginning
with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or one (1) year,
whichever is less, provided said trailer and sign are on the site
where construction is taking place.
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.
Individual
Commercial Uses Shopping Center
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 40,000 sq. ft. 120,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 150 ft. 250 ft.
Lot width 150 ft. 250 ft.
Lot depth 150 ft. 200 ft.
Side yard (each) 20 ft. 50 ft.
Front yard 50 ft. 75 ft.
Rear yard 30 ft. 50 ft.
§ 25-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.6
1:427
Individual
Commercial Uses Shopping Center
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 20 ft. 50 ft.
Distance to rear line 30 ft. 50 ft.
Distance to other
building
15 ft. 15 ft.
Maximum
Building Coverage of
principal building
25% 20%
Building Coverage of
accessory building(s)
5% 5%
f. Gross Floor Area Minimums. The minimum gross floor area shall be
three thousand (3,000) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. One (1) building may contain more than one (1) use provided that
the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed
the maximum building coverage specified for the district.
2. A shopping center may contain more than one (1) principal
building, provided that the total building coverage specified for the
district is not exceeded and the following building separation
requirements are met:
(a) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet, provided such separation is to be used
solely for pedestrian circulation.
(b) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
fifty (50) feet when such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation.
*Note: The separation requirements should not be construed
to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or
covering of such walkway extends between the principal
buildings.
3. At least the first twenty (20) feet adjacent to any street line and ten
(10) feet adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and
shall be planted and maintained in lawn area, ground cover, or
landscaped with evergreen shrubbery, and separated from the
parking area by poured concrete curbing.
§ 25-4.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.6
1:428
§ 25-4.7. "RC" Regional Commercial. [Ord. No. 18-1996]
4. Except for garden centers as allowed under subsection 25-4.7b8,
no merchandise or similar material shall be displayed outside
beyond five (5) feet of any building. No waste or equipment shall be
stored outside.
5. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
6. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area, in order to either
maintain or re-establish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic
and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated, both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "RC" district is to concentrate regional
commercial uses on a significantly large parcel of land adjacent to
excellent highway access offered by Routes 34 and 35. A major section
of the zone is intended to serve as a regional shopping center, although
certain other limited commercial and industrial uses are also allowed. It
is intended that the area be developed in accordance with an overall
plan coordinating architectural features, landscaping, drainage, shared
parking, types of uses, controlled access points and similar standards
and aesthetic features so that the final product will be a self-contained,
regional center, whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a
period of time.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Retail sales of goods and services.
2. Restaurants, bars, taverns, and nightclubs.
§ 25-4.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.7
1:429
3. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
4. Offices and office buildings.
5. Theaters.
6. Shopping centers comprised of the preceding uses.
7. Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing nature which
carry on processes within completely enclosed buildings and which
do not produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat
or glare outside the building(s).
8. Hotels and motels as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6.)
9. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6.)
10. Public purpose uses.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages, storage buildings and other customary accessory uses
incidental to the principal use.
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
5. Amusement arcades as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6
for additional standards.)
6. Medical walk-in facilities and medical services as licensed by the
State of New Jersey to include physician's offices that provide:
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Urgent, ambulatory and outpatient surgical facilities;
(b) Well-care visits and/or emergency visits for illness or
accidents;
(c) Accept Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance and/or personal
billing in associated reception/office/filing areas;
(d) Outpatient physical, occupational and speech therapy, cardiac
rehabilitation by licensed professionals, including CV profile
and nuclear imaging by licensed professionals;
(e) Sleep center testing by licensed professionals, to include
autonomic nervous system testing and urodynamics;
(f) Pain management by licensed professionals;
(g) Diagnostic ultrasound, x-rays, lab work by licensed
professionals, including by not limited to ultrasound, allergy
§ 25-4.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.7
1:430
testing, CV profile, neurodiagnostics, pharmacogenetics
testing, blood work, nerve conduction studies, dizziness and
balance testing;
(h) Outpatient surgical by licensed professionals as licensed by the
State of New Jersey;
(i) For treatment of a variety of ailments or medical needs such as,
but not limited to, podiatry, orthopedics, allergy, oncology,
dialysis, colds, pneumonia, well visits, etc.
7. Dental clinics with dental services as listed: [Added 6-6-2019 by
Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) All dental work required to be done by a licensed dentist or his
staff, including but not limited to x-rays, drilling, cleaning,
extractions, implants, dentures, lab on premises, and any
specialty associated with dental care, e.g., orthodontics,
periodontal;
(b) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated reception/office/filing areas.
8. Adult medical day care as licensed by the State of New Jersey:
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Part-time/full-time (no overnight) residents (i.e., part-time can
be either morning or afternoon; full-time is the entire day);
(b) Services to include active and passive recreation, personal
needs (hair dresser, nail trimming), meals and snacks; all
recreation to be indoors. Patients may not leave the building
unsupervised;
(c) No meals prepared on site; meals provided by outside service
to adult day care patrons;
(d) Residents may be driven to facility or transportation to be
provided by facility;
(e) At least one licensed professional and one aide to be on site
during hours of operation;
(f) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated offices/reception/filing areas.
9. Outpatient, individual or group counseling and rehabilitation.
[Added 6-6-2019 by Ord. No. 11-2019]
(a) Referred by licensed medical personnel for counseling of
alcohol, drug abuse, and health management;
(b) Accepts Medicare, Medicaid, private insurance or personal
billing in associated offices/reception/filing areas.
§ 25-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.7
1:431
10. Temporary construction trailers and two (2) signs not exceeding
two hundred (200) square feet each, advertising the prime
contractor, subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and
similar data for the period of construction beginning with the
issuance of a construction permit and concluding with the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy or one (1) year, whichever is less,
provided said trailer(s) and sign(s) are on the site where
construction is taking place.
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5, and except further
that a building not exceeding fifty (50) feet in height may be
constructed provided that for every one (1) foot in height in excess of
thirty-five (35) feet, the buffer area (as described in subsection 25-5.5)
shall be enlarged two (2) feet in width.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.
Principal Building
Mimimum
Lot area 120,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 250 ft.
Lot width 250 ft.
Lot depth 200 ft.
Side yard (each) 50 ft.
Front yard 75 ft.
Rear yard 50 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 50 ft.
Distance to rear line 50 ft.
Distance to other building 15 ft.
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building
20%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
f. Gross Floor Area Minimums. The minimum gross floor area shall be five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. One (1) building may contain more than one (1) use, provided that
the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed
the maximum building coverage specified for the district.
§ 25-4.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.7
1:432
2. A shopping center may contain more than one (1) principal
building, provided that the total building coverage specified for the
district is not exceeded and the following building separation
requirements are met:
(a) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet, provided such separation is to be used
solely for pedestrian circulation.
(b) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
fifty (50) feet when such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation.
*Note: The separation requirements should not be construed
to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or
covering of such walkway extends between the principal
buildings.
3. At least the first fifty (50) feet adjacent to any street line and twenty
(20) feet adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking, shall
be planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover, or
landscaped with evergreen shrubbery.
4. No merchandise or similar material shall be displayed outside
beyond five (5) feet of any building. No waste or equipment shall be
stored outside.
5. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
6. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area, in order to lessen the
visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The established
grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic and drainage
purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping
shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as well as assure
that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage system is
sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from
the site and contributing upstream areas.
§ 25-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.8
1:433
§ 25-4.8. "CR" Conservation/Recreation. [Ord. No. 16-2002 § 2]
a. Purpose. The "CR" district was created in recognition of Aberdeen
Township's estuarine areas and the New Jersey Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A.
13:19A-1 et seq.). Regulations apply to all lands having any one (1) of
the following three (3) specific attributes:
1. Land subject to tidal action.
2. Land now or formerly connected to tidal waters whose surface is at
or below one (1) foot above local extreme high water.
3. Land upon which may grow some, but not necessarily all, of
nineteen (19) species of vegetation.
Land affected by the Wetlands Act lies adjacent to Whale, Long
Neck and Matawan Creeks and includes land south as well as north
of State Route 35.
Land uses that may take place on the Wetlands should have a
definite relationship to the estuarial zone, e.g., marinas, boat
moorings slips, etc. All proposed uses of the Wetlands require New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approval.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Farms.
2. Detached dwelling units in accordance with the applicable
requirements of subsection 25-4.2 of this chapter for detached
dwellings without public sewerage in the "RA" Agriculture and Very
Low Density Single-Family Residential zoning district.
3. Boat yards, marinas, yacht basins and boat mooring slips.
4. Restaurants, bars, taverns and night clubs, provided they are part
of, or associated with, a marina.
5. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
6. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
§ 25-4.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.8
1:434
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height and two and one-half (2 1/2) stories except as allowed in
subsection 25-6.5.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 40,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 150 ft.
Lot width 150 ft.
Lot depth 150 ft.
Side yard (each) 20 ft.
Front yard 50 ft.
Rear yard 30 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 20 ft.
Distance to rear line 30 ft.
Distance to other building 15 ft.
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building
25%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. The minimum gross floor area shall be two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. One (1) building may contain more than one (1) use, provided that
the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed
the maximum building coverage specified for this district.
2. At least the first twenty (20) feet adjacent to any street line and ten
(10) feet adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking and
shall be planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or
landscaped with evergreen shrubbery and separated from the
parking area by poured concrete curbing.
3. No merchandise or similar material shall be displayed outside
beyond five (5) feet of any building. No waste or equipment shall be
stored outside.
§ 25-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.8
1:435
§ 25-4.9. "RO" Research/Office. [Ord. No. 13-1989]
4. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
5. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either
maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic
and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as
well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
a. Purpose. The "RO" District is located to take advantage of the highway
access afforded by the Garden State Parkway. The standards are
intended to require maximum attention to proper site designing
including the location of structures and parking areas, proper ingress
and egress, development of an interior street system, architectural
design, landscaping and the compatibility of any proposal with the
natural foliage, soils, contours, drainage patterns, and the need to avoid
visual intrusions and performance nuisances upon adjacent residences
and residential zones. It is intended that existing foliage and natural
features be retained and enhanced in relation to the site as well as the
surrounding area. The primary uses are intended to be oriented toward
office and research operations with only incidental shipping and
receiving related to the non-production oriented uses.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Offices and office buildings, including research and laboratory uses
directly associated with the office uses, provided that they occupy
no more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total gross square
footage devoted to the principal use and are processed within
completely enclosed buildings which do not produce noticeable
§ 25-4.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.9
1:436
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare outside the
buildings.
2. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, park and public purpose
uses.
3. Farms.
4. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages, storage buildings and other customary accessory uses
incidental to the principal use.
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
5. Temporary construction trailers and one (1) sign not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet advertising the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and similar data
for the period of construction beginning with the issuance of a
construction permit and concluding with the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, or one (1) year, whichever is less,
provided said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where construction
is taking place.
6. Employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire
use of a principal building, provided the cafeteria is limited in
service to the employees of the principal use designated on the site
plan as approved by the Board.
7. Snack bar or retail professional shop as part of a principal building
in the commercial recreation facility.
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5, and except further
that a building not exceeding fifty (50) feet in height may be
constructed provided that for every one (1) foot in height in excess of
thirty-five (35) feet, the buffer area (as described in subsection 25-5.5b)
shall be enlarged two (2) feet in width.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 120,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 250 ft.
§ 25-4.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.9
1:437
Lot width 250 ft.
Lot depth 200 ft.
Side yard (each) 50 ft.
Front yard 75 ft.
Rear yard 50 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 50 ft.
Distance to rear line 50 ft.
Distance to other building 15 ft.
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building*
30%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
*The maximum building coverage for the principal building(s) may
increase by a square footage amount equal to that square footage
of the building(s) used for inside parking and/or loading, provided
that in no case shall the maximum building coverage for the principal
building(s) exceed forty (40%) percent.
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. Each principal building shall have a
minimum gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. Any principal building may contain more than one (1) use or
organization.
2. A lot may contain more than one (1) principal building provided
that the total building coverage specified for the district is not
exceeded and the following building separation requirements are
met:
(a) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet provided such separation is to be used
solely for pedestrian circulation.
(b) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
fifty (50) feet when such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation.
*Note: The separation requirements should not be construed
to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or
covering of such walkway extends between the principal
buildings.
§ 25-4.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.9
1:438
§ 25-4.10. "MFG" Manufacturing. [Ord. No. 20-1982; Ord. No.
22-1998, §§ 3,4; repealed in entirety by Ord. No. 14-2010; reinstated
by Ord. No. 16-2012]
3. At least the first fifty (50) feet adjacent to any street line and twenty
(20) feet adjacent to any lot line shall not be used for parking, shall
be planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover or
landscaped with evergreen shrubbery, and shall be separated from
the parking area by poured concrete curbing.
4. Merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
objects shall not be displayed or stored outside.
5. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
6. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area in order to either
maintain or re-establish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic
and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as
well as assure that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
a. Purpose. This district has been created to allow industrial plants to
process or manufacture goods from unprepared or untreated materials
such as heavy metal work, manufacture of brick, terra-cotta, plastics,
glass etc. All manufacturing processes must take place within fully
enclosed buildings. Storage facilities may be in separate buildings.
Operations, whose principal use is the storage of solvents or other
inflammable materials, are prohibited uses. No explosives shall be
stored or used.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
§ 25-4.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.10
1:439
1. Industrial plants.
2. Wholesale distribution centers and warehouses.
3. Offices and office buildings.
4. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
5. Public purpose uses.
6. Storage yards for towed inoperable vehicles as Conditional Uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See subsection 25-6.6i for standards.)
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
2. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
3. Garages, storage buildings and other customary accessory uses
incidental to the principal use.
4. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
5. Temporary construction trailers and one (1) sign not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet, each advertising the prime contractor,
subcontractor(s), architect, financing institution and similar data
for the period of construction beginning with the issuance of a
construction permit and concluding with the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, or one (1) year, whichever is less,
provided said trailer(s) and sign are on the site where construction
is taking place.
6. Employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire
use of a principal building, provided the cafeteria is limited in
service to the employees of the principal use designated on the site
plan as approved by the Board.
7. Storage yards for towed inoperable vehicles as Conditional Uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See subsection 25-6.61 for standards.)
d. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5, and except further
that a building not exceeding fifty (50) feet in height may be
constructed provided that for every one (1) foot in height in excess of
thirty-five (35) feet, the buffer area (as described in subsection 25-5.5)
be enlarged two (2) feet in width.
e. Area and Yard Requirements.(1)
§ 25-4.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.10
1:440
Individual Use Industrial Park Use
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 120,000 sq. ft. 80,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 250 ft. 200 ft.
Lot width 250 ft. 200 ft.
Lot depth 200 ft. 200 ft.
Side yard (each) 75 ft. 50 ft.
Front yard 50 ft. 25 ft.
Rear yard 50 ft. 25 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 50 ft. 25 ft.
Distance to rear line 50 ft. 25 ft.
Distance to other
building
15 ft. 15 ft.
Minimum
Building coverage of
principal building(2)
40% 40%
Building coverage of
accessory building(s)
5% 5%
(1) No provision stipulated herein shall prohibit a permitted use from
being situated adjacent to a railroad right-of-way for purposes of
loading and unloading materials.
(2) The maximum building coverage for the principal building(s) may
increase by a square footage amount equal to the square footage of
the building(s) used for inside parking and/or loading, provided that
in no case shall the maximum building coverage for the principal
building(s) exceed fifty (50%) percent.
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. Each principal building shall have a
minimum gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
g. General Requirements.
1. Any principal building may contain more than one (1) use or
organization.
2. A lot may contain more than one (1) principal building provided
that the total building coverage specified for the district is not
§ 25-4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.10
1:441
exceeded and the following building separation requirements are
met:
(a) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet provided such separation is to be used
solely for pedestrian circulation.
(b) All principal buildings shall be separated* by a minimum of
fifty (50) feet when such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation.
*Note: The separation requirements should not be construed
to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or
covering of such walkway extends between the principal
buildings.
3. At least the first fifty (50) feet (twenty-five (25) feet for industrial
park lots) adjacent to any street line and twenty (20) feet adjacent
to any lot line shall not be used for parking, shall be planted and
maintained in lawn area or ground cover or landscaped with
evergreen shrubbery and shall be separated from the parking area
by poured concrete curbing.
4. Any use resulting in the outdoor storage of merchandise, products,
equipment or similar material shall be screened by a fence, wall,
plant material or combination thereof in order to provide a visual
barrier between the storage areas and any street or residential
zoning district.
5. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residential district shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes which shall not include unpainted or painted cinder block
or concrete block walls.
6. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area, in order to either
maintain or re-establish the tone of the vegetation in the area and
lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic
and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as
§ 25-4.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.10
1:442
§ 25-4.11. "LI" Light Industrial. [Ord. No. 20-1982; Ord. No.
23-1990; Ord. No. 18-1996; Ord. No. 22-1998, § 5; Ord. No. 1-2000,
§ 2; Ord. No. 3-2006, § 3]
well as assure that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water generated and
anticipated both from the site and contributing upstream areas.
a. Purpose. These districts are intended to accommodate light industrial
plants, office buildings, research labs, wholesale distribution centers
and warehouses and similar uses. Industrial plants must be of the type
which process previously prepared or refined materials. No building
shall be used in a manner which will create nuisance problems or
noxious conditions. All industrial processes must take place within fully
enclosed structures. Operations whose principal use is the storage of
solvents or other inflammable materials are prohibited. No explosives
shall be stored or used.
Within these districts, industrial parks may be developed on tracts
of ten (10) acres or more. Parks must be planned as single entities
intended to accommodate any one (1) or more of the uses permitted in
the industrial area.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Offices and office buildings.
2. Light Industrial plants.
3. Wholesale distribution centers and warehouses.
4. Farms.
5. Public utility uses as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6 for
additional standards.)
6. Storage yards for towed inoperable vehicles as Conditional Uses
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. (See subsection 25-6.6i for standards.)
7. Retail sales of goods and services only on properties with at least
two hundred (200) feet of frontage on State Route 35 and provided
that the lands utilized for the retail uses do not extend further than
seven hundred fifty (750) feet from the right-of-way of State Route
35 and provided further that the land shall be utilized solely for
retail sales uses. It is the intent of this Ordinance that no retail uses
will be located on the same property with other principal uses
permitted in the "LI" District as specified hereinabove.
8. Amusement arcades as Conditional Uses. (See subsection 25-6.6
for additional standards.)
9. Luxury apartments are permitted, in accordance with the
requirements specified in subsection 25-4.11h of this section
§ 25-4.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.11
1:443
hereinbelow, only within that particular "LI" Light Industrial zoning
district in Aberdeen Township which contains the Aberdeen/
Matawan train station.
10. Wireless communication antennas on new wireless communication
towers in accordance with the conditions, standards and limitations
specified in subsection 25-6.10 of this chapter.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted. (See subsection 25-4.10c.)
d. Maximum Building Height. (See subsection 25-4.10d.)
e. Area and Yard Requirements. (See subsection 25-4.10e.)
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. (See subsection 25-4.10f.)
g. General Requirements. (See subsection 25-4.10g.)
h. Requirements Governing the Development of Luxury Apartments.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this "Land Development Ordinance"
to the contrary, the following requirements shall govern the
development of luxury apartments only within that particular "LI" Light
Industrial zoning district in Aberdeen Township which contains the
Aberdeen/Matawan train station.
1. Luxury apartments may be developed on tracts of land at least
thirteen (13) acres in size which have direct vehicular access to an
existing public street.
2. The maximum density shall be twenty (20) apartment units per
gross acre of land, provided that no more than two hundred ninetyone
(291) apartment units may be developed within any single
luxury apartment development.
3. At least forty (40%) percent of the apartment units shall contain
one (1) bedroom, and no apartment shall contain more than two (2)
bedrooms. Dens shall be permitted if the room is designed with no
closet and no door.
4. More than one (1) apartment building shall be permitted, provided
that no more than sixty (60) apartment dwelling units shall be
permitted within any one (1) building, and provided further that all
buildings are separated by a distance of at least twenty (20) feet.
5. Each apartment building shall not exceed four and one-half (4 1/2)
stories and sixty (60) feet in height, and shall be constructed with
elevators.
6. The height of an apartment building shall be measured from the
elevation of the ground floor subfloor, and it is recognized that the
height above grade will vary due to the topography of a given
property.
§ 25-4.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.11
1:444
7. All buildings within a luxury apartment development shall be totally
covered by a true and complete gable, hip, gambrel or mansard
roof, provided, however, that where roof mounted equipment is
proposed for the operation of the building, a facade roof treatment
exhibiting the appearance of such pitched roofs may be permitted
and approved by the Planning Board during site plan review.
However, regardless of the style of the roof treatment, the elevation
of the building shall have a roof height extending above the
building wall equivalent to at least one-quarter (i.e., twenty-five
(25%) percent) of the total height of the building, and this
measurement of roof height shall not include any eave projecting
below the building wall.
8. Only the following structures may be erected above the actual
height of a building, and such structure shall not exceed more than
ten (10) feet above the actual height of the building:
(a) Penthouses or other roof structures for the housing of
stairways; and
(b) Spires, cupolas, chimneys and similar architectural structures
associated with the building and its design.
9. All portions of all buildings shall be provided both heat alarms and
smoke alarms and, except for outside balconies and attics, all
interior areas of all buildings shall have a wet fire suppression
sprinkler system.
10. All principal and accessory buildings shall be set back at least
twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines, except that the
building setback distance may be reduced to five (5) feet from a
property line abutting existing open space lands, the Garden State
Parkway and/or a railroad right-of-way.
11. All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from all property lines, except that the parking area and
driveway setback distance may be reduced to five (5) feet from a
property line abutting existing open space lands, the Garden State
Parkway and/or a railroad right-of-way.
12. Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio of 1.8
spaces per apartment unit, in accordance with the requirements of
the mandated Residential Site Improvement Standards. Parking
spaces shall be nine feet by eighteen (9 x 18) feet in size, provided
that the Planning Board may approve up to forty (40%) percent of
the required spaces to be eight feet by sixteen (8 x 16) feet in size if
provided for compact cars only.
13. A luxury apartment development shall provide on-site recreational
amenities including, but not limited to a club house area at least
five thousand (5,000) square feet in size and a swimming pool.
§ 25-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.11
1:445
14. Total lot coverage shall not exceed seventy-five (75%) percent.
15. As luxury apartment development shall be a gated community, with
an entry and security system provided by the operators of the
development, which entry and security system shall be described to
the Planning Board and approved by the Planning Board as part of
final site plan approval.
16. All streets, driveways, parking areas, lighting and landscaping
within a luxury apartment development shall be maintained by the
operators of the development, at no expense to Aberdeen
Township.
17. In addition to the apartment units provided at the maximum density
of twenty (20) units per gross acre of land area, an on-site model
unit, not intended for occupancy, and a sales office shall be
permitted within the building containing the club house area. All
toilet facilities within the model unit shall not be functional, and
shall be labeled "Display Only: Do Not Use."
18. A luxury apartment development shall be permitted one (1) ground
mounted monument-type sign identifying the name of the
development at each public street access to the development. Each
such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall be set back
at least fifteen (15) feet from all street and property lines, and shall
not exceed an area of fifty (50) square feet. Additionally,
information and directional signs, each not more than three (3) feet
in height and ten (10) square feet in area, shall be permitted where
appropriate and as approved by the Planning Board, in order to
guide traffic to its intended destination in a safe and convenient
manner.
19. There shall be a maintenance staff on site every day, and all
residents shall be provided with a telephone number to receive
emergency services during the evening and overnight hours; the
telephone number also shall be provided the Aberdeen Township
Police Department and the Township Manager.
20. Lighting shall be minimal for security and safety purposes, and a
lighting plan shall be submitted indicating the location of the
lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the wattage and
isolux curves for each fixture, and the details of the lighting poles
and the luminaries, in accordance with the following:
(a) The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting
height not higher than twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the
ground level to the centerline of the light source;
(b) The lighting fixtures are to include non-glare lights with
recessed lenses focused downward and with cut-off shields as
appropriate in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon
§ 25-4.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.11
1:446
adjacent and nearby properties, the safety of traffic along
adjacent roadways and overhead skyglow; and
(c) The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated
in footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not
less than five-tenths (0.5) footcandles at inter-sections and
three-tenths (0.3) footcandles elsewhere in the area to be
illuminated, and shall average not more than one (1.0)
footcandle throughout the area to be illuminated.
21. The landscaping within a luxury apartment development shall be
conceived as a total pattern throughout the tract, integrating the
various elements of the architectural design of the buildings and
creating an aesthetically pleasing environment in accordance with
the following:
(a) The landscaping shall include shade trees, decorative
flowering trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and hedges, ground
cover, perennials and annuals, and may include other materials
such as rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and decorative brick
or paving materials.
(b) The dollar amount expenditure for the landscaping shall not be
less than the equivalent expenditure for the planting of at least
twelve (12) shade trees per gross acre of the tract not covered
by buildings and other impervious surfaces, and sufficient
information shall be provided to the Planning Board to confirm
this requirement.
(c) The minimum size of new plants at the time of planting shall be
as follows:
(1) Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and onehalf
(2-1/2) inches measured six (6) inches from ground
level, shall have a standing height of at least ten (10) feet
and shall be balled and burlapped;
(2) Decorative flowering trees shall have a minimum caliper of
one and one-quarter (1-1/4) inches measured six (6) inches
from ground level, shall have a standing height of at least
six (6) feet and shall be balled and burlapped. Decorative
flowering trees shall be well branched, with the branches
starting not less than three (3) feet above the crown of the
root system;
(3) Evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at
time of planting and shall be balled and burlapped; and
(4) Shrubs and hedges shall be at least eighteen to twentyfour
(18-24) inches at time of planting, depending upon
and appropriate to the species of plant.
§ 25-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.11
1:447
(d) All plants shall be installed in accordance with the American
Nurserymen Guide, latest edition.
(e) All plant material shall be guaranteed for at least two (2) years
and a written copy of the guarantee executed between the
developer and the nursery or landscape architect installing the
plantings shall be reviewed by the attorney for the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
prior to the Board granting any final approval.
22. An indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage
of residentially-generated recyclable materials shall be provided as
follows:
(a) The dimension of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number, and which are consistent with
anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the
area in which the project is located. The dimensions of the
recycling area and the bins or containers shall be consistent
with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to Section 3
of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), as amended.
(b) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the
residential disposition of source separated recyclable
materials preferably near, but clearly separated from a refuse
dumpster.
(c) The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles.
Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area
without interference from parked cars or other obstacles.
Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of
recyclable materials, bins or containers.
(d) The recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein
shall be designed so as to provided protection against adverse
environmental conditions which might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used
for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which
are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped
with a lid, or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
(e) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of
access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein.
§ 25-4.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.11
1:448
(f) Landscaping and/or fencing, at least six (6) feet in height, shall
be provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be
provided in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
23. All provision within Section 25-5 of this "Land Development
Ordinance" regulating "Improvements and Design Standards,"
which are not inconsistent with the provisions specified
hereinabove, shall govern the design and construction of a luxury
apartment development.
24. A luxury apartment development shall be served by both public
water and public sewerage facilities.
25. Any approval of a luxury apartment development by the Planning
Board shall be conditioned upon the applicant entering into a
Developer's Agreement with the Aberdeen Township Council
regarding monetary contributions to the Township's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and regarding any other matters as may be
applicable.
26. A luxury apartment development shall require preliminary and final
major site plan approval in accordance with the procedures and
requirements specified in subsections 25-8.4 and 25-8.5 of this
"Land Development Ordinance."
27. In addition to the Environmental Impact Statement required at
subsection 25-8.4e of this Land Development Ordinance and the
"Traffic Impact Statement" required at subsection 25-8.4d, an
applicant for preliminary major site plan approval for a luxury
apartment development shall submit a Community Impact
Statement containing the following information:
(a) An analysis of the total number of people expected to be added
to the population of Aberdeen Township according to the
following age cohorts:
(1) 0-4 years;
(2) 5-17 years;
(3) 18-24 years;
(4) 25-44 years;
(5) 45-64 years; and
(6) 65 years and older.
(b) An analysis of the anticipated number of public school students
projected to be added to the public school system, and the
ability of the existing school facilities to absorb the additional
students projected ten (10) years into the future.
§ 25-4.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.11
1:449
§ 25-4.12. "OR" Office-Residential.
(c) An analysis of the impact of the development upon existing
public water facilities, existing public sewerage facilities,
police protection, fire protection and recreational facilities.
(d) An analysis of the revenues expected to be generated from the
development compared to the anticipated costs which the
proposed development is expected to generate.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Office-Residential zone is to provide a
transition from the general commercial nature of State Route 34 to the
residential character of Oxford Lane. Land uses that are not adversely
affected by the heavily traveled and commercially oriented highway
should be located in this area. However, such development should not,
in turn, include the same range of general commercial uses found along
Route 34. Uses prescribed for this district are intended to minimize the
intrusion of commercial qualities on Oxford Lane.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Detached dwelling units.
2. Offices and office buildings.
3. Public purpose uses.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Private residential swimming pools. (See subsection 25-5.21 for
standards.)
2. Private residential tool sheds not to exceed ten (10) feet in height.
3. Travel trailers and campers may be parked or stored on the
premises, and their dimensions shall not be counted in determining
the total building coverage. They shall not be used as temporary or
permanent living quarters or used for storage while situated on a
lot.
4. Off-street parking and private garages. (See subsection 25-5.12.)
5. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8.)
6. Home professional offices.
7. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18.)
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. Gross Floor Area Minimum. The minimum gross floor area for nonresidential
uses shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet. For
residential uses, see subsection 25-4.3, PC zone requirements.
§ 25-4.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.12
1:450
§ 25-4.13. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former subsection 25-4.13, "FP" Flood Plain, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 8-1985 was
repealed in its entirety by Section 2 of Ordinance No. 11-2002.
g. General Requirements for Non-Residential Principal Uses. (Residential
and accessory uses thereto shall comply with applicable requirements
specified elsewhere in this Ordinance.)
1. One (1) building may contain more than one (1) use, provided that
the total building coverage of the combined uses does not exceed
the maximum building coverage specified for the district.
2. At least the first ten (10) feet adjacent to any street line shall not be
used for parking and shall be planted and maintained in lawn area,
ground cover, or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery and
separated from the parking area by curbing.
3. No merchandise or similar material, waste or equipment shall be
stored outside.
4. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all
at one time or in stages over a period of time. Where a side or front
exterior wall in excess of fifty (50) feet is proposed, variations in
design shall be used to provide attractiveness to the building which
shall include changing roof lines and roof designs, altering building
heights, varying facade treatment or staggering the building
setback. Wherever practicable and feasible, buildings shall be
oriented so as to promote the conservation of energy and the use of
renewable energy resources. All building walls visible from any
street or residence shall not include unpainted or painted cinder
block or concrete block walls.
5. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock
formations, contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers
and/or deciduous trees native to the area, in order to lessen the
visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The established
grades on any site shall be planned for both aesthetic and drainage
purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and landscaping
shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as well as assure
that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage system is
sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from
the site and contributing upstream areas.
6. Ingress and egress for nonresidential uses shall be from State
Route 34 only.
§ 25-4.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.14
1:451
§ 25-4.14. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former subsection 25-4.14, RA-PRD Planned Residential
Development, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance Nos. 11-1985, 6-1988, 1-1989 and 22-1990 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance Nos. 8-2003 and 12-2003.
§ 25-4.15. ARAH Age-Restricted Affordable Housing. [Ord. No.
12-2002 § 3; Ord. No. 13-2010]
Editor's Note: Former subsection 25-4.15, TH Townhouse, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 6-1988 and
20-1992 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 19-1993.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "ARAH" Age-Restricted Affordable Housing
zoning district is to provide affordable housing for senior citizen
households in accordance with the "Housing Plan Element & Fair Share
Plan" portion of the Aberdeen Township Master Plan and the
"Substantive Rules" of the New Jersey Council On Affordable Housing
(COAH).
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Apartment dwelling units, age-restricted in accordance with the
following requirements and limitations:
(a) All dwelling units within an ARAH development shall be deed
restricted for occupancy by households with at least one (1)
person fifty-five (55) years of age or older and with no person
less than nineteen (19) years of age, provided that visitors less
than nineteen (19) years of age are permitted for no more than
eight (8) weeks during any twelve (12) month time period.
(b) The wording of the required deed restriction shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Planning Board for review as
part of the application for final subdivision approval, and the
wording shall be reviewed, modified as necessary, and finally
approved by the Township Council and incorporated within a
developer's agreement between the developer and the
Township Council as a condition of any final approval granted
by the Planning Board for an age-restricted housing
development.
(c) The wording of the required deed restriction as finally
approved by the Township Council shall be recited in the
Master Deed and the Homeowners' Association bylaws, which
also shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Council
and Planning Board as a condition of any final approval
granted by the Planning Board for an age-restricted housing
development.
2. Conservation areas, open spaces and common property.
§ 25-4.14 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.15
1:452
3. Recreational facilities.
4. A Senior Citizen Center for Aberdeen Township, which shall
contain at least six thousand (6,000) square feet of gross floor area
unless a lesser size is approved for good cause shown by the
applicant.
c. Size of Tract. The minimum tract size shall be thirteen and one-half
(13.5 ac) acres.
d. Density and Number of Dwelling Units. The tract of land shall be
developed at an overall tract density not exceeding fifteen (15) dwelling
units per acre, rounded to the nearest whole number, provided that no
less than one hundred ten (110) units shall be constructed as part of an
ARAH development.
e. COAH Affordable Housing Requirements. All of the dwelling units in an
ARAH development shall be "very low," "low" and "moderate" income
affordable units in accordance with all applicable requirements of the
"Third Round Substantive Rules" of the New Jersey Council Of
Affordable Housing (COAH) (N.J.A.C. 5:97, et seq.) and COAH's
"Uniform Housing Affordability Controls" (N.J.A.C. 5:80, et seq.) shall
apply. Regarding the minimum required one hundred ten (110) units,
fifty-five (55) units shall be provided for "moderate" income households,
thirty-seven (37) for "low" income households, and eighteen (18) for
"very low" income households.
f. Building Design Requirements.
1. Each apartment building shall not exceed four and one-half (4 1/2)
stories and seventy-one (71) feet in height measured from grade to
the highest building ridge.
2. Each building shall be constructed with elevators.
3. All buildings within an ARAH development shall be totally covered
by a true and complete gable, hip, gambrel or mansard roof,
provided, however, that where roof mounted equipment is
proposed for the operation of the building, a facade roof treatment
exhibiting the appearance of such pitched roofs may be permitted
and approved by the Planning Board during site plan review.
4. All portions of all buildings shall be provided both heat alarms and
smoke alarms and, except for any outside balconies and attics, all
interior areas of all buildings shall have a "wet" fire suppression
sprinkler system.
5. Only the following structures may be erected above the actual
height of a building, and such structures shall not exceed more
than ten (10) feet above the actual height of the building:
(a) Penthouses or other roof structures for the housing of
stairways; and
§ 25-4.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.15
1:453
(b) Spires, cupolas, chimneys and similar architectural structures
associated with the building and its design.
6. More than one (1) apartment building shall be permitted, provided
that all buildings are separated by a distance of at least twenty (20)
feet.
7. All buildings shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from all street
right-of-way lines and fifteen (15) feet from all other property lines.
g. Parking Requirements.
1. Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio of one
(1.0) space per apartment unit, in accordance with the allowances
of the "Residential Site Improvement Standards."
2. Parking spaces shall be nine feet by eighteen (9 x 18) feet in size.
3. All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least ten (10)
feet from all property lines.
h. Permitted Signs.
1. An ARAH development shall be permitted one (1) ground-mounted
monument-type sign identifying the name of the development at
each public street access to the development. Each such sign shall
not exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall be set back at least fifteen
(15) feet from all street and property lines, and shall not exceed an
area of fifty (50) square feet.
2. Additionally, information and directional signs, each not more than
three (3) feet in height and ten (10) square feet in area, shall be
permitted, where appropriate and as approved by the Planning
Board, in order to guide traffic to its intended destination in a safe
and convenient manner.
i. Lighting Requirements.
1. Lighting shall be minimal for security and safety purposes, and a
point-by-point lighting plan shall be submitted indicating the
location of the lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the
wattage and footcandle levels of illumination for each fixture, and
the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries.
2. The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting height
not higher than twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the ground
level to the centerline of the light source.
3. The lighting fixtures are to include non-glare lights with recessed
lenses focused downward and with "cut-off" shields as appropriate
in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon adjacent and
nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent roadways and
overhead skyglow.
§ 25-4.15 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.15
1:454
4. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated in
footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not less than
five-tenths (0.5) footcandles at intersections and three-tenths (0.3)
footcandles elsewhere in the area to be illuminated, and shall
average not more than one (1.0) footcandle throughout the area to
be illuminated.
j. Landscaping Requirements.
1. The landscaping within an ARAH development shall be conceived
as a total pattern throughout the tract, integrating the various
elements of the architectural design of the buildings and creating
an aesthetically pleasing environment.
2. The landscaping shall include shade trees, decorative flowering
trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and hedges, ground cover,
perennials and annuals, and may include other materials such as
rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and decorative brick or paving
materials.
3. The dollar amount expenditure for the landscaping shall not be less
than the equivalent expenditure for the planting of at least twelve
(12) shade trees per gross acre of the tract not covered by buildings
and other impervious surfaces, and sufficient information shall be
provided to the Planning Board to confirm this requirement.
4. The minimum size of new plants at the time of planting shall be as
follows:
(a) Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half
(2 1/2) inches measured six (6) inches from ground level, shall
have a standing height of at least ten (10) feet and shall be
balled and burlapped;
(b) Decorative flowering trees shall have a minimum caliper of one
and one-quarter (1 1/4) inches measure six (6) inches from
ground level, shall have a standing height of at least six (6) feet
and shall be balled and burlapped. Decorative flowering trees
shall be well branched, with the branches starting not less than
three (3) feet above the crown of the root system;
(c) Evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at time of
planting and shall be balled and burlapped; and
(d) Shrubs and hedges shall be at least eighteen to twenty-four
(18—24) inches at time of planting, depending upon and
appropriate to the species of plant.
5. All plants shall be installed in accordance with the American
Nurserymen Guide, latest edition.
6. All plant material shall be guaranteed for at least two (2) years and
a written copy of the guarantee executed between the developer
§ 25-4.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.15
1:455
and the nursery or landscape architect installing the plantings shall
be reviewed by the attorney for the Planning Board prior to the
Board granting any final approval.
k. Recycling Requirements. An indoor or outdoor recycling area for the
collection and storage of residentially-generated recyclable materials
shall be provided as follows:
1. The dimension of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate
size and number, and which are consistent with anticipated usage
and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the
bins or containers shall be consistent with the district recycling
plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13), as amended.
2. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
3. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles
shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from
parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers
placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
4. The recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, shall
be designed so as to provide protection against adverse
environmental conditions which might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for
the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are
located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid,
or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
5. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to
the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped
with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
6. Landscaping and/or fencing, at least six (6) feet in height, shall be
provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be provided
in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
7. The separation, storage, collection and recovery of recyclable
materials shall be in accordance with Sections 16-4 and 16-5 of
Chapter XVI, Public Works, of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Aberdeen.
l. Additional Requirements.
§ 25-4.15 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.15
1:456
§ 25-4.16. "R-70" Single-Family Residential. [Ord. No. 6-1988; Ord.
No. 20-1992; Ord. No. 19-1993]
1. An ARAH development shall be served by both public water and
public sewerage facilities.
2. An ARAH development shall provide on-site recreational amenities
for the residents of the development.
3. An ARAH development shall provide, at no cost to Aberdeen
Township, a Senior Citizen Center for use by the residents of the
Township.
4. There shall be a maintenance staff on site every day, and all
residents shall be provided with a telephone number to receive
emergency services during the evening and overnight hours; the
telephone number also shall be provided the Aberdeen Township
Police Department and the Township Manager.
5. All provision within Section 25-5 of this "Land Development
Ordinance" regulating "Improvements And Design Standards,"
which are not inconsistent with the provisions specified
hereinabove, shall govern the design and construction of an ARAH
development.
6. An ARAH development shall require preliminary and final major
site plan approval in accordance with the procedures and
requirements specified in Sections 25-8.4 and 25-8.5 of this "Land
Development Ordinance."
a. Purpose. The purpose of the "R-70" District is to provide specific and
separate zoning provisions controlling the development of two (2)
tracts of land in the Township, commonly known as "Heather Glen At
Aberdeen" (Block 12; Lots 1—5 and 8: approximately 17.6 acres) and
"The Orchards At Aberdeen" (Block 10; Lots 1—6 and Block 4; Lots
1—2: approximately 28.92 acres), by Order of the Superior Court of
New Jersey in resolution of the "Mt. Laurel II" related litigation known
as V & G Builders, Inc. vs. The Township of Aberdeen, docket number
L-074780-84PW, and BHJ Associates vs. The Township of Aberdeen,
docket number L-221143-85PW.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Public playgrounds, conservation areas, and public purpose uses.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Private residential swimming pools. (See subsection 25-5.21 for
standards.)
2. Private residential tool sheds not to exceed ten (10) feet in height.
§ 25-4.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.16
1:457
3. Travel trailers and campers may be parked or stored on the
premises, and their dimensions shall not be counted in determining
the total building coverage. They shall not be used as temporary or
permanent living quarters or used for storage while situated on a
lot.
4. Off-street parking and private garages. (See subsection 25-5.12 for
standards.)
5. Fences and walls. (See subsection 25-5.8 for standards.)
6. Home professional offices.
7. Signs. (See subsection 25-5.18 for standards.)
d. Density. The tract of land shall be developed at an overall tract density
of two and two-tenths (2.2) dwelling units per gross acre of land,
rounded to the nearest whole unit number, except that the density may
be increased to up to two and six-tenths (2.6) dwelling units per gross
acre of land, also rounded to the nearest whole unit number, in
accordance with the "'Mt. Laurel' Housing Requirements" specified in
subsection 25-4.16g of this Ordinance hereinbelow.
e. Maximum Building Height. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
and two and one-half (2 1/2) stories and height.
f. Area and Yard Requirements.
"R-70" District Single-Family
Detached Dwellings
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area(1) 7,500 sq. ft.
Lot frontage(2)(3) 70 ft.
Lot width(2) 70 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft.
Side yard (each)(4) 9 ft.
Front yard(4) 25 ft.
Rear yard(4) 25 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 3 ft.
Distance to rear line 3 ft.
Distance to other building 10 ft.
Maximum
§ 25-4.16 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.16
1:458
"R-70" District Single-Family
Detached Dwellings
Combined building coverage of
principal and accessory buildings
25%
Footnotes:
(1) Except that up to ten (10%) percent of the lots may have a lot area
not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet, provided such lots
are located in the interior portion of the tract and do not abut any
tract boundary line.
(2) Except that those permitted lots with a lot area between seven
thousand (7,000) square feet and seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet may have a lot frontage and a lot width of no less
than sixty (60) feet.
(3) Except that the lot frontage may be reduced to not less than forty
(40) feet on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than five
hundred (500) feet measured from the centerline of the street.
(4) Except that a first floor entry deck may be attached to the
principal building, but shall not be less than seven (7) feet to any
property line.
g. "Mt. Laurel" Housing Requirements.
1. By order of the Superior Court of New Jersey, in resolution of "Mt.
Laurel II" related litigation known as V & G Builders Inc. vs. The
Township of Aberdeen, docket number L-074780-84PW, and BHJ
Associates vs. The Township of Aberdeen, docket L-221143-85PW,
developers within the "R-70" Single-Family Residential District
shall be responsible for monetary contributions in lieu of the actual
construction of low and moderate income housing units on-site in
accordance with the following:
(a) A developer shall contribute twenty thousand ($20,000) dollars
per unit for twenty (20%) percent of the units, rounded upward
to the nearest whole number, to be developed at a density up to
two and two-tenths (2.2) dwelling units per acre, to be utilized
as follows:
(1) Forty and one-half (40.5%) percent of the contribution
shall be deposited in a fund entitled "Reserved For
Woodfield Sewer Lateral Connections" established by the
Township of Aberdeen for providing subsidies for sewer
lateral connections to existing low and moderate income
dwelling units in the Woodfield area of the Township; and
(2) Fifty-nine and one-half (59.5%) percent of the contribution
shall be deposited in a fund entitled "Reserve for Freneau
Area Infrastructural Improvements" established by the
Township of Aberdeen for the construction of sewer, water
§ 25-4.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.16
1:459
and roadway infrastructural construction improvements in
the Freneau area of the Township.
(b) A developer shall contribute an additional ten thousand
($10,000) dollars for eighty (80%) percent of any additional
units, rounded upward to the nearest whole number, to be
developed at a density between two and two-tenths (2.2) and
two and six-tenths (2.6) dwelling units per acre, to be utilized
as follows:
(1) Five and one-half (5.5%) percent of the contribution shall
be deposited in the fund entitled "Reserve For Woodfield
Sewer Lateral Connections;" and
(2) Ninety-four and one-half (94.5%) percent of the
contribution shall be deposited in the fund entitled
"Reserve For Freneau Area Infrastructural
Improvements."
(c) The maximum number of units permitted by this Ordinance
and the total required monetary contributions are calculated
as follows for the "Lloyd Road" tract (Block 10; Lots 1—6 and
Block 4; Lots 1—2, commonly referred to as "The Orchards At
Aberdeen") and for the "Line Road" tract (Block 12; Lots 1—5
and 8, commonly referred to as "Heather Glen"):
Tract Acreage
Total Unit @
Density
Units
Contributing
$ Amount
Per Unit Total Contribution
Lloyd
Road
28.92 ac 64du @ 2.2du/
ac
plus
13 (20%) $20,000 $260,000
11du @ to
2.6du/ac
75 units
9 (80%) $10,000 $90,000
$350,000
Line
Road
17.6 ac 38du @ 2.2du/
ac
38 units
8 (20%) $20,000 $160,000
$160,000
(d) The three hundred fifty thousand ($350,000) dollars total
monetary contribution resulting from the development of the
"Lloyd Road" tract shall be apportioned to the "Reserve For
Woodfield Sewer Lateral Connections" fund and the "Reserve
For Freneau Area Infrastructural Improvements" fund in
accordance with subsections 25-4.16g1(a) and 25-4.16g1(b)
hereinabove and shall be contributed by the developer in the
following manner:
§ 25-4.16 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.16
1:460
(1) Ninety-five thousand two hundred ($95,200) dollars within
seventy-five (75) days after a resolution of final major
subdivision approval is adopted by the Aberdeen Township
Planning Board;
(2) One hundred forty-one thousand fifty ($141,050) dollars
upon application for a building permit for the first dwelling
unit to be constructed or upon the sale of any lot,
whichever first occurs; and
(3) Two thousand eight hundred forty-three dollars and
seventy-five ($2,843.75) cents per dwelling unit payable
within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy for each of the first forty (40) dwelling units.
(e) The one hundred sixty thousand ($160,000) dollars total
monetary contribution resulting from the development of the
"Line Road" tract shall be apportioned to the "Reserve For
Woodfield Sewer Lateral Connections" fund and the "Reserve
For Freneau Area Infrastructural Improvements" fund in
accordance with subsection 25-4.16g1(a) hereinabove and
shall be contributed by the developer in the following manner:
(1) Forty-three thousand five hundred ($43,500) dollars within
seventy-five (75) days after a resolution of final major
subdivision approval is adopted by the Aberdeen Township
Planning Board;
(2) Sixty-four thousand five hundred ($64,500) dollars upon
application for a building permit for the first dwelling unit
to be constructed or upon the sale of any lot, whichever
first occurs; and
(3) Two thousand six hundred ($2,600) dollars per dwelling
unit payable within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for each of the first twenty (20)
dwelling units.
2. See subsection 25-6.7 for additional requirements as applicable.
h. General Requirements.
1. No lot shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet along any
common property line with an active railroad right-of-way; said
land area shall be part of the common open space lands within the
development and shall be heavily landscaped and otherwise
improved for recreational purposes as specifically approved by the
Planning Board.
2. Regarding the "R-70" District along Lloyd Road, a minimum three
(3) acre parcel of land with frontage along Lloyd Road shall be
subdivided from the overall tract and dedicated to the Township of
§ 25-4.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.16
1:461
Aberdeen for "public purpose use." Said land area may be included
in the calculation of the required "common open space" pursuant
to subsection 25-4.16i of this chapter hereinbelow.
3. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall apply.
i. Common Open Space Requirements.
1. Land area equal to a minimum of twenty-five (25%) percent of the
tract of land proposed for residential development shall be left
undeveloped and set aside for conservation, open space, recreation
and/or other common open space. Of the twenty-five (25%) percent
common open space land, an area equivalent to at least two
hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit shall be specified on
the site plan and approved by the developer as active recreational
areas for use by the residents of the development.
2. The Township shall review the submitted common open space plan
in the context of the particular development proposal and the
particular characteristics of the subject land area. In any case, the
lands shall be improved as may be necessary to best suit the
purpose(s) for which they are intended.
3. Common open space lands shall be owned and maintained by an
open space organization or trust as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43
and stipulated therein.
4. In the event that the organization created for common open space
management shall fail to maintain any open space or recreation
area in a reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
approved site plan, the Township may serve notice upon such
organization or upon the owners of the development, setting forth
the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain such
areas in reasonable conditions, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
thirty (30) days thereof and shall set the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice. At
such hearing the Township may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of time not
to exceed sixty-five (65) days, within which time the deficiencies
shall be cured.
(a) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said thirty (30)
days or any extension thereof, the Township, in order to
preserve the common open space and maintain the same for a
period of one (1) year, may enter upon and maintain such land.
Said entry and said maintenance shall not vest in the public
any rights to use the open space and recreation areas except
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the
owners.
§ 25-4.16 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.16
1:462
§ 25-4.17. AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay District. [Amended
6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 17-201822]
(b) Before the expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of said areas, call a public
hearing upon fifteen (15) days written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development to be held
by the Township, at which hearing such organization and
owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the municipality shall not, at the election of
the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to
maintain such open space and recreation areas in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain such open
space and recreation areas at the end of said year. If the
Township shall determine such organization is not ready and
able to maintain said open space and recreation areas in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space and recreation areas
during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar
hearing, a determination in each year thereafter. The decision
of the Township in any case shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(c) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed pro rata against the properties within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of the open space
in accordance with the assessed value at the time of imposition
of the lien, and shall become a lien and tax on said properties
and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon, and enforced and collected with interest by
the Township in the same manner as other taxes.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay District
is to provide development that contributes to the Township of
Aberdeen's municipal affordable housing obligation. There is hereby
established the AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay District. The AHO-1
Affordable Housing Overlay District shall consist of:
1. The entire NC (Neighborhood Commercial) zone located along
Lower Main Street identified as Site A on the Affordable Housing
Sites Plan of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan prepared by
T&M Associates, dated May 23, 2018.
2. Block 155, Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5 - Residential Properties adjacent to
Glassworks identified as Site C on the Affordable Housing Sites
22.Editor's Note: Former § 25-4.17, Inclusionary Housing Overlay Zone, was originally
adopted by Ordinance No. 11-2010 as subsection 25-4.17. This was moved to subsection
25-6.12 by Ordinance No. 20-2010
§ 25-4.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.17
1:463
Plan of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M
Associates, dated May 23, 2018.
3. Block 231, Lots 2, 3 and 4 - Commercial site along Route 35
identified as Site D on the Affordable Housing Sites Plan of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M Associates
dated May 23, 2018.
b. Permitted Uses. Mixed-use buildings, subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
1. A "mixed-use building" shall be defined as: a building of two or
more stories with a minimum of the ground floor consisting of
exclusively nonresidential uses, with the exception of residential
entrances and/or lobby areas, and a minimum of one floor of
residential uses over one or more floors of permitted nonresidential
uses. For purposes of this definition, nonresidential uses shall
include: retail and personal sales, service uses, office, storage and
equipment facilities, community rooms and off-street parking.
2. Residential apartments above nonresidential uses may be
permitted in any structure containing a nonresidential use that is
permitted pursuant to § 25-4.5, NC Neighborhood Commercial
Zone, except that restaurants, bars, and taverns, and drive-in
facilities shall not be permitted.
3. The residential use shall be located on the second floor and higher.
4. The entrance for the residential use shall be separate from that of
the nonresidential use.
c. Development Standards for Site A (NC Zone Along Lower Main Street).
1. Maximum permitted building height: Three stories or 45 feet.
2. Maximum residential density: 16 dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 80%.
4. Minimum principal building front yard setback: 10 feet.
5. Minimum principal building side yard setback: 10 feet.
6. Minimum principal building rear yard setback: 20 feet.
7. Off-street parking requirements.
(a) For mixed-use development, the number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses.
(b) The required number of off-street parking spaces may be
reduced as established below:
§ 25-4.17 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.17
1:464
(1) The required number of spaces may be reduced by one
space for each on-street parking space immediately
adjacent to the lot line of the property with a mixed-use
building.
(2) The required number of spaces for a commercial or
personal service establishment portion of a mixed-use
development may be reduced to three spaces for each
1,000 square feet of floor area.
(c) All other parking requirements shall comply with the
"Residential Site Improvement Standards" (RSIS) and:
(1) Off street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio
of 1.0 space per apartment unit.
(2) Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size.
(3) All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least
10 feet from all property lines.
8. All other applicable development standards not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-4.5.
d. Development Standards for Site C (Block 155 Lots 2, 3, 4 and 5).
1. Maximum permitted building height: Three stories or 45 feet.
2. Maximum residential density: 16 dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 80%.
4. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum distance from off-street parking areas: 15 feet.
5. Minimum tract size: two acres.
6. Off-street parking requirements.
(a) For mixed-use development, the number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses.
(b) All other parking requirements shall comply with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS)23 and:
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 25-4.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.17
1:465
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio
of 1.0 space per apartment unit.
(2) Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size.
(3) All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least
10 feet from all property lines.
7. All other applicable development standards not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-4.5.
e. Development Standards for Site D (Block 231 Lots 2,3 and 4).
1. Maximum permitted building height: Four stories or 60 feet.
2. Maximum residential density: 16 dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 80%.
4. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum distance from off-street parking areas: 15 feet.
5. Minimum tract size: five acres total tract area.
6. Off-street parking requirements.
(a) For mixed-use development, the number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses.
(b) All other parking requirements shall comply with the
Residential Site improvement Standards (RSIS)24 and:
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided at the minimum ratio
of 1.0 space per apartment unit.
(2) Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size.
(3) All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least
10 feet from all property lines.
7. All other applicable development standards not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-4.5.
f. Affordable Housing Requirements.
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 25-4.17 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.17
1:466
§ 25-4.18. AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay District. [Added
6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
1. A minimum of 15% of rental units and 20% of for-sale units shall be
affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
2. At least 50% of the affordable units shall be affordable to very-lowand
low-income households. If only one affordable unit is created in
a project, the unit shall be a very-low- or low-income unit.
3. The units designated as very-low-, low-, or moderate-income units
may be rented or sold only to very-low-, low-, or moderate-income
households.
4. The affordable units shall be affirmatively marketed to the housing
region in accordance with the Township's Affirmative Marketing
Plan.
5. Affordability controls shall be maintained for a minimum of 30
years and thereafter until the Township of Aberdeen takes action to
release the affordability controls.
6. Rental increases shall be in accordance with percentages set forth
in § 25-6.7, Affordable Housing.
7. All affordable units shall be subject to the provisions of § 25-6.7,
Affordable Housing.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay District
is to provide development that contributes to the Township of
Aberdeen's municipal affordable housing obligation. There is hereby
established the AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay District, which shall
consist of the area as shown on the Township of Aberdeen's Tax Map as:
1. Block 11 Lots 1 and 2 - Industrial site along Lloyd Road and the
Garden State Parkway identified as Site B on the Affordable
Housing Sites Plan of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
prepared by T&M Associates dated May 23, 2018.
2. Block 12 Lot 7.01 - Office property along Line Road identified as
Site E on the Affordable Housing Sites Plan of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan prepared by T&M Associates dated May 23,
2018.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses.
(a) Multifamily Housing. Multifamily residential apartments or
townhouses may be permitted to provide areas where
additional multifamily development can take place.
2. Accessory Uses:
§ 25-4.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.18
1:467
(a) Community clubhouse building,
(b) Swimming pools.
(c) Common open space and public gathering areas,
(d) Tot lots.
(e) Maintenance facilities/sheds/garages.
(f) Signs.
(g) Fences, hedges, walls, and decorative landscape features.
(h) Solid waste and recycling facilities to support the
development.
(i) Other customary accessory uses and structures that are clearly
incidental to the principal structures and uses.
c. Development Standards for Site B (Block 11, Lots 1 and 2).
1. Maximum permitted building height: Three stories or 38 feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: 30% of the net lot area [the
developable portions of the lot(s)].
3. Maximum residential density: 16 dwelling units per acre.
4. Principal Buildings:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum distance from off-street parking areas: 15 feet.
5. Accessory Buildings:
(a) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum distance to other buildings: 15 feet.
6. Minimum tract sizes: five acres.
7. Off-street parking requirements: The off-street parking
requirements shall be as set forth in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards ("RSIS").25
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 25-4.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.18
1:468
(a) Off street parking minimum setback: 10 feet from any lot line.
(b) All other off-street parking requirements not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-5.12 of this chapter.
8. All other applicable development standards not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-5, Improvements and Design
Standards, with the exception of § 25-5.5, Buffers, which shall not
apply.
d. Development Standards for Site E (Block 12, Lot 7.01).
1. Maximum permitted building height: Three stories or 38 feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: 30% of the net lot area [the
developable portions of the lot(s)].
3. Maximum residential density: 12 dwelling units per acre.
4. Principal Buildings:
(a) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum distance from off-street parking areas: 15 feet.
5. Accessory Buildings:
(a) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(c) Minimum distance to other buildings: 15 feet.
6. Off-street parking requirements: The off-street parking
requirements shall be as set forth in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards ("RSIS").26
(a) Off-street parking minimum setback: 10 feet from any lot line.
(b) All other off-street parking requirements not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-5.12 of this chapter.
7. All other applicable development standards not referenced herein
shall be met in accordance with § 25-5, Improvements and Design
Standards, with the exception of § 25-5.5, Buffers, which shall not
apply.
e. Affordable Housing Requirements.
26.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 25-4.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.18
1:469
§ 25-4.19. Inclusionary Development District A. [Added 6-21-2018
by Ord. No. 18-2018]
1. A minimum of 15% of rental units and 20% of for-sale units shall be
affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
2. At least 50% of the affordable units shall be affordable to very-lowand
low-income households. If only one affordable unit is created in
a project, the unit shall be a very-low- or low-income unit.
3. The units designated as very-low-, low-, or moderate-income units
may be rented or sold only to very-low-, low-, or moderate-income
households.
4. The affordable units shall be affirmatively marketed to the housing
region in accordance with the Township's Affirmative Marketing
Plan.
5. Affordability controls shall be maintained for a minimum of 30
years and thereafter until the Township of Aberdeen takes action to
release the affordability controls.
6. Rental increases shall be in accordance with percentages set forth
in § 25-6.7, Affordable Housing.
7. All affordable units shall be subject to the provisions of § 25-6.7,
Affordable Housing.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Inclusionary Development District A
zoning district is to provide an opportunity for the creation of an
inclusionary housing development in accordance with the Housing Plan
Element and Fair Share Plan, which was adopted on June 6, 2018, and
applicable statutory requirements.
b. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Apartment dwelling units.
2. Townhouse dwelling units.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Off-street parking and private garages.
2. Mailboxes, lamp posts, flagpoles, driveways, paths and sidewalks.
3. Fences, walls and retaining walls.
4. Signage, as permitted in this section.
5. Solid waste and recycling enclosures.
6. Patios, terraces and decks attached to principal structures in
accordance with an approved site plan.
§ 25-4.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.19
1:470
7. Recreation center for the exclusive use of residents of a
development and their guests, the design of which shall
complement the design of the principal buildings.
8. Outdoor recreation facilities, such as tennis and basketball courts,
tot lots and similar facilities.
9. Gazebos.
10. Benches.
11. Stormwater management basins and facilities, including structures
for collection, treatment and discharge.
12. Essential services.
13. Common areas, open space and conservation areas.
d. Size of the Tract. The minimum tract size shall be 9.5 acres.
e. Density and Number of Dwelling Units. The tract shall be developed at
an overall density not exceeding eight dwelling units per acre, rounded
to the nearest whole number, and subject to the following additional
limitations and requirements:
1. No less than 20% or 16 of the total number of units constructed,
whichever is greater, shall be apartment dwelling units.
(a) In computing the required number of apartment dwelling
units, the requirement shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number such that: any portion of a unit less than 1/2 unit shall
not be considered and, thus, rounded down; and, any portion of
a unit that is greater than or equal to 1/2 unit shall be
considered and, thus, rounded up.
f. Affordable Housing Requirements. All apartment dwelling units shall be
very-low-, low-, and moderate-income affordable units in accordance
with all applicable statutory requirements (e.g., N.J.A.C. 5:97 et seq.;27
N.J.A.C. 5:80 et seq.) and the following additional limitations and
requirements:
1. No more than 50%, rounded down to the nearest whole number,
shall be moderate-income units.
2. No less than 13%, rounded up to the nearest whole number, shall
be very-low-income units.
g. Building Design Requirements.
1. Each building shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet in height
measured from grade to the highest building ridge.
27.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 25-4.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.19
1:471
2. All buildings shall be totally covered by a true and complete gable,
hip, gambrel or mansard roof; provided, however, that where roofmounted
equipment is proposed for the operation of the building, a
facade roof treatment exhibiting the appearance of such pitched
roofs may be permitted and approved by the Planning Board during
site plan review.
3. All portions of all buildings shall be provided both heat alarms and
smoke alarms and, except for any outside balconies and attics, all
interior areas of all buildings shall have a "wet" fire suppression
sprinkler system.
4. Only the following structures may be erected above the actual
height of a building, and such structures shall not exceed more
than 10 feet above the actual height of the building:
(a) Penthouses or other roof structures for the housing of
stairways.
(b) Spires, cupolas, chimneys and similar architectural structures
associated with the building and its design.
5. All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from all existing
street right-of-way lines, 30 feet from property lines abutting
nonresidential properties, and 50 feet from property lines abutting
existing residential properties.
(a) For the purposes of this section, decks attached to buildings
shall not be considered to be part of the building and shall be
exempt from the setback requirements specified above. Decks
shall be set back a minimum of 24 feet from property lines
abutting nonresidential properties, and 44 feet from property
lines abutting existing residential properties.
6. No building shall be closer than 26 feet to any proposed right-ofway
or access road on the development tract that links to an
existing right-of-way.
7. Buildings containing residential apartment dwelling units shall
contain no more than 16 such units.
8. Buildings containing townhouse dwelling units shall contain no
more than 10 such units.
9. Maximum building coverage shall be limited to 25% of the total
tract area.
10. The bedroom distribution of townhouse units shall be: 20% onebedroom
units; 40% two-bedroom units; and, 40% three-bedroom
units.
h. Parking Requirements.
§ 25-4.19 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.19
1:472
1. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards (i.e.,
N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
2. All parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least 15 feet
from all property lines abutting existing residential properties.
3. All parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from all
buildings.
4. All parking areas and drivelines shall be set back at least 15 feet
from all property lines abutting nonresidential properties, except
that culs-de-sac and similar areas may be set back up to five feet
from abutting nonresidential properties.
i. Permitted Signs.
1. Each development shall be permitted one ground-mounted,
monument-type sign identifying the name of the development at
each public street access to the development. Each such sign shall
not exceed 10 feet in height, shall be set back at least 15 feet from
all street and property lines, and shall not exceed an area of 50
square feet.
2. Additionally, information and directional signs, each not more than
three feet in height and 10 square feet in area, shall be permitted,
where appropriate and as approved by the Planning Board, in order
to guide traffic to its intended destination in a safe and convenient
manner.
j. Lighting Requirements.
1. Lighting shall be minimal for security and safety purposes, and a
point-by-point lighting plan shall be submitted indicating the
location of the lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the
wattage and footcandle levels of illumination for each fixture, and
the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries.
2. The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting height
not higher than 25 feet, measured from the ground level to the
center line of the light source.
3. The lighting fixtures are to include nonglare lights with recessed
lenses focused downward and with cutoff shields as appropriate in
order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon adjacent and
nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent roadways and
overhead skyglow.
4. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated in
footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not less than
5/10 footcandle at intersections and 3/10 footcandle elsewhere in
the area to be illuminated and shall average not more than 1.0
footcandle throughout the area to be illuminated.
§ 25-4.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.19
1:473
k. Landscaping Requirements.
1. Landscaping shall be conceived as a total pattern throughout the
tract, integrating the various elements of the architectural design
of the buildings and creating an aesthetically pleasing
environment.
2. The landscaping shall include shade trees, decorative flowering
trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and hedges, ground cover,
perennials and annuals, and may include other materials such as
rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and decorative brick or paving
materials.
3. The dollar amount expenditure for the landscaping shall not be less
than the equivalent expenditure for the planting of at least 12
shade trees per gross acre of the tract not covered by buildings and
other impervious surfaces, and sufficient information shall be
provided to the Planning Board to confirm this requirement.
4. The minimum size of new plants at the time of planting shall be as
follows:
(a) Shade trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches,
measured six inches from ground level, and shall have a
standing height of at least 10 feet and shall be also balled and
burlapped.
(b) Decorative flowering trees shall have a minimum caliper of 1 1/
4 inches, measured six inches from ground level, and shall
have a standing height of at least six feet and shall also be
balled and burlapped. Decorative flowering trees shall be well
branched, with the branches starting not less than three feet
above the crown of the root system.
(c) Evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height at time of
planting and shall be balled and burlapped.
(d) Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 18 inches to 24 inches at
the time of planting, depending upon and appropriate to the
species of plant.
5. All plants shall be installed in accordance with the American
Nurserymen Guide, latest edition.
6. All plant material shall be guaranteed for at least two years and a
written copy of the guarantee executed between the developer and
the nursery or landscape architect installing the plantings shall be
reviewed by the attorney for the Planning Board prior to the Board
granting any final approval.
l. Recycling Requirements.
§ 25-4.19 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-4.19
1:474
1. An indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage
of recyclable materials generated by the apartment dwelling units
shall be provided as follows:
(a) The dimension of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers that are of adequate
size and number, and that are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in
which the project is located. The dimensions of the recycling
area and the bins or containers shall be consistent with the
district recycling plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.
1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), as amended.
(b) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the
residential disposition of source-separated recyclable
materials preferably near, but clearly separated from, a solid
waste container.
(c) The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles.
Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area
without interference from parked cars or other obstacles.
Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of
recyclable materials, bins or containers.
(d) The recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein,
shall be designed so as to provide protection against adverse
environmental conditions which might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used
for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which
are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped
with a lid, or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
(e) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of
access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein.
(f) Landscaping and fencing, at least six feet in height, shall be
provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be
provided in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
(g) The separation, storage, collection and recovery of recyclable
materials shall be in accordance with §§ 16-4 and 16-5 of
Chapter 16, Public Works, of the Revised General Ordinances
of the Township of Aberdeen.
m. Additional Requirements.
§ 25-4.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4.19
1:475
§ 25-5. IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 25-5.1. Improvements.
1. All developments shall be served by both public water and public
sewerage facilities, access to which shall be provided at the
expense of the developer.
2. All developments shall provide on-site recreational amenities for
the exclusive use of residents and their guests. The area devoted to
such amenities shall be at least 10,000 square feet.
3. There shall be a maintenance service available to residents of the
apartment dwelling units, and all residents of such units shall be
provided with a telephone number to receive emergency
maintenance services at all times; the telephone number shall also
be provided to the Aberdeen Township Police Department and
Aberdeen Township Manager.
4. All utilities shall be installed underground.
5. The developer shall establish and convey appropriate utility
easements to the appropriate utility service provider.
6. All provisions within § 25-5 of this Land Development Ordinance
regulating Improvements and Design Standards that are not
inconsistent with the provisions specified hereinabove shall govern
the design and construction of all developments.
7. All developments shall require preliminary and final major site plan
approval in accordance with the procedures and requirements
specified in §§ 25-8.4 and 25-8.5 of this Land Development
Ordinance.
a. Requirements. All improvements shall be installed in accordance with
the design standards of this section and with all other applicable
municipal, County, State and Federal regulations. Should improvements
be required which are not provided for within the particular
subsections of this section, or should the applicable design standards
set forth herein be impracticable due to unusual circumstances
affecting the site or the project which would cause the implementation
of such applicable standards to contravene the purposes of this chapter,
then such improvements shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with good engineering practice and recognized design
standards and subject to review and approval by the Board and
Township Engineer.
b. Standard Specifications and Construction Details. The Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (latest edition), including all addenda,
and the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation (latest revision) as modified, supplemented, amended or
§ 25-4.19 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.1
1:476
§ 25-5.2. General Design Standards.
§ 25-5.3. Apartments and Townhouses. [Ord. No. 11-1985; Ord. No.
6-1988; Ord. No. 1-1991]
No apartment or townhouse dwelling unit shall be constructed in the
Township unless the dwelling is part of an approved site plan and unless
the following minimum standards are met in addition to other applicable
requirements of this chapter:
superseded by the requirements of this section, by the approved final
plat or plan, by particular agreement among the Board, Governing
Body and subdivider, or by other applicable municipal, County, State
or Federal regulations, shall govern the completion of the required
improvements. Such Standard Specifications and Standard
Construction Details are hereby made a part of this section by
reference.
a. Relationship to Master Plan and Official Map. All subdivision plats and
site plans shall conform to design standards that will encourage
desirable development patterns within the Township and promote the
conservation of energy and the use of renewable energy resources. The
subdivision plat or site plan shall conform to the proposals and
conditions of the Master Plan and Official Map for streets, drainage
rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds and other
municipal facilities. If no provisions have been made, the streets and
drainage rights-of-way shown on the subdivision plat or site plan shall
be oriented so as to promote the harmonious development of the
municipality and the enhancement of the public welfare, the
conservation of energy and the use of renewable energy resources.
b. Minimum Requirements. The standards set forth in this section shall be
taken to be the minimum necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township. Any action
taken by the Planning Board under the terms of this Section 25-5, shall
give primary consideration to such matters and the welfare of the entire
community. However, if the applicant can demonstrate that, because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of this
Section 25-5 is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning
Board may permit such variances as may be reasonable, within the
general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards
expressed in this Section 25-5.
a. Each building and complex of buildings shall have an architectural
scheme with appropriate variations in design to provide attractiveness
to the development; compatible within the development and in
relationship to adjacent land uses. Such variations in design shall result
from the use of landscaping and the orientation of buildings to the
natural features of the site and to other buildings as well as orientation
to the sun so that solar energy may be utilized and from varying unit
§ 25-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.3
1:477
§ 25-5.4. Appearance of Buildings.
widths, using different exterior materials; changing roof lines and roof
designs, varying building heights and changing window types, shutters,
doors, porches and exterior colors. Architectural elevations shall be
submitted to the Board for review and approval. Dwelling unit designs
may be varied by differences in unit width and setback.
b. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning water
and sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
c. All parking facilities shall be on the same site as the building and
located one hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest entrance of the
building they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall be provided in
areas specifically for parking, and there shall be no parallel or diagonal
parking along interior streets.
d. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of
laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Sufficient area
and equipment shall be made available within each building for the
laundering and artificial drying of the laundry of the occupants of each
building.
e. Dwelling units shall have access to a master television antennae system
and individual dwelling units may not erect individual external
television or radio antennas.
f. No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than twenty (20) feet wide.
g. Apartment buildings may consist of any configuration that meets the
required setback requirements and does not exceed the following
overall or component building lengths: two hundred ten (210) feet on
one (1) plane; three hundred forty (340) feet on any angle; and five
hundred (500) feet along the centerline.
h. Each building shall have adequate access for fire fighting purposes.
Sufficient numbers of water hydrants shall be appropriately located and
no parking shall be permitted in any required "fire zones."
a. Within any residential district no building with permitted professional
or office occupation shall be constructed or altered so as to be
inharmonious with the residential character of the adjacent residential
areas.
b. The Township Council hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior
design and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential
neighborhood tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate
and neighboring areas for residential purposes and impairs existing
residential property in such areas; tends to impair the value of both
improved and unimproved real property in such areas; tends to deprive
the municipality of tax revenue; and destroys a proper balance between
§ 25-5.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.4
1:478
the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of
municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this section
to prevent these and other harmful effects of uniformity in design and
appearance of dwellings erected in any housing development in the
same residential neighborhood and thus to promote and protect the
general welfare of the community.
1. Except as provided in this chapter, not more than one (1) building
permit shall hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be erected in a
housing development consisting of two (2) or more houses if it is
substantially alike in exterior design and appearance with any
neighboring dwelling situated on the same or opposite sides of the
street within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a dwelling then in
existence or for which a building permit has been issued or is
pending. The distance herein specified shall be construed to mean
the distance between the street property lines and the respective
properties.
2. Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be
considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one (1) of the following characteristics.
(a) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one (1) or more exterior
elevations.
(b) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial
change in design and appearance.
(c) The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation
are without substantial differentiation.
3. In addition, there shall be no fewer than two (2) separate basic
house designs in every housing development consisting of eight (8)
or fewer houses; no fewer than three (3) basic house designs in
every housing development consisting of fifteen (15) or fewer
houses; no fewer than five (5) basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of fifty (50) or fewer houses; no fewer than
six (6) basic house designs in every housing development
consisting of seventy-seven (77) or fewer houses; and no fewer than
eight (8) basic house designs in every housing development
consisting of seventy-eight (78) or more houses.
4. To insure conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, no
construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one (1)
dwelling in any housing development until the builder shall post or
cause to be posted on each specific lot on the map of the
subdivision on file with the Construction Official the type and
model of each house for which a construction permit has been or is
being issued.
§ 25-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.4
1:479
§ 25-5.5. Buffers. [Ord. No. 11-2002, § 3]
5. The provisions, requirements and standards heretofore set forth
shall not be considered met where there is an attempt to make
minor changes or deviations from building plans and location
surveys, which changes show an obvious intent to circumvent the
purpose of this section.
a. Buffer areas are required along lot and street lines of all multi-family
and nonresidential developments where the property lines or the
centerline of the adjacent streets abut a single-family residential
district. Buffer areas are for the primary purposes of visually separating
one use from another in order to safeguard the character of adjacent
districts, and buffer screening is used to visually shield or obscure the
view of one use from another and reduce noise perception and glare
from direct or reflected light beyond the lot.
1. No structure, activity, drainage basin, storage of materials, parking
of vehicles or any other improvements shall be permitted in a
buffer area, except that underground utilities may be installed
where the Board deems that a buffer screening is not necessary
within the entire width of the buffer area.
2. The location and design of buffer screening within the buffer shall
consider the use being screened; the distance between the use
being screened; the distance between the use and the property
line; differences in elevations; the types of buffers, such as dense
planting, existing woods, a wall or fence; buffer height and width;
and other combinations of man-made and natural features.
3. The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded, landscaped and
developed with the general guideline that the closer a use or
activity is to a property line or the more intense the use, the more
effective and dense the buffer screening within the buffer must be
in obscuring light and vision and reducing noise beyond the lot.
4. Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained and kept clean of all
debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass. Plant material which does not
live shall be replaced by the developer prior to any bond release or
final acceptance by the Township.
5. The buffer area shall not be broken except for vehicular or
pedestrian access points to assure a clear sight triangle, unless
specifically approved by the Board.
b. All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with either grass or
ground cover, together with a dense buffer screening of shrubs or trees
a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width, meeting the following
requirements:
1. The plant materials shall be of a species common to the area, of
nursery stock and free of insects and disease.
§ 25-5.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.5
1:480
2. The plant materials used in the buffer screening shall consist of a
mixture of forty (40%) percent evergreen/conifer trees; thirty
(30%) percent deciduous and evergreen shrubs; twenty (20%)
percent deciduous shade trees; and ten (10%) percent deciduous
flowering ornamental trees.
3. The plants shall be arranged in natural groupings at an adequate
density to screen the adjoining uses.
4. The preservation of existing, natural wooded tracts shall be an
integral part of all plans and may be calculated as part of the
required buffer area, provided that the area is of the required width
and the existing vegetation is of a sufficient density to serve the
purpose of a buffer and buffer screening. Supplemental
landscaping may be provided to enhance partially wooded areas to
be retained to meet the requirements of this subsection for the
buffer screening.
5. Except for existing preserved or transplanted vegetation,
evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at the time of
planting, balled and burlapped, and deciduous shade trees shall be
at least two and one-half (2 1/2) inches caliper, measured six (6)
inches above the top of the root ball, at the time of planting, balled
and burlapped.
6. Flowering ornamental trees shall not be less than one and one-half
(1 1/2) inch caliper, measured six (6) inches above the ground, nor
less than six (6) feet high. They must be well-branched, the
branches to start not less than three (3) feet from the crown of the
root system. Trees shall be balled and burlapped.
7. Evergreen and deciduous shrubs and hedges used in screen
planting shall be at least two (2) feet in height when planted.
8. The screen planting shall be placed so that at maturity the plant
material will be no closer than three (3) feet from any street or
property line.
9. New buffer screening shall be contained in continuous mulched
landscape beds. The landscape beds exceeding a length of one
hundred (100) linear feet may be broken for the purpose of
maintenance. The gap shall be located at deciduous shade tree
groupings, shall be no greater than twenty (20) feet wide and shall
be diagonally oriented to the length of the required buffer to
reduce visibility to the adjoining use.
10. The buffer screening shall comply with all other applicable
requirements in subsection 25-5.10 of this section.
c. Landscape mounds or earthen berms of adequate height for screening
purposes shall be required in the buffer area when the proposed multifamily
or nonresidential use exceeds two (2) stories and/or where
§ 25-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.5
1:481
existing woodlands are either not sufficient or desirable or are to be
disturbed.
1. Berms shall be curvilinear and free form in shape and shall be
constructed with a maximum mowable, grassed slope of 3:1 or a
nonmowable, mulched slope of 2:1. In no case shall a berm with a
permitted 2:1 slope exceed four (4) feet in height.
2. A four (4) foot wide flat area shall be provided at the top. The berm
shall be constructed of suitable soil material to sustain vigorous
plant growth. Prior to any planting, a four (4) inch thick layer of
prepared topsoil containing a water absorbent polymer shall be
evenly spread over the entire berm and fertilizer applied.
3. The berms shall be stabilized by ground cover to prevent soil
erosion and shall be planted with evergreen and deciduous trees in
accordance with subsection 25-5.5b of this section, except that
deciduous trees shall be limited to the bottom one-third (1/3) of the
height of the berm to be constructed to ensure adequate soil
moisture for plant survival.
d. The installation of that portion of the approved buffer necessary to
screen a particular portion of the tract from being viewed from a
bordering street or from an adjacent developed property shall be
completed to the greatest extent possible prior to the development of
that particular portion of the tract.
e. Buffer widths shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to
either a straight lot or street line or the tangent lines of curved lot or
street lines. The minimum width of the buffer area shall be considered a
zoning requirement for the purposes of this Ordinance and shall be
dimensioned as follows for the respective zoning district:
APT/TH 50 feet
RA-PRD 50 feet
HC 50 feet
RC 100 feet
RO 50 feet
MFG 100 feet
LI 100 feet
OR 25 feet
CR 50 feet
In addition to the above, any shopping center within any zoning district
shall provide a one hundred (100) foot wide buffer along any common
property line with a residential district.
f. The minimum buffer areas required herein shall not contain any area
necessary to satisfy the minimum yard or building distance
§ 25-5.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.5
1:482
§ 25-5.6. Drainage.
requirements of the respective zoning district. Buffer areas shall be
provided in addition to all other bulk requirements.
a. All streets shall be provided with manholes, catch basins and pipes
where the same may be necessary for proper surface drainage. This
requirement shall not be satisfied by the construction of dry wells.
b. Total stormwater runoff from a site after development shall be limited
to not more than the runoff from the site in its undeveloped state.
Detention and retention facilities shall be utilized to limit such runoff.
The Board may waive this requirement if the nature of the site, the
character of adjacent previously developed areas or other factors make
the utilization of runoff limiting devices unnecessary, inadvisable or
impractical.
c. The system shall be adequate to carry off or store the stormwater and
natural drainage water which originates not only within the lot or tract
boundaries, but also that which originates beyond the lot or tract
boundaries. No stormwater run-off or natural drainage water shall be
so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems or create flooding
or the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands without proper and approved provisions
being made for taking care of these conditions. Drains for the purpose
of disposing of sump pump and/or roof leader runoff must outlet into an
adequate water course or drainage system as approved by the
Township Engineer.
d. The existing system of natural drainage within each site shall be
preserved to the maximum extent possible. To this end, the Board may
require the preservation of natural drainage swales, recharge areas,
wet weather ponds and similar features and may require suitable
drainage and conservation easements. In its review of the proposed
system, the Board shall consider the following criteria:
1. The utilization of the natural drainage system to the fullest extent
possible.
2. The maintenance of the natural drainage system as much as
possible in its unimproved state.
3. When drainage channels are required, wide shallow swales with
natural vegetation will be preferred to other sections.
4. The construction of flow retarding devices, detention areas and
recharge berms to minimize runoff value increases.
5. Maintenance of the base flow in streams, reservoirs and ponds.
§ 25-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.6
1:483
6. The reinforcement, improvement and/or extension of the natural
drainage system to such an extent as is necessary to eliminate
flooding and excess maintenance requirements.
e. The computation of stormwater runoff shall be made using the rational
formula unless, in unusual cases, another method is approved by the
Township Engineer. Runoff from upstream areas shall be calculated
based on full development potential according to current zoning or
current use, whichever produces the greatest runoff. Runoff
coefficients used should generally fall in the following ranges:
Classification Fully Developed Range of Coefficient
Public parks, open space and land
conservation
0.15—0.30
Low density residential 0.35—0.45
Medium density residential 0. 40—0. 60
High density residential 0.55—0.80
Commercial and Industrial 0.75—0.95
Pavements, roadways, shoulders 1
f. Storm sewers, open channels, bridges and culverts, unless otherwise
directed by the Township Engineer, shall be designed for minimum flow
capacities as follows:
1. For closed systems, ten (10) years; or if the above results in a pipe
size at least equivalent to a twenty-one (21) inch reinforced
concrete pipe, then twenty-five (25) years, or if the above results in
a pipe size at least equivalent to a thirty (30) inch reinforced
concrete pipe, then fifty (50) years; or if the above results in a pipe
size at least equivalent to a fifty-four (54) inch reinforced concrete
pipe, then one hundred (100) years.
2. For open channels, ten (10) years; or if the tributary area exceeds
fifty (50) acres, then twenty-five (25) years; or if the tributary area
exceeds two hundred fifty (250) acres, then fifty (50) years. The
flooding limits for storms with a return period of twice the design
storm shall be determined for all open channels. Such limits shall
be the drainage or conservation easements delineated on the plat
or plan.
3. For detention facilities, a twenty-four (24) hour flood with a return
period not less than fifty (50) years or, if the tributary area exceeds
fifty (50) acres, then one hundred (100) years.
g. Velocities shall be restricted as follows:
1. Velocities in closed systems at design flow shall be at least two and
one-half (2.5) feet per second, but not more than that velocity
which will cause erosion damage to the pipe.
§ 25-5.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.6
1:484
2. Velocities in open channels at design flow shall not be less than
one-half (1/2) foot per second and not greater than that velocity
which will begin to cause erosion or scouring of the channel.
3. For unlined earth channels, the maximum velocity allowed will be
two (2) feet per second.
4. At transitions between closed systems and open channels or
different types of open channels suitable provisions must be made
to accommodate the velocity transitions. These provisions may
include broken stone streambed protection, rip-rap, gabions,
lining, aprons, chutes and checks, or others, all suitably detailed
and approved as part of the plan submission.
h. The design location and type of inlets and the size and location of
manholes shall be approved by the engineer.
i. The use of siltation and oil separation basins with controlled outflows
shall be required to prevent pollution of waterways when discharge is
into a standing body of water.
j. Where, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, underdrainage is
required, Type F underdrains shall be installed in accordance with the
New Jersey State Highway Specifications of 1961 as amended and
supplemented, and shall be of the size specified by the Township
Engineer. All underdrain systems shall be provided with a clean-out.
k. If the property on which a proposed development is to be located is
proposed to be traversed by a drainage facility of any kind, including a
pipe, channel, stream or swale, the Board may require that a
stormwater and drainage easement or right-of-way along said facility be
provided by the developer.
l. The minimum easement for open channel sections shall be the
maximum design top width of the channel section segment plus twentyfive
(25) feet rounded to the next highest five (5) foot increment. The
excess easement area shall be provided offset to that side of the
channel most convenient for use by maintenance crews and equipment.
The minimum distance between the channel top edge and any easement
line shall be five (5) feet.
m. Land subject to periodic or occasional flooding (flood plain areas) shall
not be used for any purpose which may endanger life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard. Site design, grading and drainage shall be
so arranged to prevent damage to existing or proposed structures or
adjacent properties under major storm conditions of a one hundred
(100) year return frequency.
n. Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings and
into drainage structures, where possible. Additionally, drainage shall be
provided in a manner which will prevent the collection of storm water in
§ 25-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.6
1:485
§ 25-5.7. Grading and Site Clearance.
pools or other unauthorized concentrations of flow. To the extent
possible, water shall not flow across adjacent property lines.
a. Clearing, excavation and embankment construction shall be in
accordance with the applicable requirements of the Standard
Specifications and approved Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan.
b. No excavated material may be removed from the site except in
accordance with an approved site plan or with the prior approval of the
Township Engineer. Such material shall be removed from the site and
disposed of by the developer.
c. Where borrow excavation materials from off-site sources are required
to complete the necessary grading, such material shall meet the
requirements of the Standard Specifications for Borrow Excavation,
Zone 3, and shall be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
d. Sites shall be graded to a system of interior drainage in such a manner
as to prevent the collection of stormwater or the creation of drainage
problems off-site.
e. Topsoil shall not be removed from lawn areas or open space. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed on the
surface as cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. If
sufficient topsoil is not available on the site, topsoil meeting the
requirements of the Standard Specifications shall be provided to result
in a four (4) inch minimum thickness.
f. Grading shall be performed in a manner which will minimize the
damage to or destruction of trees growing on the land. Stripping of
trees from a lot or filling within six (6) feet of trees or shrubs to be
retained shall not be permitted unless it can be shown to be necessary
or unless wells are constructed with extension tiles to the dripline of
trees.
g. Unless otherwise required by the Standard Specifications, all tree
stumps, masonry and other obstructions and debris shall be removed to
a depth of two (2) feet below finished grade and disposed of in a lawful
manner. All dead, dying or diseased trees, standing or fallen, shall be
removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips they may,
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer, be used as mulch in
landscaped areas.
h. The minimum slope for lawns shall be one and one-half (1.5%) percent
and for smooth hard-finished surfaces, other than roadways, five-tenths
of one (5/10 of 1%) percent.
§ 25-5.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.7
1:486
§ 25-5.8. Fences and Walls.
i. Unless otherwise approved by the Township Engineer, the maximum
grade for lawns within ten (10) feet of a building shall be five (5%)
percent.
j. Retaining walls installed in slope control areas shall be designed as
follows:
1. Said retaining walls shall be constructed of heavy, pressure treated
timber or logs, reinforced concrete, other reinforced masonry or of
other construction acceptable to the Township Engineer and
adequately designed and detailed on the plans to carry all earth
pressures, including any expected surcharges.
2. Proposed retaining walls having a height of greater than three (3)
feet shall require calculations to support the design of such walls.
Such calculations shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
review.
3. The height of retaining walls shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the
horizontal distance from the foundation wall of any building to the
face of the retaining wall.
a. No wall or fence shall be erected or altered so that said wall or fence
shall be over four (4) feet in height in the front yard and six (6) from the
front set back line to the rear lot line.
1. In any non-residential zone, open wire fences not exceeding eight
(8) feet in height may be erected in the rear or side yard areas and
behind the front yard setback line.
2. On park, recreation or school properties, open wire fences not
exceeding eight (8) feet may be erected, except that fences
enclosing outdoor tennis courts, baseball backstops and other
fences normally provided with recreation facilities may be open
wire fences not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height.
3. Fences specifically required by State and Federal regulations.
b. On any lot in a "P-C", Planned Community, district in the Township, no
fences or walls shall be erected between the building setback line and
the street.
c. All fences and walls must be erected within the property lines, and no
fence or wall shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-ofway.
d. No fence in a residential district shall be erected of barbed wire, topped
with metal spikes, or constructed of any material or in any manner
which may be dangerous to persons or animals, except that these
provisions shall not apply to farms. Canvas or cloth fences are
specifically prohibited in all districts.
§ 25-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.8
1:487
§ 25-5.9. Lighting.
§ 25-5.10. Natural Features and Landscaping. [Ord. No. 11-2002
§ 4]
e. All supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of the
fence, and if erected along or adjacent to a property line, the supporting
members of the fence shall face the principal portion of the tract of land
of the property upon which the fence is erected.
a. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways
and driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment
or other similar uses having common off-street parking and/or loading
areas, and building complexes requiring area lighting shall be
adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes. The lighting
plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for nonglare, color
corrected lights focused downward. The light intensity provided at
ground level shall be a minimum of three-tenths (.3) footcandle
anywhere in the area to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of fivetenths
(.5) footcandle over the entire area, and shall be provided by
fixtures with a mounting height not more than twenty-five (25) feet or
the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground
level to the centerline of the light source and spaced a distance not to
exceed five (5) times the mounting height. Any other outdoor lighting
such as sidewalk illumination, driveways with no adjacent parking, the
lighting of signs and ornamental lighting shall be shown on the lighting
plan in sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects to adjacent
properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objective of these
specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No direct
lighting shall be permitted. Additionally, no light shall shine into
windows or onto streets and driveways in such manner as to interfere
with or distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements, the
intensity of such light sources, the light shielding and similar
characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval by the Board.
b. Street lighting of a type supplied by the utility and of a type and number
approved by the Township Engineer shall be provided for all street
intersections and along all arterial, collector and local streets and
anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever electric
utility installations are required to be underground, the applicant shall
provide for underground service for street lighting.
a. Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open
waters, critical areas and natural drainage ridge lines shall be
preserved to the maximum extent reasonably possible in designing any
development containing such features. The development plan should
clearly reflect the avoidance of unnecessary alteration of existing
topography or the removal of vegetation and should propose
development that will otherwise respect the established natural
conditions of the site and its surroundings.
§ 25-5.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.10
1:488
b. In conjunction with uses other than single-family dwellings, all areas of
the site not occupied by buildings, pavement, walkways, or other
required improvements shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs,
ground cover, seeding or plantings and maintained in good condition.
The proposed landscaping shall be designed and located to benefit
pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, provide delineation of
parking areas, provides shade, screen unwanted views and enhance
site aesthetics to the satisfaction of the Board.
c. For the purpose of approving the quantity, locations and species of
trees, the Board shall consider safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
including visibility and sight distance; tree foliage, canopy, typical
habit, growth characteristics and cultural requirements; potential
interference with utility lines and poles and consistency with the
general character of the area.
d. A minimum of twelve (12) shade trees, or the equivalent dollar value of
evergreen trees, ornamental trees and shrubs, shall be required for
every disturbed acre of land for all nonresidential and multi-family
development. Landscaping should provide a variety and mixture of
plantings. The selection should consider susceptibility to disease,
colors, season, textures, shapes, blossoms and foliage.
e. All deciduous trees shall be of nursery stock and shall have a minimum
caliper of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in diameter measured six (6)
inches above the top of the root ball. All trees shall comply with the
current American Standards For Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1) and shall
be balled and burlapped. All deciduous trees shall be staked, guyed and
wrapped with a biodegradable tree wrap from the first branch to the
ground. Acceptable methods for staking and guying shall be
determined by the Township Engineer.
f. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be
balled and burlapped, and shall have a full and uniform canopy habit at
time of installation. All evergreen trees should be treated with an antidesiccant/
wilt-proof at the beginning of the first fall season following
installation to ensure protection from drying winter winds. All
evergreen trees shall be staked and guyed. Acceptable methods for
staking and guying shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
g. All ornamental trees and shrubs shall be at least a maximum mature
distance, but not less than two (2) feet, from a foundation wall or fence.
All ornamental trees shall be installed at a minimum one and one-half
(1 1/2) inch in caliper, measured six (6) inches above the ground, and a
minimum six (6) feet in height. All shrubs shall be installed at a
minimum height of two (2) feet or a minimum spread of eighteen (18)
inches, as measured in compliance with ANSI Z60.1. All shrubs shall
conform to the height restrictions of subsection 25-5.20c of this section,
as applicable. Varieties shall be selected and specified as appropriate to
sun and wind exposures and shall be suitable in mature size for the
location to be planted.
§ 25-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.10
1:489
h. Street trees are required along all public and private street rights-ofway.
The species selection and location shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Township Engineer and the Board. Street trees
shall be selected and located to create site uniformity, enhance
microclimate and improve site aesthetics. Street trees shall be installed
with the same species on both sides of the road in groupings not to
exceed forty (40) trees of one (1) species to ensure site diversity and to
reduce species related disease and insect infestations associated with a
monoculture planting. Street trees shall comply with the following
requirements:
Type of Tree
Planting Interval
(Ft.) Minimum Caliper
Large and Medium Trees 40 to 50 ft. 3"-3-1/2"
Small and Ornamental
Trees
20 to 40 ft. 2"-2-1/2"
i. All landscaping required by the approved plan shall be in a healthy and
vigorous growing condition at time of installation. No plant shall remain
unplanted at a site for more than three (3) days after delivery without
being properly healed in. No tree with a damaged central leader shall
receive final acceptance by the Township. All dead and damaged plant
material shall be replaced by the developer prior to any bond release or
final acceptance by the Township. Said replacement shall be within
sixty (60) days following written demand for such replacement from the
Township or for such extended periods as may be specified.
j. All newly installed landscaping shall be set plumb in the planting pit
and backfilled in lifts not to exceed eight (8) inches with a backfill mix
consisting of three (3) parts native topsoil, three (3) parts screened
topsoil and three (3) parts peat. A moisture absorbent polymer shall be
included in the amended backfill on well and excessively drained soils
and on earthen terms to ensure soil moisture availability. All landscaped
beds shall be underplayed with a suitable water permeable weed fabric
and shall receive a minimum four (4) inch application of shredded hard
wood mulch or other acceptable material. Untreated wood chips shall
not be used. Plant material arranged in groupings shall be contained in
one (1) continuous mulched bed to reduce possible plant damage
caused by maintenance equipment. A single mulched bed around one
(1) shrub is not acceptable. The landscape bed shall extend to the
branch limits of the newly installed plantings.
k. Landscaping of the area of all cuts, fills or terraces shall be sufficient to
prevent erosion and shall be approved by the Board. All roadway slopes
steeper than one (1) foot vertically to three (3) feet horizontally shall be
planted with suitable ground cover plants combined with grasses and/
or sodding. Grasses or sodding alone shall not be acceptable. No cut or
fill slopes shall go unstabilized for more than thirty (30) days.
§ 25-5.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.10
1:490
l. Except in conservation easements and areas specifically designated to
remain in their natural state, existing wooded areas shall be selectively
thinned, and dead or diseased vegetation, either standing or fallen,
undesirable trees, and any other undesirable growth and stumps shall
be removed.
m. Existing trees should be saved by not varying the grade around the
trees by more than six (6) to twelve (12) inches. Proposed grading
exceeding more than six (6) to twelve (12) inches shall require the
construction of tree wells, as necessary, to preserve the identified
tree(s). A temporary tree protection fence shall be required to be
erected at the drip line of all existing woodlands to remain undisturbed.
The temporary tree protection fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet
in height and be a wood snow fence, orange plastic construction fence
or other suitable material, as determined by the Township Engineer.
n. Specimen trees, which are defined as those trees that have a diameter
or circumference of eighty (80%) percent of the State record for the
individual species, shall be identified on all subdivision and site plans. If
a specimen tree exists on site, it shall not be removed nor shall the soil
within ten (10) feet of the drip line be disturbed, unless the applicant
can substantiate an outstanding need to the Board as to why the
removal or soil disturbance is necessary. A waiver from this
requirement may be granted in the event the subject tree is dying or
diseased.
o. All site plan and subdivision applications which propose to remove any
existing trees equal to or greater than six (6) inches Diameter Breast
Height (DBH), as measured at a point four (4) feet above the ground,
shall submit a "Tree Removal And Replacement Plan" in the set of
construction plans for review and approval.
1. The "Tree Removal And Replacement Plan" shall contain the
following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant and the property owner
of the property from which the tree(s) are to be removed.
(b) Total acreage of the property, total acreage of the existing
woodlands on the property, and total acreage of the woodlands
to be removed from the property.
(c) Location of the trees to be removed as identified on a survey of
the property.
(1) The plan shall indicate all existing trees equal to or greater
than six (6) inches DBH to be removed and to remain
within twenty-five (25) feet of the proposed limit of
clearing, specifically by an assigned number.
§ 25-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.10
1:491
(2) A listing of the assigned tree numbers shall be clearly
shown on the plan and shall include the tree species and
size (DBH).
(3) Location of the limit of existing woodlands and the
proposed limit of clearing where the temporary tree
protection fence shall be installed.
(4) For any clearing greater than one (1) acre, a sample plot of
a representative five (5%) percent of the woodlands to be
removed shall be inventoried. The location(s) of the
sample plot shall be identified and dimensioned on the
plan and flagged in the field for verification. All pertinent
tree removal information from the sample plot shall be
identified on the plan.
(5) All specimen trees greater than sixteen (16) inches DBH
shall be specifically identified on the plan.
(d) Dead and diseased trees are not to be included in the tree
removal calculations.
(e) Any other information, which may reasonably be required to
enable the application to be properly and thoroughly reviewed.
2. Replacement trees shall be provided at a one (1) to one (1) ratio for
each tree six (6) inches DBH or greater to be removed, as follows:
(a) All replacement trees shall be clearly depicted on the plan and
identified in the proposed planting schedule for review and
approval.
(b) Required buffer screening plantings shall not be considered in
the replacement tree calculations.
(c) Where site spatial constraints do not permit the installation of
the required replacement trees on the site, the replacement
value for all trees to be removed as per the plan shall be
calculated as follows:
Trees To Be Removed (DBH) Replacement Tree Value
6" up to 12" $200 ea.
Greater than 12" up to 18" $400 ea.
Greater than 18" up to 24" $600 ea.
Greater than 24" $800 ea.
(d) The value of proposed evergreen trees and deciduous and
evergreen shrub material shall be deducted from the
calculated amount for replacement trees required in
subsection 25-5.10m2(c) hereinabove. The value of the
§ 25-5.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.10
1:492
proposed landscape material shall be calculated based upon
average plant material cost in the area.
(e) All fees collected from the replacement calculation shall be
deposited in a Tree Escrow Fund for the Township of
Aberdeen. The fund shall be utilized to promote and administer
environmental enhancement programs such as tree planting,
tree preservation, park development, landscaping of public
spaces and or other related projects on or within municipally
owned properties or facilities.
3. Where the preservation of stands of ten (10) or more trees, each
greater than four (4) inches DBH, are proposed, a one (1) to one (1)
replacement tree credit shall be applied for each tree greater than
four (4) inches DBH within said stand.
4. Tree removal applications shall be subject to the same time limits
associated with the development application approval.
5. Any person violating any provisions of this section or failing to
perform in compliance with the requirements of the Board for
which the application has been submitted shall be subject to
penalties and fines of up to one thousand ($1,000) dollars per day
for each illegal tree removal offense. Violations of any terms of this
section shall be abated within five (5) days after written notice has
been served, either by certified mail or personal service. Each day
that the violation continues thereafter shall constitute a separate
offense.
The Township Engineer or his/her designee will enforce violations
and penalties. In addition to other remedies, the Code Enforcement
Officer or other municipal official may institute any appropriate
legal action to prevent a continuing violation of the terms of this
section.
p. The Board may waive the requirements of this section in heavily
wooded areas, in areas unsuitable for plantings, or because of other
exceptional conditions.
q. No land disturbance or removal of any trees, shrubs, grasses or other
existing vegetation is to occur within twenty-five (25) feet of the top of
bank of any naturally occurring water course in the absence of acid
producing deposits, or within fifty (50) feet of the top of bank of any
naturally occurring watercourse where acid producing deposits are
present. The location of the top of bank shall be verified by the
Township Engineer, unless such a determination has been made by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood
Plain Management. Any exception or mitigation shall be in conformance
with New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
r. Tree Removal Prior to Major Subdivision or Site Plan Approval.
§ 25-5.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.10
1:493
§ 25-5.11. Lot Configuration.
1. The purpose of this paragraph is to promote the preservation of
woodlands to reduce soil loss, erosion, arid flooding; to increase the
quality and quantity of water being recharged; to purify air; to
provide wildlife habitat; and to maintain visual appeal.
2. For purposes of this paragraph, a "tree" shall mean any woody
perennial plant having a trunk or main stem with a diameter of
three (3) inches or greater measured four (4) feet above the
ground.
3. Any application for major subdivision or major site plan approval
shall have all trees plotted and identified on the plat or plan, and
shall contain a detailed description of planned vegetation removal
and regeneration, including all measures and materials necessary
to reestablish the natural landscape.
4. Existing trees shall be utilized as buffers along all lot lines and
streets.
5. No trees shall be removed from an area exceeding one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet per lot for any purpose unless the
applicant:
(a) Demonstrates the absence of alternative development options
which will reduce the need for the removal of trees;
(b) Identifies the area to be disturbed; and
(c) Replants an area of comparable density and species
composition for that portion of the disturbed forested area that
exceeds the permitted impervious coverage limitation for the
zoning district in which the lot is located.
6. Any tree removal proposed in the stream corridor area shall be
subject to the provisions of subsection 25-6.8f3 and g24 of this
section.
a. Each lot must front upon a public street.
b. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new street line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
c. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or flood
conditions, percolation tests or test borings indicating the ground
conditions to be inadequate for proper sewage disposal for on-lot
sewage treatment or similar circumstances, the Board, after adequate
investigation may withhold approval of such lots. If approval is
withheld, the Board shall give reasons and notify the applicant and
enter same in the minutes.
§ 25-5.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.11
1:494
§ 25-5.12. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Driveways. [Ord. No.
11-1985]
d. Concrete monuments shall be installed for all lot corners of all lots
approved as part of a major submission. All lot corners of lots approved
as part of a minor subdivision submission shall be marked with a metal
alloy pin of permanent character. Monuments shall be in accordance
with the Map Filing Law.
a. Size of Stalls.
1. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than
one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet, exclusive of access drives
or aisles, except in sections for the handicapped. It shall measure
nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length. These
conditions shall not apply to parallel parking spaces, which shall
measure no less than eight (8) feet in width and twenty-three (23)
feet in length.
2. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be a minimum
of twelve (12) feet wide.
3. No parking stall shall be so located as to require a vehicle to back
into any portion of the right-of-way in order to enter or exit the
parking stall.
b. Parking Requirements by Use. Each use shall meet the following
requirements in terms of parking. Where more than one (1) use exists
on a lot, the required parking shall be the sum of the parking spaces
required for each individual use.
1. Detached dwelling units, apartments and townhouses shall each
provide two (2) spaces per unit. In all residential districts, one (1)
commercial vehicle may be parked on the premises by the dwelling
unit owner or tenant.
2. Churches shall provide one (1) space per every five (5) permanent
seats and one (1) additional space for every thirty (30) square feet
of floor area which can be used for overflow seating capacity. (One
(1) seat shall be considered twenty-two (22) inches in calculating
the capacity of pews or benches.)
3. Public and private schools, grades K—8, shall provide one (1) space
for every twelve (12) students as determined by the school's
functional capacity. Public and private schools, grades 9—12, shall
provide one (1) space for every eight (8) students as determined by
the school's functional capacity.
4. Banks, offices and retail and service activities shall provide parking
at a ratio of five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
§ 25-5.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.12
1:495
5. Restaurants, bars, taverns and theaters shall provide one (1) space
for every four (4) seats. (Note: This requirement may be waived if
the use is located within a shopping center.)
6. Bowling alleys shall provide four (4) spaces per bowling lane.
7. Service stations shall provide at least six (6) spaces for the first lift,
wheel alignment pit or similar work area; five (5) additional spaces
for a second work area; and an additional three (3) spaces for each
additional work area. Such spaces shall be separated from the
driveway and general apron areas which give access to the gasoline
and air pumps and service areas. No designated parking space
shall obstruct access to such facilities.
8. Commercial recreation facilities shall provide four (4) spaces per
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
9. Marinas, boat yards and yacht basins shall provide parking on the
following basis:
(a) One (1) space for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
storage, dry dock or similar area plus one (1) space for every
two hundred (200) square feet or fraction thereof of floor area
used for offices.
(b) One (1) space shall be provided for every three (3) boat
mooring slips.
(c) One (1) space shall be provided for every vehicle operated by
the use operating from that site.
(d) Sufficient area shall be reserved for the temporary storage of
auto-towed trailers if ramp launching facilities are provided.
10. Automobile Sales. Ten (10) spaces for customer convenience
separated from vehicular displays and not used by employees.
11. Car Washes. Three (3) access lanes for each mechanized car wash
entrance with each lane having a minimum capacity for twelve (12)
vehicles; one (1) separate space for each waxing, upholstery
cleaning or similar specialized service area; and one (1) space for
every two (2) employees. All vehicle entrances shall be from the
rear of the building, and all parked and waiting vehicles shall be
accommodated on the lot.
12. Manufacturing plants and industrial plants shall provide parking at
the ratios of one (1) space for every one thousand (1,000) square
feet of gross floor area used for inside storage and warehousing
plus one (1) space for every seven hundred (700) square feet of
gross floor area used for manufacturing plus one (1) space for
every two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area used for
offices. Additionally, one (1) space shall be provided for every
§ 25-5.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.12
1:496
vehicle owned and/or operated by the manufacturing or industrial
plant operating from the site.
13. Hotels and motels shall provide one and one-quarter (1.25) spaces
per room.
14. Non-residential uses shall provide one (1) space for every vehicle
owned and/or operated by a use operating from a site in addition to
any parking requirement set forth hereinabove. Such spaces shall
be of sufficient size to accommodate the vehicles intended to be
parked therein, if oversized.
15. Public utilities shall provide sufficient spaces and maneuvering
areas, as determined by the Board during site plan approval, to
prevent any parking along public rights-of-way or private
driveways, fire lanes and aisles.
c. Loading Area Requirements. Each activity shall provide for off-street
loading and unloading in accordance with the following requirements:
1. For each building, one (1) space shall be provided for the first five
thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area and one (1)
additional space shall be provided for each additional ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
2. Each loading space shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) by forty (40)
feet with a minimum vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
3. In shopping centers, this requirement may be met by combining the
floor areas of several activities taking place under one (1) roof and
applying the above ratios.
4. Boat launching or storage areas shall not be construed to fulfill the
off-street loading space requirement.
5. Buildings designed exclusively for office use may be exempted from
the loading area requirement provided that at least one (1)
entrance other than the main entrance is designed to accommodate
deliveries of supplies and office equipment and furnishings.
d. Location of Parking and Loading Areas. Required off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be located on the same lot or premises as the use
served regardless of the number of spaces required. No parking of
vehicles or unloading or loading shall be permitted in fire lanes, streets,
driveways, landscaped areas, aisles, buffer areas, sidewalks or turning
areas.
1. Parking spaces may be on, above, or below the surface of the
ground. When parking spaces are provided within a garage or
other structure, said structure shall adhere to the proper accessory
or principal building setbacks.
§ 25-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.12
1:497
2. Parking areas in residential zones for uses other than single family
dwellings may be located in any rear yard or side yard, but may not
be located in any required front yard.
3. Parking areas in the "H-C" and "R-C" zones shall be located in side
and rear yards only except that parking for not more than one-fifth
(1/5) of the total required spaces may be provided in the front yard
if the depth of the parking area setback is increased by fifty (50%)
percent over that required in subsections 25-4.7g2 and 25-4.8g2
respectively.
e. Design of Parking and Loading Areas.
1. Access.
(a) Access points from any one (1) lot crossing the street line shall
be limited to a maximum of two (2) along the frontage of any
single street. The centerlines of any separate access points
shall be spaced at least seventy (70) feet apart; shall handle no
more than two (2) lanes of traffic; shall be at least forty (40)
feet from any property line; and shall be set back from the
street line of any intersecting street at least fifty (50) feet or
one-half (1/2) the lot frontage, whichever is greater, except
that in no case need the setback distance exceed two hundred
(200) feet.
(b) Continuous open driveways in excess of sixteen (16) feet at the
street line shall be prohibited, except that for non-residential
uses, driveways of eighteen (18) feet for one-way traffic and
twenty-five (25) feet for two-way traffic shall be provided.
(c) Unrestricted vehicular access shall not be permitted between
adjacent properties. Controlled vehicular access between two
(2) or more adjacent properties, if required or approved by the
Board, shall be limited to not more than one (1) opening
providing two (2) lanes of traffic and shall be located in such a
manner as to maintain continuity of traffic circulation on both
properties. The opening shall occur at the point furthest from
the street line which would facilitate the joining of the
properties. The remainder of the side lot lines shall be
separated by a landscaped dividing strip, ten (10) feet in width,
located on each property being developed. If an adjoining
property is not yet being developed, there shall be provided a
similar dividing strip at least ten (10) feet wide at the time of
development.
2. Aisles. The provision of parking spaces shall also include adequate
driveways and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicles for
which provision is made. Parking areas shall be designed to permit
each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicle. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall have the
§ 25-5.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.12
1:498
following minimum dimensions. Where the angle of parking is
different on both sides of the aisle, the large aisle width shall
prevail.
Angle of Parking
Space One-Way Aisle Two-Way Aisle
90 24 ft. 24 ft.
60 18 ft. 20 ft.
45 18 ft. 20 ft.
30 15 ft. 20 ft.
parallel 12 ft. 20 ft.
3. Lots Over One Hundred (100) Spaces.
(a) The parking area shall be divided as nearly as possible into
smaller lots of not more than fifty (50) spaces separated by
landscaped dividing strips.
(b) Exit drives in which direct access to stalls is prohibited shall
extend a minimum distance of sixty (60) feet from the curb to
the first major access aisle.
(c) Wherever feasible, access drives located along one-way streets
or divided highways shall be one-way drives.
(d) If the Board determines that the total number of off-street
parking spaces required by this section may not be required
for a specific use or in the immediate future it may approve a
staged development plan requiring that only a portion of the
parking area, in no case less than sixty-five (65%) percent of
the required spaces, be completed initially, subject to the
following regulations:
(1) The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the
parking area to be paved initially and the total parking
needed to provide the number of spaces required by this
section.
(2) The plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both the
partial and total parking areas.
(3) The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially
shall be landscaped.
(4) The applicant shall post a separate performance guarantee
which shall reflect the cost of installing the additional
parking facilities necessary to provide the total number of
parking spaces required. This shall be in addition to the
performance guarantees required by Section 25-9.
§ 25-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.12
1:499
(5) In lieu of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy, a
temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a
period of two (2) years. Prior to the expiration of the two
(2) year period, the applicant may either install the
additional parking shown on the site plan and apply to the
Construction Official for issuance of a permanent
Certificate of Occupancy or apply to the Board after the
use has been in operation a minimum of eighteen (18)
months for a determination as to whether or not the initial
paved parking area provided is adequate. If the Board
determines that the parking facility is adequate as
originally constructed, the additional performance
guarantee may be released and a permanent Certificate of
Occupancy issued. The area to be landscaped may be
provided in either curbed safety islands or curbed divider
strips, or both, as approved by the Board. These areas
shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, and be
distributed throughout the parking area in order to break
the view of long rows of parked cars in a manner not
impairing driver visibility.
4. Parking for the Handicapped. Parking spaces for the handicapped
shall be located to provide convenient access to building entrances
by way of depressed curbs and ramps in accordance with State
regulations. The number of spaces to be provided shall be
determined by the following table:
Total Parking Spaces in
Parking Area
Minimum Number of Spaces
to Be Provided for Physically
Handicapped
16—50 2
51—75 3
76—100 4
101—150 5
151—200 6
201—300 7
301—400 8
401—500 9
501—1,000 2% of Total
over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each
5. Sight Easements. No commercial signs, light standards or other
above-ground obstructions other than plantings shall be permitted
within ten (10) feet of the street right-of-way.
§ 25-5.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.12
1:500
f. Conditions for Waiver of Parking and Loading Requirements. If the
Board determines that the total number of off-street parking spaces
required by this section may not be required for a specific use or in the
immediate future it may approve a staged development plan requiring
that only a portion of the parking area, in no case less than sixty-five
(65%) percent of the required spaces, be completed initially, subject to
the following regulations:
1. The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the parking
area to be paved initially and the total parking needed to provide
the number of spaces required by this section.
2. The plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both the partial and
total parking areas.
3. The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially shall be
landscaped.
4. The applicant shall post a separate performance guarantee which
shall reflect the cost of installing the additional parking facilities
necessary to provide the total number of parking spaces required.
This shall be in addition to the performance guarantees required
under Section 25-9.
5. In lieu of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy, a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a period of two (2)
years. Prior to the expiration of the two (2) year period, the
applicant may either install the additional parking shown on the
site plan and apply to the Construction Official for issuance of a
permanent Certificate of Occupancy or apply to the Board after the
use has been in operation a minimum of eighteen (18) months for a
determination as to whether or not the initial paved parking area
provided is adequate. If the Board determines that the parking
facility is adequate as originally constructed, the additional
performance guarantee may be released and a permanent
Certificate of Occupancy issued. If, however, the Board determines
that the parking area initially paved is not adequate, the applicant
shall be required to install the additional parking facilities in
accordance with the terms of the additional performance
guarantee prior to the issuance of a permanent Certificate of
Occupancy.
g. Landscaping.
1. Except for detached dwelling units, a screen planting of a dense
evergreen material not less than four (4) feet in height shall be
provided between the off-street parking areas and any lot line or
street line except where a building intervenes or where the
distance between such areas and the lot line or street line is
greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
§ 25-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.12
1:501
2. All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading platforms from
any public street, adjacent residential district or uses and the front
yards of adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such screening
shall be by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the three (3)
and shall not be less than four (4) feet in height.
3. Parking areas for more than fifty (50) cars shall contain landscaped
islands or strips. These areas shall be planted with trees or shrubs
or a combination of the two (2).
h. Lighting. All parking facilities providing five (5) or more parking spaces
shall be lighted. Lighting in and around the parking areas shall provide
for nonglare, color corrected lights focused downward. The light
intensity provided at ground level shall be a minimum of three-tenths
(.3) footcandle anywhere in the area to be illuminated, shall average a
minimum of five-tenths (.5) footcandle over the entire area, and shall be
provided by fixtures with a mounting height of not more than twentyfive
(25) feet or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured
from the ground level to the centerline of the light source and spaced a
distance not to exceed five (5) times the mounting height.
i. Surfacing. Off-street parking lots and loading areas, together with their
access aisles, driveways and fire lanes, shall not occupy more than
thirty-five (35%) percent of the lot area.
j. Curbing.
1. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided with
curbing so that vehicles cannot be driven onto required perimeter
landscaped areas, buffer zones and street rights-of-way and so that
each parking and loading area has controlled entrances and exits
and drainage control. Curbing shall be located to prevent any part
of a vehicle from overhanging internal sidewalks or landscaped
areas. Parking and loading spaces shall not be an extension of any
street right-of-way.
2. Curbing shall be depressed at the driveway or the curbing may be
rounded at the corners and the driveway connected with the street
in the same manner as another street.
3. Parking areas for twenty-five (25) or more cars and access drives
for all parking areas on arterial streets shall provide curbed return
radii of not less than fifteen (15) feet for all right turn movements
and left turn access from one-way streets and concrete aprons on
entrance and exit drives.
4. Parking areas for fewer than twenty-five (25) cars may utilize
concrete aprons without curb returns at entrance and exit drives
which are not located on an arterial street.
§ 25-5.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.12
1:502
§ 25-5.13. Performance Standards for All Uses.
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended
use will comply with the performance standards enumerated below. In
the case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a
construction permit may be issued with the condition that no Certificate of
Occupancy will be issued until such time as this documentation is submitted
with respect to the particular occupant. A new application and a new
Certificate of Occupancy shall be required in the event of a change of any
use of any structure.
k. Drainage. All parking areas, regardless of size and location, shall be
suitably drained and maintained.
l. Markings. All off-street parking lots shall have adequate designations to
control traffic flow and indicate parking spaces. Such designations may
include traffic safety signs and devices, paint striping to delineate
parking stalls, barrier lines, lane lines, directional arrows, stop lines,
fire lanes and other striping as may be required to insure safe and
convenient traffic circulation. Striping shall be in substantial
conformance with the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices.
m. Pavement. The pavement for all off-street parking shall be constructed
according to the specifications and procedures as set forth in the
standard specifications in accordance with the following guidelines:
1. The base course for all off-street parking shall be placed on a
compacted, unyielding subgrade and shall consist of a minimum of
six (6) inches of graded quarry blend (Mix No. 5A) which has been
inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
2. The surface course for all off-street parking shall consist of two (2)
inches of bituminous concrete, Type FA-BX-1, Mix No. 5
constructed in accordance with New Jersey State Highway
Specifications.
3. A prime coat shall be applied between the base course and the
surface course in accordance with the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications.
a. Electrical and/or Electronic Radiation Control. All electrical or
electronic devices located within the boundaries of a dwelling unit,
manufacturing, industrial or commercial building, medical clinic or
professional office shall be subject to the provisions of Public Law
90-602, 90th Congress, HR 10790, dated October 18, 1968, entitled "An
Act for the Protection of Public Health and Safety from the Dangers of
Electronic Product Radiation." Radiation products as defined in DHEW
Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 shall be so limited and controlled so that
no measurable energy can be recorded at any point beyond the
property boundaries. Applicant shall, upon request, produce certified
data wherein measurements made in accordance with the procedure
§ 25-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.13
1:503
§ 25-5.14. Retaining Walls, Embankment Slopes and Bulkheads.
and standards set forth in the DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003
adequately demonstrate compliance to the minimum standards
established by the Act. All other forms of electromagnetic radiation
lying between 100 KHz and 10 GHz shall be restricted to the technical
limits established in the Federal Communication Commission's Rules
and Regulations.
b. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or reflection of a
strong, dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall
be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare, direct light or
reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties, adjoining
dwelling units, adjoining districts or streets.
c. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any part of ponds, streams or other water courses.
d. Noise. Noise levels for commercial and industrial enterprises shall be
designed and operated in accordance with the regulations established
by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection as
they are adopted and amended.
e. Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond.
f. Storage and Waste Disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited
upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by natural causes or forces nor shall any substance be deposited
which can contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render
such underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes
which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or
which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall
be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards.
g. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate site on which such use is located.
a. Retaining Walls and Embankment Slopes.
1. When retaining walls, terraces, embankment slopes or similar
types of earthen retaining devices are necessitated, they shall be
kept in good repair or otherwise maintained so as to keep the site
and surrounding areas free of debris and dirt.
2. Where a parking area is proposed on a site having a slope greater
than ten (10%) percent, regardless of size, it shall be terraced,
utilizing retaining walls or properly reinforced embankment slopes
and providing for adequate safety, stability and drainage.
§ 25-5.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.14
1:504
§ 25-5.15. Public Utilities.
3. To preserve the integrity of pavements, embankments and
excavations for paved areas, slope returns shall be provided with
slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical rise for every three (3)
feet of horizontal distance. At no time shall an embankment slope
that is not reinforced, or any other earthen material having a
greater elevation than the adjacent pavement area, have a slope
exceeding a ratio of three to one (3:1).
b. Bulkheads.
1. All development on tidal lagoons, navigable waterways or other
bodies of water, either existing or proposed, shall provide for
bulkheading. All development on non-tidal bodies of water, either
existing or proposed, shall provide for bulkheading or other
appropriate permanent bank stabilization, acceptable to the Board.
In no case shall bank slopes, bulkhead, rip-rap, revetments, or
other elements of bank stabilization be located within required
minimum yard areas.
2. Bulkheads may be constructed of treated timber, reinforced
concrete, marine alloy steel or other materials in accordance with
approved details (if adopted) and a detailed design to be submitted
by the developer in each case for approval by the Township
Engineer, and such other approval authorities, including, but not
limited to, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as may be
necessary.
3. New or reconstructed lagoons shall have a minimum width of one
hundred (100) feet and be provided with suitable turning basins.
4. The Board may consider waiver and/or modification of this
requirement when necessary to preserve wetlands or other natural
features, provided that minimum lot sizes are maintained and that
all development may be made reasonably secure from erosion.
a. All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists.
b. The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines and
service connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Standard Terms and Conditions incorporated as part of its tariff as the
same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and the developer shall provide the Township
with four (4) copies of a final plan showing the installed location of the
utilities. The developer shall submit to the Board, prior to the granting
of final approval, a written instrument from each serving utility which
shall evidence full compliance or intended full compliance with the
provisions of this paragraph; provided, however, that:
§ 25-5.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.15
1:505
§ 25-5.16. Sanitary Sewers and Septic Systems.
1. Lots which abut existing streets or rights-of-way where overhead
electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from these overhead lines, if no new
poles are required, but any new service connections from the
utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground; and
2. In cases where extensions of service are needed to existing
buildings or new buildings in established subdivisions, industrial
parks, or shopping; centers, the present method of service may be
continued.
c. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an
extension of service or other such condition occur as a result of the
development and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such
utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
d. Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width
shall be provided in consultation with the companies or Township
departments concerned and, to the fullest extent possible, be centered
on, or adjacent to, rear or side lot lines. Such easement dedication shall
be expressed on the plat or plan as follows "Utility right-of-way
easement granted for the purposes provided for and expressed in the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township."
a. If a public treatment and collection system is accessible or planned, the
developer shall construct facilities in accordance with N.J.D.E.P. permit
requirements and A.T.M.U.A. rules and regulations and in such a
manner as to make adequate sewage treatment available to each lot
and structure within the development from said treatment and
collection system.
b. Individual on-lot treatment plants and collection systems, including,
septic systems, shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the State Health Department or Township ordinances enforced by the
Township Department of Health, whichever is more restrictive, and
shall be subject to approval by the Township Department of Health.
c. No subdivision shall be approved without satisfactory evidence of the
availability of public sewage collection and treatment or, where no such
public system can be made available, certification by a licensed
professional engineer that each lot proposed to be served by an
individual septic system can accommodate such septic system without
threat to the public health and safety or to health and safety of the lot
owner(s). For the purposes of such certification, a minimum of two (2)
passing percolation tests and a soil log of one (1) of the passing holes
shall be required for each lot, such tests and log to be located within the
proposed disposal area. The test results and other applicable
§ 25-5.15 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.16
1:506
§ 25-5.17. Sidewalks, Aprons and Curb Ramps. [Ord. No. 11-1985]
Sidewalks and aprons shall be required on both sides of Routes 34 and
35, along any existing or proposed street in a non-residential development
and as further required on or off-site by the Planning Board based upon
considerations of the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the
development's location in relation to other populated areas, and the general
type of improvement intended.
Sidewalks shall be required in APT/TM and PRD developments as needed
for safe pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks may follow streets and/or open
space corridors, as suggested by probable pedestrian travel patterns.
requirements regulating location(s) of test holes, etc., shall be in
compliance with the "Individual Sewage Disposal Code of New Jersey"
and shall be so shown on the plat and certified by a licensed
professional engineer. All such tests must be witnessed by the Township
Engineer who shall be notified by the developer at least forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the initiation of the tests.
a. Sidewalk Location and Size.
1. Where required along public streets, sidewalks shall be at least
four (4) feet wide and located a minimum of three (3) feet from the
curb face.
2. Where required within parking areas and located perpendicular to
parking stalls, sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet six (6) inches
wide or else they shall be at least four (4) feet wide and separated
from the curb by a distance of at least three (3) feet.
3. Where sidewalks have already been installed in locations other
than as specified above or where such variations in sidewalk
locations are needed due to topography or the need to preserve
trees or natural features, the Board may approve alternate
sidewalk locations in order to provide for the preservation of
physical features or the continuation of the existing sidewalks.
b. Sidewalk Construction.
1. Sidewalks shall be four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick,
except crossing driveways, where the thickness shall be increased
to six (6) inches for residential uses and all drives to parking areas
of less than fifty (50) spaces and eight (8) inches for drives to larger
parking areas and all other uses.
2. The sidewalk subgrade shall be six inches thick porous material
approved by the Township Engineer and compacted prior to the
placement of any sidewalk as directed by the Township Engineer.
3. All six (6) inch or eight (8) inch sidewalk areas crossing driveways
shall be reinforced at the midpoint or one-third (1/3) points,
§ 25-5.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.17
1:507
§ 25-5.18. Signs. [Ord. No. 6-1988; Ord. No. 20-1992; Ord. No.
19-1993; Ord. No. 21-2010; Ord. No. 14-2012 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No.
12-2014]
respectively, of the sidewalk section. Reinforcing shall be welded
wire fabric (66-1212), or an equivalent approved by the Township
Engineer. The width of reinforced sidewalks shall be not less than
the width of the driveway plus ten (10) feet, five (5) feet each side.
4. Grading of sidewalk areas shall slope at two (2%) percent from the
top of the curb, and sidewalk construction shall conform to this
slope.
c. Apron Construction.
1. Reinforced concrete aprons shall be constructed at all driveways
between the concrete curb (or combination curb and gutter) and
the concrete sidewalk. Such aprons shall be six (6) inches thick for
residential uses and all drives to parking areas of less than fifty (50)
spaces and eight (8) inches for drives to larger parking areas and
all other uses.
2. When sidewalks are not required, there shall be installed at the
driveway of each building lot a bituminous concrete apron between
the curb and the right-of-way line which shall consist of a minimum
of four (4) inches of crushed stone and a two (2) inch bituminus
concrete wearing surface. The apron shall be at least fifteen (15)
feet wide at the curb line and shall be tapered to not less than
twelve (12) feet in width at the right-of-way line.
d. Curb Ramps.
1. Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be constructed on
all street curb returns and where appropriate, in parking areas.
2. Two (2) curb ramps shall be constructed at each corner unless site
conditions preclude the use of the two (2) ramp system. Where a
grass or landscaped area exists between the curb and the sidewalk,
side ramps need not be provided. Curb ramps shall be provided at
all four (4) corners of full intersections and at the two (2) corners
plus a location across the street from both of the ramps a "T"
intersections.
3. Curb ramps shall be constructed with a rough broom finish in
accordance with New Jersey Department of Transportation
specifications and shall be flush with the street pavement at the
gutter line.
a. General Provisions. No sign may be placed on or attached to a building
or erected independently for any purpose other than to advertise a
permitted business or use conducted on the same premises. No
billboards shall be erected or replaced.
§ 25-5.17 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.18
1:508
No signs shall be erected, altered or replaced which are not in
accordance with the standards established in this Ordinance. Except for
home professional offices and temporary real estate signs, the erection
of any sign shall require a construction permit. No sign of any type
shall be permitted to obstruct driving vision, traffic signals, traffic
directional and identification signs, other places of business, other
signs or windows of the building on which they are located. No sign
shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility poles or other
signs but shall be free-standing or attached to buildings in an approved
manner.
1. Animated, Flashing and Illusionary Signs. Signs using mechanical
or electrical devices to revolve, flash or display movement or the
illusion of movement are prohibited.
2. Height. No free-standing or attached sign shall be higher at any
point than the roof line of the building, except that no sign shall
exceed any lesser height if particularly specified in this section. In
addition, no attached sign shall project into or hang over a street
right-of-way, and no sign shall project beyond a building in a
manner placing it above an area traversed by motor vehicles such
as, but not limited to, driveways and parking areas. Where signs
project beyond a building facade or wall over a pedestrian way, the
lowest portion of the sign shall be at least eight (8) feet above the
walkway.
3. Free-standing signs shall be supported by one (1) or more columns
or uprights which are firmly embedded in the ground. Exposed guy
wires, chains or other connections shall not be made a permanent
support of the free-standing sign.
4. Illuminated signs shall be so arranged as to reflect the light and
glare away from adjoining premises and away from adjoining
highways. No sign with red, green or blue illumination in a beam,
beacon or flashing form resembling an emergency light shall be
erected in any location. Illuminated signs shall comply with the
National Electric Code.
5. Information and Direction Signs. Street number designations,
postal boxes, on-site directional and parking signs, warning signs
and signs posting property as "private property," "no hunting" or
similar signs are permitted in all zones but are not to be considered
in calculating sign area. No such sign shall exceed two (2) square
feet in area.
6. Maintenance. Signs must be constructed of durable materials,
maintained in good condition and not allowed to become
dilapidated.
7. Political Signs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter to the contrary, it shall be lawful in any zone to erect,
construct or display political signs directing attention to any
§ 25-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.18
1:509
candidate for public office or to any political party or any political
campaign drive, movement or event, for a period of not more than
sixty (60) days prior to, nor more than ten (10) days after, any
general, special, primary or school board election. The erection of
such signs shall not require site plan approval or a construction
permit.
8. Portable Signs. No sign shall be exhibited which is portable, i.e.,
fixed on a movable stand, self-supporting without being firmly
embedded in the ground, supported by other objects, mounted on
wheels or movable vehicles, or made easily movable in some other
manner.
9. Real estate signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premise or portion thereof shall be, if not attached to the
building, set back at least ten (10) horizontal feet from all street
lines. Such signs shall not exceed nine (9) square feet on each of
two (2) sides and shall be removed at the expense of the advertiser
within fifteen (15) days after the termination or completion of the
matter or business being advertised. "Sold" signs shall be
permitted between the signing of the contract of sale and the date
of the legal closing. All such signs do not need a construction
permit.
10. Sign area shall be measured around the outside edges of a framed
or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by isolated words and/or
symbols, including the background, whether open or enclosed, but
said area shall not include any supporting, framework and bracing
incidental to the display itself. For signs with two (2) sides the
maximum area requirement shall be permitted on each side. Signs
with more than two (2) sides are prohibited.
11. Temporary Signs. Interior window signs shall not be considered in
computing the allowable signs provided, however, that such
interior signs shall not exceed twenty (20%) percent of the total
window area.
12. Wall fascia or attached signs shall be firmly attached to the exterior
wall of a building and shall not project more than fifteen (15) inches
from the building.
b. Permitted Signs.
1. Residential Districts.
(a) Churches, schools and institutional buildings. Two (2)
announcement signs, each of which shall not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area. If not attached to the building, they
shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and shall be set back
twenty (20) feet from all street lines.
§ 25-5.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.18
1:510
(b) Home professional office. One (1) unlighted or white lightedfrom-
within nameplate sign identifying the home office. The
sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and shall be
attached flat against the building or free-standing (if freestanding,
no higher than six (6) feet and set back from all lot
lines ten (10) feet).
(c) Apartments, townhouses. Each development may have one (1)
sign along each arterial or collector road which the tract in
question abuts provided there exists at least two hundred fifty
(250) feet of unbroken frontage. Such sign(s) shall not exceed
ten (10) feet in height, shall be set back from the street rightsof-
way and driveways at least thirty (30) feet, shall be set back
from any property line a minimum of fifty (50) feet, shall not
exceed an area of forty (40) square feet and shall be used only
to display the development's name.
2. (Reserved)
3. Neighborhood Commercial "NC" District.
(a) Attached signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted sign on each
building facade with at least fifty (50) feet of street frontage.
The total area of the sign shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of
the area of the face of the wall upon which such sign is
attached or thirty (30) square feet, whichever is smaller. Where
the building(s) is (are) designed for rear or side entrances, one
(1) unlighted sign may be attached flat against the building at
the rear and side entrances, each sign not to exceed an area
equivalent to half that of the sign on the front of the building.
(b) Free-standing signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted free-standing
sign for each principal building or group of attached principal
buildings.
(1) Height. Thirty-five (35) feet or the height of the principal
building, whichever is shorter.
(2) Setback. Fifteen (15) feet from street line.
(3) Area. Thirty (30) square feet.
4. Highway Commercial "HC" and Conservation "CR" District.
(a) Attached signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted sign on each
building facade with one hundred fifty (150) feet of street
frontage. The total area of the sign shall not exceed ten (10%)
percent of the area of the face of the wall upon which such sign
is attached or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is smaller.
Where building(s) is (are) designed for rear or side entrances,
one (1) unlighted sign may be attached flat against the building
§ 25-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.18
1:511
at the rear and side entrances, each sign not to exceed an area
equivalent to half that of the sign on the front of the building.
(b) Free-standing signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted free-standing
sign for each principal building or group of attached principal
buildings (except auto service stations).
(1) Height. Thirty-five (35) feet or the height of the principal
building, whichever is shorter.
(2) Setback. At least twenty (20) feet from all street lines and
fifty (50) feet from all side property lines.
(3) Area. One (1) square foot of area for every two (2) linear
feet of unbroken frontage up to seventy-five (75) square
feet.
(c) Sandwich Boards. One (1) unlighted sandwich board sign for
each principal building or group of attached principal
buildings.
(1) Design. Must be at least thirty (30) inches wide and forty
(40) inches high and designed to withstand area wind
loads.
(2) Location. Must be located no further than five (5) feet from
the front wall of the building.
(3) Display. May be displayed outside during normal business
hours. No sign may be placed outside overnight.
(4) Fee. There will be a twenty-five ($25) dollar fee required
along with a zoning permit.
5. Regional Commercial "RC" District.
(a) Attached signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted sign on each
principal building facade with at least two hundred fifty (250)
feet of street frontage. The total area of the sign shall not
exceed ten (10%) percent of the area of the face of the wall
upon which such sign is attached or seventy-five (75) square
feet, whichever is smaller. Where the building(s) is (are)
designed for rear or side entrances, one (1) unlighted sign may
be attached flat against the building at the rear and side
entrances, each sign not to exceed an area equivalent to half
that of the sign on the front of the building. Where more than
one (1) use occupies a building, a sign not exceeding eight (8)
square feet, identifying the name of the use, may also be
attached at the entrance.
(b) Free-standing signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted free-standing
sign for each principal building or shopping center.
§ 25-5.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.18
1:512
(1) Height. Thirty-five (35) feet or the height of the principal
building, whichever is shorter.
(2) Setback. At least fifty (50) feet from any street or lot line.
(3) Area. One hundred (100) square feet.
6. Research Office "RO" Manufacturing "MFG" and Light Industrial
"LI". Each principal building (including restaurants, taverns, hotel/
motel complexes, manufacturing plants and wholesale or
distribution centers) may have one (1) lighted or unlighted sign
either free-standing or attached.
(a) If free-standing:
(1) Height. Fifteen (15) feet.
(2) Setback. At least fifty (50) feet from all street lines and lot
lines.
(3) Area. Fifty (50) square feet.
(b) If attached to the building:
(1) Height. No higher than the roof line.
(2) Area. Ten (10%) percent of the front wall or seventy-five
(75) square feet, whichever is smaller.
(c) Where more than one (1) use occupies a building, a sign not
exceeding eight (8) square feet, identifying the name of the
use, may also be attached at the entrance.
7. Office Residential "OR" District.
(a) Non-residential principal buildings which have frontage on
Route 34 shall comply with the sign requirements specified for
the Neighborhood Commercial District (subsection 25-4.6h).
Such signs shall be located on building facades and/or freestanding
along Route 34 only.
(b) Non-residential principal buildings which do not have frontage
on Route 34 shall be permitted the following signs.
(1) Free-standing. One (1) unlighted or lighted free-standing
sign for each principal building.
[a] Height. Five (5) feet.
[b] Setback. Fifteen (15) feet from all street and lot lines.
[c] Area. Ten (10) square feet.
(2) Attached signs. One (1) unlighted or lighted sign not to
exceed two (2) square feet.
§ 25-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.18
1:513
8. Street Signs. Street signs shall be of a type approved by the
Planning Board. The location of the street signs shall be
determined by the Planning Board, but there shall be at least two
(2) signs furnished at each intersection. All signs shall be installed
free of visual obstruction.
c. Temporary Signage.
1. General.
(a) Note that granting of approval for this use shall not establish a
permanent preexisting right should this paragraph be modified
or repealed.
(b) Applicant shall complete an application, requesting zoning
approval for all signs which includes, supplying a plot plan or
site plan showing the location of the proposed signage, signs
and a print to scale of the proposed signage, showing lettering,
colors, and dimensions of the proposed signage.
(c) Signage shall not be permitted to interfere with or obstruct any
of the following: driver's vision, traffic signals, traffic
directional signs, traffic identification signs, store windows
and/or public rights-of-way.
(d) Signage shall not be animated, flashing or contain moving
letters or symbols.
(e) Signs must be made of weather proof materials and be no
larger than twenty-two by twenty-eight (22 x 28) inches.
(f) Signage shall be securely fastened to the ground and must not
be placed on trees and tree stumps, fence posts, utility poles
and sidewalks or in public rights-of-way.
2. Grand Openings. Temporary grand opening signage (signs,
banners, flags, including flutter or feather flags, pennants and lawn
signs) are permitted in the following zoning districts:
• HC (Highway Commercial)
• RC (Regional Commercial)
• LI (Light Industrial)
• RO (Research Office)
• MFG (Manufacturing)
(a) Applicant shall complete an application requesting zoning
approval at least six (6) weeks in advance of opening.
(b) Content of signs are limited to the business or service.
§ 25-5.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.18
1:514
(c) No sign may be displayed on a roof top structure or parked
vehicle, except that wrapped signage or magnetic signs are
permitted on licensed operational vehicles.
(d) Grand opening signs, flags, pennants, banners and lawn signs
must be made of weather-proof plastic, cloth, vinyl materials or
weather-proof poster board.
(e) Grand opening signs may be placed at all store entrances for
the business, and the location must be so noted on zoning
application and plot plan.
(f) Pennants may be hung from a finished façade to another
nonpublic structure (i.e. light pole) on the property, with height
clearance of fourteen (14) feet minimum. Temporary grand
opening signs must be securely fastened to a building facade,
and may not exceed ten (10%) percent of the area of the face of
the wall upon which the sign is attached, or twenty-four (24)
square feet, whichever is smaller.
(g) With the approval of the Zoning Officer, temporary grand
opening signs may be erected at any time prior to the grand
opening; however, signage can only be in place for a maximum
of fourteen (14) consecutive days. All temporary signage must
be removed on or before the 15th day.
(h) The fee for grand opening signs, banners, flags, pennants and
lawn signs is fifty ($50) dollars.
3. Lawn Signs. Lawn signs will be permitted in the following zoning
districts:
• HC (Highway Commercial)
• RC (Regional Commercial)
• LI (Light Industrial)
• RO (Research Office)
• MFG (Manufacturing)
(a) The maximum number of lawn signs shall be six (6).
(b) Lawn signs must be on store owner's property, or landlord's
property with their approval in writing.
(c) With the approval of the zoning officer, lawn signs may remain
in place for a two (2) week period each quarter, which may be
broken up into one (1) week intervals. Lawn signs are to be
used in combination with special events or grand openings. If
used as a special event, lawn signs are limited to once per
calendar quarter.
§ 25-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.18
1:515
(d) The fee for lawn signs is twenty-five ($25) dollars per two (2)
consecutive weeks.
4. Signage for Not-For-Profit Organizations. Signage for not-for-profit
organizations will be permitted in the following zoning districts:
• HC (Highway Commercial)
• RC (Regional Commercial)
• LI (Light Industrial)
• RO (Research Office)
• MFG (Manufacturing)
• R 50, R 60, R 70, R 75, R 100, (single-family residential
zones)
(a) The maximum number of signs may be one (1) per street.
(b) With the approval of the zoning officer, signs may be put in
place two (2) weeks before the scheduled event and must be
removed within three (3) working days after the event.
(c) The fee for placement of signs for not-for-profit organizations
will be waived.
5. Prohibited Temporary Signage. Signage as listed below will not be
permitted within the Township:
(a) Blackboard type signs
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Advertising device type signs, such as blimps, balloons, blow
ups
(d) Animated signs
(e) Live signs
(f) Skins
If any of these signs or devices are used, you will be asked to
remove them immediately. You may also forfeit your right to
put up promotional signage in the next quarter.
6. Special Events, Promotional Events. To accommodate the needs of
Aberdeen Township business owners, churches and synagogues,
special events, such as holiday or seasonal sales, promotional
events, and anniversary celebrations will be permitted in the
following zoning districts:
• HC (Highway Commercial)
• RC (Regional Commercial)
§ 25-5.18 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.18
1:516
§ 25-5.19. Solid Waste Storage.
Solid wastes from all uses other than residentially zoned areas, if stored
outdoors, shall be placed in metal receptacles within a screened refuse
area.
• LI (Light Industrial)
• RO (Research Office)
• MFG (Manufacturing)
• R 50, R 60, R 70, R 75, R 100, (single-family residential
zones)
(a) At least six (6) weeks in advance of the proposed event/
promotion, the applicant shall complete an application
requesting zoning approval.
(b) Special events and promotional events may be held four (4)
times per year, for a period of two (2) weeks during each
calendar quarter and the two (2) week period may run
consecutively or separately within the quarter.
(c) With the approval of the Zoning Officer, the event must start on
the day approved and end on the end date specified in the
application and the set up for the event may be a maximum of
two (2) days before the event, and must be removed within two
(2) business days after the event. The Zoning Officer will
coordinate with any Township agencies necessary to grant
approval, such as Police, Fire or Board of Health. Once
approval is given in writing to the applicant, with copies to
other required agencies, if any, the applicant may proceed to
prepare for the event.
(d) The zoning fee is twenty-five ($25) dollars per two (2)
consecutive weeks.
a. The screened refuse area shall not be located within any front yard
area.
b. The refuse storage area shall be surrounded on at least three (3) sides
by a solid uniform fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height.
c. A four (4) foot minimum width landscaping area shall be provided along
the fence or wall enclosing the refuse storage area. The landscaping to
be provided shall be shown on the site plan submitted for Board
approval.
d. The opening in the enclosed refuse area shall be located to minimize
the view of refuse from adjoining properties or public streets.
e. If located within or adjacent to a parking area or access drive, the
enclosed refuse area shall be separated from such parking area or
§ 25-5.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.19
1:517
§ 25-5.20. Streets and Curbs. [Ord. No. 11-1985]
access drive by curbing and shall not be located so as to interfere with
traffic circulation or the parking of vehicles.
f. All refuse shall be deposited in containers maintained within the refuse
area. No containers shall be maintained anywhere on a site except in a
refuse area meeting these requirements.
g. There shall be provided at least one (1) outdoor refuse storage area of
at least one hundred (100) square feet for each ten thousand (10,000)
square feet of floor area. The refuse storage area shall be suitably
located and arranged for access and ease of collection and shall not be
part of, restrict or occupy any parking aisle and shall not be located
further than three hundred (300) feet from the entrance to any unit
which it is intended to serve.
a. Streets.
1. All developments shall be served by paved public streets with an
adequate crown. The arrangement of streets not shown on the
Master Plan or Official Map, as adopted by the Township, shall be
such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets,
should conform with the topography as far as practicable, and
should be so oriented as to permit, within the limits of practicability
and feasibility, the buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar
gain.
2. When a new development adjoins land susceptible of being
subdivided, suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access
of the remaining and/or adjoining tract to existing or proposed
streets.
3. Local streets shall be so planned and identified with appropriate
signs so as to discourage through traffic.
4. In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Master Plan
and/or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
Ordinance, additional land along either or both sides of said street,
sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements, shall be
dedicated for the location, installation, repair and maintenance of
streets, drainage facilities, utilities and other facilities customarily
located on street rights-of-way. The necessary deeds of ownership
shall be furnished, and the dedication shall be expressed as follows:
"Street right-of-way granted permitting the entrance upon these
lands for the purposes provided for and expressed in the Land
Development Ordinance of the Township." This statement shall in
no way reduce the developer's responsibility to provide, install,
repair or maintain the facilities in the area dedicated by ordinance
and/or as shown on the plan and/or as provided for by any
§ 25-5.19 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.20
1:518
maintenance or performance guarantees. If the development is
along one (1) side only, one-half (1/2) of the required extra width
shall be dedicated. Additionally, that portion of the existing street
or road adjoining or included within a site plan or major subdivision
shall be improved, including excavation, grading, base courses and
surfacing in accordance with the road improvement standards of
this Ordinance.
5. In all developments, the minimum public street right-of-way shall
be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with
the following schedule, but in no case shall a new street that is a
continuation of an existing street be continued at a width less than
the existing street although a greater width may be required in
accordance with the following schedule.
ROW Width
Traffic Lanes
No. Width
Shoulder
Width Within
Gutters
Utility and
Rights-of-Way
Outside
Gutters on
Each Side(1)
Width Between
Gutters
Arterial
streets
80 ft. 4 @ 12 ft. 8 ft. 10 ft. 64 ft.
Collector
streets
60 ft. 2 @ 20 ft.(2) 10 ft. 40 ft.
Local
streets
50 ft. 2 @ 18 ft.(2) 7 ft. 36 ft.(3)
(1) Shall be grass stabilized topsoil, minimum four (4) inches thick.
(2) Areas adjacent to curb available as parking or emergency area.
(3) Except in specific instances where less pavement may be desirable.
Interior streets in APT/TM and PRD developments with no onstreet
parking and no dwellings fronting on the roadway: ROW
Width = 40 feet, Cartway Width = 20 feet.
6. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than sixty (60°) degrees and approaches
to all intersections shall follow a straight line for at least one
hundred (100) feet. No more than two (2) streets shall meet or
intersect at any one (1) point and the centerlines of both
intersecting streets shall pass through a common point. Measuring
from this common point, two (2) intersections shall be spaced a
sufficient distance to permit a minimum of two (2) lots or one
hundred fifty (150) feet, whichever is greater, between the two (2)
street rights-of-way. Any development abutting an existing street
classified as an arterial or collector shall be permitted only one (1)
new street connecting with the same side of the existing street
except where the frontage is sufficient, more than one (1) street
§ 25-5.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.20
1:519
may intersect the arterial or collector street provided the streets
shall not intersect with the same side of the existing street at
intervals of less than eight hundred (800) feet for collectors and
twelve hundred (1,200) feet for arterials. The block corners at
intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with the street
having the highest radius requirements as outlined below
determining the minimum standard for all curblines: arterials - 40
feet; collectors - 35 feet; and local streets - 30 feet.
7. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. When
connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one (1) point,
they shall be connected by a curve with a radius conforming to
standard engineering practice so that the minimum sight distance
within the right-of-way shall be five hundred (500) feet for local
streets, seven hundred fifty (750) feet for a collector street and one
thousand (1,000) feet for an arterial street.
8. Culs-de-sac of a permanent nature (where provision for the future
extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining property is
impractical or impossible) or of a temporary nature (where
provision is made for the future extension of the street to the
boundary line of adjoining property) shall serve no more than
fifteen (15) lots and shall provide a turn-around at the end with a
radius of fifty (50) feet on the curbline plus a utility and planting
strip width of ten (10) feet around the entire cul-de-sac. The center
point for the radius shall be on the centerline of the associated
street or if off-set, off-set to a point where the radius becomes
tangent to the right curbline of the associated street.
9. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate the name of an existing street that confusion results. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
Curvilinear streets shall change their names only at street
intersections. The Board shall reserve the right to approve or name
streets within a proposed development.
10. The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and base
materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the
Township, County or State Engineers when said paving concerns
roads under the jurisdiction and where such standards exist.
Concerning streets under the jurisdiction of the Township, the
following standards shall apply:
(a) The minimum requirements of any new street shall be
constructed according to the specifications and procedures as
set forth in the Standard Specifications.
(b) On all local roads, the base course shall be three (3) inches of
Bituminous Stabilized Base, Stone Mix No. 1, placed on a
compacted, unyielding subgrade consisting of a minimum of
§ 25-5.20 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.20
1:520
six (6) inches of graded quarry blend (Mix #5) which has been
inspected and approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) On all Township collector and arterial streets, the base course
shall consist of Bituminous Stabilized Base, Stone Mix No. 1,
applied in two (2) lifts upon a compacted unyielding subgrade
consisting of a minimum of six (6) inches of graded quarry
blend (Mix #5) which has been inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer. Township collector streets shall have four
(4) inches of base course, while Township arterial streets shall
have five (5) inches.
(d) The surface course for all classes of Township streets shall
consist of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches of Bituminous
Concrete, Type F.A.B.C.-1, Mix No. 5, applied according to
state highway specifications.
(e) In all cases, a tack coat shall be applied between the surface
course and the base course in accordance with the New Jersey
State Highway Specifications.
11. The approval of any map of land delineating streets by the
governing body of the Township shall in no way be construed as an
acceptance of any street indicated thereon.
b. Curbs.
1. Belgian block or concrete curbing shall be installed along every
street within a subdivision and at intersections with existing
Township, County or State roads unless otherwise specified by the
Township Engineer.
2. Concrete curbs for local roads shall be eight (8) inches wide at their
base and not less than six (6) inches wide at their top. Their heights
shall not be less than eighteen (18) inches and be constructed to
show a vertical face above the roadway pavement of six (6) inches.
The rear top corner of this curb shall have a radius of one-fourth (1/
4) inch, and the front top corner shall have a radius of one and onehalf
(1 1/2) inches. Curbs at driveway openings shall be
constructed to the full depth of eighteen (18) inches which depth
shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches on either side of the
depression.
3. If Belgian block, stones used for local roads shall not be less than
ten (10) inches in height and shall be constructed to show a vertical
face above the roadway pavement of six (6) inches. Stones used for
Township collector and arterial roads shall not be less than twelve
(12) inches in height and shall be constructed to show a vertical
face above the roadway pavement of eight (8) inches.
c. Sight Triangles. Sight triangle easements shall be required at
intersections, in addition to the specified right-of-way width, in which
§ 25-5.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.20
1:521
§ 25-5.21. Swimming Pools.
§ 25-5.22. Water Supply.
no grading, planting or structure shall be erected or maintained more
than three (3) feet in height as measured from the mean elevation
of the finished grade five (5) feet away from the centerline of the
grading, planting or structure. The sight triangle is defined as that
area outside the right-of-way which is bounded by the intersecting
street lines and the straight line connecting "sight points," one (1)
each located on the two (2) intersecting street centerlines the following
distance away from the intersecting centerlines arterial streets @ three
hundred (300) feet; collector streets @ two hundred (200) feet; and
local streets @ ninety (90) feet. Where the intersecting streets are both
arterial, both collectors or one (1) arterial and one (1) collector, the
two (2) overlapping sight triangles shall be required to be formed by
connecting the "sight points" noted above with a "sight point" ninety
(90) feet on the intersecting street. Such easement dedication shall be
expressed on the site plan or plat as follows: "Sight triangle deeded
for the purposes provided for and expressed in the Land Development
Ordinance."
a. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed
on any lot unless the lot contains a residence building. Pools and all
appurtenances shall be located in rear yard areas only and shall meet
the setback distances for accessory buildings as specified in Section
25-4 for each particular zoning district, except that in no case may a
swimming pool be located closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.
b. A swimming pool and appurtenances shall occupy no more than
seventy-five (75%) percent of the rear yard area in which they are
located.
c. A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a
suitable fence with a self-latching gate at least four (4) feet, but no more
than six (6) feet, in height.
a. Where public water is accessible, water mains shall be constructed in
such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot
or building within the development. The entire system shall be designed
in accordance with the requirements and standards of the local and/or
State agency having approval authority and shall be subject to their
approval. The system shall also be designed with adequate capacity and
sustained pressure and in a looped system with no dead-end lines,
whenever possible.
b. When a residential subdivision is to be served by a water utility
company, the subdivider shall provide for the installation of service
lines with a minimum diameter of six (6) inches in the street right-ofway.
Each lot shall be served by a three-fourths (3/4) inch size Type K
service line from the nearest street main.
§ 25-5.20 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.22
1:522
§ 25-5.23. Surface Water Management. [Ord. No. 18-1990]
c. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished on an
individual lot basis. If wells are installed on each lot and the lot also
contains its own sewage disposal facilities, the wells shall be of the
drilled type with a minimum of fifty (50) feet of casing. Well installation,
sealing and testing shall be in accordance with the New Jersey
Standards for Construction of Water Supply Systems in Realty
Improvements (Ordinance 199 of the Public Laws of 1954), as amended.
The well will be required to have a production of not less than six (6)
gallons per minute as established by bailor tests, and certified by the
well driller. Before being placed in consumer use, it shall be disinfected
by the use of sodium hypochlorite or other acceptable solutions and a
sample collected by a local or State Health Department representative
for bacteriological examination. A copy of the result of the above
referred to bailor tests and bacteriological examination and a
certificate from the local or State Health Officer that the owner has
complied with the applicable local or State health regulations shall be
submitted to the Township before the issuance of building permits in
connection with each individual lot.
d. All buildings for which a Certificate of Occupancy is granted shall be
within four hundred (400) feet, measured from the midpoint of the
street frontage, of a functioning fire hydrant approved by the
appropriate fire company.
a. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to allow the natural recharge of
groundwater supplies, protect the ecological health and function of
streams and the quality of the waters, alleviate hazards to health and
property from surface water run-off, and minimize public and private
losses due to surface water run-off damage. Neither property owners
whose land is at a lower elevation nor neighboring property owners nor
the public at large should bear the cost incident to surface water run-off
damage caused by land disturbance. Rather, these costs should be
borne in the first instance by the individual property owner or
developer who engages in the disturbance which may result in
increased or altered surface water run-off.
b. Word Usage. Unless specifically defined in Section 25-2, words or
phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them
meanings they have in common usage and to give this section its most
reasonable application.
c. General Provisions. The following provisions shall be applicable to all
methods of surface water management governed by this section unless
specifically exempted or waived in accordance with the provisions of
this section:
1. No application for development shall be deemed complete unless
the Township Engineer has certified to the approving authority that
§ 25-5.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:523
the applicant has provided the Engineer with sufficient information
for it to determine whether or not the proposed development will
conform to Township run-off standards, run-off details and
stormwater detention facility design criteria.
2. Planning Board Approval.
(a) The surface water management plan or any major amendment
thereof shall be approved by the Planning Board in the manner
and form and according to the regulations hereinafter set
forth.
The Planning Board, in approving said surface water
management plan, may impose lawful conditions or
requirements designated or specified on or in connection
therewith. These conditions and requirements shall be
provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment,
maintenance and continuance of any use or occupancy of any
structure or land.
3. Maintenance and Safety.
(a) At the time of approval of the plan, responsibility for continued
maintenance of surface water run-off control structures and
measures shall be stipulated and recorded in the resolution of
approval.
(b) Where continued maintenance is to be the responsibility of the
applicant, a proposed maintenance agreement, a form to be
provided by the Township, shall be submitted. The agreement
shall specify maintenance responsibility and standards during
and after completion of the proposed activity and upon
approval, shall be recorded by the applicant in the Office of the
Monmouth County Clerk. The applicant shall thereafter file a
copy of the recorded agreement with the Township Planning
Department. The Township shall retain the right to enter and
make repairs and improvements where necessary to ensure
that all control measures as well as areas dedicated to surface
water retention or groundwater recharge are adequately
maintained and preserved. The Township may charge the
owner for the costs of these services if such maintenance is his
responsibility.
(c) Where continued maintenance of a detention basin is to be the
responsibility of the Township, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) The applicant shall maintain the basin during the
construction phase of the project.
(2) As a condition of final approval and prior to acceptance of
the basin by the Township, the applicant shall enter into an
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:524
escrow agreement with the Township, which agreement
shall include a statement that the escrow contribution
is made in consideration of the Township assuming all
future maintenance of the basin. The form of agreement
shall be provided by the Township. The agreement, upon
execution, shall be recorded by the applicant in the Office
of the Monmouth County Clerk. The applicant shall
thereafter file a copy of the recorded agreement with the
Township Planning Department.
(3) The amount of the escrow contribution shall be based
upon area of the detention basin on an acreage basis,
which shall include the plan area at the top of the bank
plus an additional twenty-five (25) feet at the top of the
bank encircling the basin. The amount of the escrow
contribution shall be calculated according to the following
formula:
Nine thousand ($9,000) dollars per acre of area of basin,
plus twenty-five thousand ($25,000) dollars per basin for
repairs and major maintenance.
The total of the above shall be multiplied by a factor of one
and one-tenth (1.1) to cover the cost of the first year of
maintenance.
The minimum contribution, regardless of the size of the
basin, shall be thirty-five thousand ($35,000) dollars.
(4) Upon certification by the Township Engineer that the
project is complete and the guarantee bond for the project
may be released, acceptance of the basin by the Township
shall be specifically stated in the resolution authorizing the
bond release. The Township shall retain from the cash
portion of the bond a sum equal to the escrow contribution
calculated by the Township Engineer in accordance with
the formula in paragraph c3(c) above. In the event the
case portion of the bond is less than the escrow
contribution, the developer shall post the deficit in cash
prior to release of the bond. Any interim bond reductions
authorized by the Township shall not be constructed to
mean that all or any part of the detention basin has been
accepted by the Township nor shall any such interim
reduction reduce the cash portion of the bond to an
amount less than the escrow contribution.
(5) The escrow contribution does not include maintenance of
the lot or open space area in which the detention basin is
located.
(d) In the interest of safety to the public, all detention basin outlet
structures, existing or proposed, shall be equipped with a
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:525
debris rack or grating to prohibit entry by persons or by
material which may cause clogging. The owner shall be
responsible for insuring that such device is functioning
properly at all times and is locked in place to discourage
removal by unauthorized persons. Design and placement of the
safety debris rack should keep in mind the protection of the
public at all times to avoid accidental entry or injury.
4. As-Built Certification. Prior to the acceptance by the Township of
any surface water management facilities, the developer's engineer
shall certify that said facilities were constructed in accordance with
the approved plan, and submit as-built plans for the Township
records.
d. Surface Water Management Plans.
1. Applicability.
(a) Plan required. Approval by the municipal agency of a surface
water management plan shall be prerequisite to each of the
following:
(1) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision, including that
of a planned residential development.
(2) Preliminary approval of a site plan, including that of a
planned residential development.
(3) Approval of an application to use the residential cluster
option.
(4) A permit for any land disturbance or any construction.
(b) Exemptions. A surface water management plan shall not be
required where:
(1) The vegetative cover of the land will not be disturbed.
(2) The site will be used for agricultural or gardening
purposes.
(3) The land disturbance will take place on sites of one (1)
acre or less already occupied by a residential dwelling.
(4) The application for development is for a single-family
dwelling.
(5) The application is for a minor subdivision.
(c) Waiver. The municipal agency may waive the requirement of a
surface water management plan on sites of three (3) acres or
less, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer,
where it is satisfied that the proposed activity will not result in
surface water run-off damage.
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:526
2. Information Required. A surface water management plan
submitted pursuant to this section shall contain the following
information:
(a) Map. A map at a scale of no smaller than one (1) inch to one
hundred (100) feet [one to one thousand two hundred
(1:1,200)], showing the following:
(1) Soils of the site prepared from the Monmouth County soil
survey map. Appended to this map shall be text describing
the pertinent properties and characteristics of the soils
shown on this map.
(2) Topography and drainage, showing contours at five (5) foot
intervals where slopes exceed ten (10%) percent and at
two (2) foot intervals where slopes are ten (10%) percent
or less. Areas officially designated as floodways and flood
fringe areas, according to the rules and regulations for
delineation of flood hazard areas, as adopted by the New
Jersey Water Policy and Supply Council, shall be shown.
(3) Major vegetative types.
(4) Location of all proposed changes to the site whether of a
permanent or temporary nature, including but not limited
to impervious surfaces, improvements or modifications to
watercourses, interception of presently dispersed flow and
other factors which may affect surface water run-off.
(5) Location of all proposed measures for surface water runoff
control.
(6) Area of the watershed which drains through the site and
the location of the site within the watershed.
(b) Narrative description. A narrative description shall be
submitted, showing proposed measures for surface water runoff
control the sequence of installation of the surface water
run-off control measures as related to the progress of the
project.
(c) Maintenance agreement. An appropriate maintenance or
escrow agreement shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 25-9.2.
(d) Engineering reports. Detailed engineering reports of the
following:
(1) Computations of the surface water run-off, both rate and
volume, from the site in the predevelopment condition and
in the postdevelopment condition.
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:527
(2) Soil logs and other investigations as needed for proper
review of the surface water management plan.
(3) Detailed engineering plans and performance capabilities
of the surface water collection system and the surface
water run-off measure.
(e) Hydrologist's or engineer's statement. A written statement by
a hydrologist or licensed engineer shall be submitted,
certifying that the proposed surface water management plan
will meet all the standards as set forth in subsection 25-5.23d3
and, where applicable, the design standards set forth in
subsection 25-5.23e below.
3. Standards and Principles. The following standards and principles
shall be applicable to all surface water management measures:
(a) Rate of run-off. The peak rate of run-off for a two (2)-year, ten
(10)-year and one hundred (100)-year storm from a site during
and after development shall not exceed the predevelopment
peak rate of run-off, or exceed the capacity of downstream
drainage facilities.
(b) Minimize increase. The increase in total volume of run-off from
a site during and after development, from the predevelopment
total volume of run-off shall be minimized.
(c) Control measures. Run-off control measures shall be used both
to reduce run-off and to increase recharge. Natural and
artificial recharge areas and systems should be employed
wherever practicable to minimize the volume of surface water
run-off. Proposed site usage shall also be considered with
regard to site run-off contaminant levels. On sites containing
prime aquifer recharge areas, as delineated by the appropriate
critical areas map, surface water run-off control measures
which recharge water to the groundwater shall be required.
(d) Run-off to remain in watershed. Run-off within a site shall
ultimately leave the site in the same watershed in which it
originated and shall be released in such a manner as to not
substantially increase predevelopment erosion of adjacent
properties.
(e) Stormwater control.
(1) Stormwater-retarding structures shall control all storms
occurring more frequently than once in one hundred (100)
years including Type III storms as defined by the Soil
Conservation Service.
(2) All facilities located within the Township designed for
eventual evacuation of stormwater diverted to them, shall
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:528
be designed in such a manner to provide for the gradual
release of ninety (90%) percent of the run-off from a
rainfall measuring one and one-fourth (1 1/4) inches
occurring in two (2) hours or less, which release shall be
timed so as to be accomplished as close as is reasonably
possible to a point in time thirty-six (36) hours after the
start of such rainfall; provided, however, that such
evacuation from a facility serving residential projects may
be designed to accomplish the ninety (90%) percent
evacuation from a similar storm time so as to be
accomplished at a point in time as close as is reasonably
possible to eighteen (18) hours after the start of the
rainfall. The specific provisions regarding the timing of
evacuation may be waived if the evacuation is
accomplished through piping with a maximum diameter
of three (3) inches or if the water to be evacuated has
reached the facility via unchanneled sheet flow over fifty
(50) or more feet of lawn or vegetation of an equivalent
nature, provided that said flow shall not cross over any
land, improved or unimproved, which may reasonably be
expected to add any contaminants or pollutants to the flow
which may adversely affect the central supply and which
would not be removed from the flow by its passage over
the lawn or vegetative area.
(f) Collection systems. Collection systems shall be designed in
accordance with subsection 25-5.6.
(g) Inlet systems. The inlet system from the final junction to the
retarding structure shall be designed to handle one hundred
(100)-year storms.
(h) Water velocity at pipe outlets. The maximum velocity at pipe
outlets shall be seven (7) feet per second. To the greatest
possible extent, the plan shall avoid the concentration of flow
and shall provide for dissipation of velocities at all
concentrated discharge points.
(i) Setback requirements. The top of the excavation or the toe of
the outside slope shall be set back twenty-five (25) feet from
adjoining nonresidential property lines and fifty (50) feet from
an adjoining property line of a lot on which there is a
residential use. The edge of the design high water for
detention basins shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from
existing or proposed dwelling units.
(j) Calculation of run-off values. Run-off values shall be calculated
by the Soil Conservation Service method, the rational method
(Q = CIA) or other methods acceptable to the Township
Engineer. Either the Monmouth County Engineering
Department standards for the coefficient of run-off, as set forth
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:529
in the Monmouth County Land Subdivision Resolution, on file
in the office of the Township Engineer, or other generally
accepted engineering standards, whichever are more
stringent, should be used.
(k) Use of existing control measures. Maximum use should be
made of presently existing surface water run-off control
measures, including but not limited to berms, terraces,
grassed waterways, swamps, swales, ditches, woodlands,
floodplains, favorable hydrologic soils or watercourses.
(l) Run-off control measures. Run-off control measures listed in
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, TR 55, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, on file in
the office of the Township Engineer, may be employed.
(m) Cluster development. The use of cluster development and
conservation easements should be considered to reduce the
rate or volume of surface water run-off, to reduce the total area
of impervious surfaces and to preserve open space and
topographic features critical to surface water run-off control.
(n) Construction of run-off control measures. The plan shall
consider construction of specific water run-off control
measures prior to beginning other land disturbance activities.
(o) Completion of run-off control measures. All water-carrying
structures and/or detention areas shall be completed and
stabilized prior to certification of completion by the Township
Engineer and acceptance by the Township.
(p) Vegetative cover. Reestablishing vegetative cover shall be in
accordance with Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, adopted by the Freehold Soil
Conservation District, latest edition.
(q) Standards for run-off control measures.
(1) All measures for surface water run-off control measures
shall be equal to or exceed the standards for such
measures as promulgated by the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Committee and the Freehold Soil
Conservation District, which shall be on file in the office of
the Township Engineer.
(2) Where applicable, an applicant shall certify through a
licensed engineer that proposed stormwater management
facilities have been designed in a manner consistent with
dam safety and other design standards in accordance with
the then current state of the art for such structures and in
accordance with any and all standards which may be
required by law or regulation.
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:530
4. Grading Plans.
(a) A certified grading plan shall be submitted by the developer
prior to the issuance of a building permit. The grading plan
shall show no less than a two (2%) percent slope for surface
run-off, not to exceed two (2) lots; alternatively, lawn outlets
must be provided. Grading plans showing slopes exceeding
four (4%) percent must be approved for erosion protection by
the Township Engineer.
(b) Prior to the issuance of more than eighty (80%) percent of the
Certificates of Occupancy for each block, a certified as-built
grading plan shall be submitted by the developer, indicating
that the approved grading plan is being complied with. For
purposes of this section "block" shall be defined as a lot or lots
bounded by streets, highways, rivers and prominent streams as
the same shall be depicted on the Official Tax Map of the
Township of Aberdeen.
e. Detention Basins. In addition to all other provisions of this section,
where a surface water management plan includes a detention basin, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Dry Detention Basins. The following design standards shall apply to
all dry detention basins:
(a) Side slopes shall be one (1) vertical to three (3) horizontal.
(b) Basin bottom.
(1) Traverse slope (to low flow channel) minimum two (2%)
percent.
(2) Low flow channel if sodded, minimum slope two (2%)
percent.
(3) Low flow channel concrete if slope less than two (2%)
percent.
(c) An area fifteen (15) feet wide with a maximum slope of two
(2%) percent shall be constructed at the top of the bank
surrounding the basin.
(d) To provide accessibility to the bottom, an area with a minimum
width of eighteen (18) feet and having a slope no greater than
one to four (1:4) shall be constructed.
(e) If the areas described in paragraphs a1(c) and (d) above
require stabilization, they shall be stabilized by paving blocks
for Fire Emergency Access Lane.
(f) All storm sewer discharge outlets into the basin shall be at the
grade of the basin's bottom.
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:531
(g) All stabilization of conduit shall be by riprap or concrete.
(h) The top of the excavation or the toe of the outside shall be set
back twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining nonresidential
property lines and fifty (50) feet from an adjoining property
line of a lot on which there is a residential use. The edge of the
design highwater for detention basins shall be set back one
hundred (100) feet from existing or proposed dwelling units.
(i) Vegetative stabilization cover shall be provided throughout the
basin and landscaping shall be provided on the perimeter.
(j) The basin floor shall lie two (2) feet above the seasonal high
ground water table.
(k) Discharge structure. The discharge structure shall be in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) A minimum twelve (12) inch diameter discharge is
recommended (except where a three (3) inch diameter
orifice is required for water quality measures).
(2) Trash rack and safety protections shall be provided for all
smaller diameter outlets.
(3) All stored stormwater must discharge from the basin
within two (2) days (forty-eight (48) hours).
(4) No detention basins shall be located in floodways,
wetlands or floodplains.
2. Recharge Basins. Where a recharge basin is to be constructed, the
standards for dry detention basins, as set forth above, shall be
applicable, together with the following:
(a) The applicant shall provide detailed soils data for each basin
site, to include:
(1) Soils data to a depth of at least six (6) feet below the
proposed basin floor.
(2) The elevation of the seasonal high ground water table. The
seasonal high water table must be at least two (2) feet
below the proposed basin floor.
(3) The soil percolation rate for the soils at the elevation of the
proposed basin floor.
(b) Recharge enhancement by means of stone filled trenches or
porous pipe, shall be situated at the lowest elevation of the
basin.
(c) Where practical, the basin floor elevation shall be established
at or above waterways or storm sewers in the area.
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:532
(d) Where the basin floor elevation is established at or above
waterways or storm sewers in the area, alternate discharge
measures for emergency basin drainage, such as "plugged"
outlet pipes in place at the basin floor elevation, shall be
provided. Manual valves are optional.
3. Wet Detention Basins (Ponds).
(a) Where a wet detention basin is to be constructed, the applicant
shall provide an environmental study which includes the
following:
(1) Recharge water volume, to include storm run-off, stream
flow and ground water elevation.
(2) Recharge water quality, to include run-off from parking
lots, streets and roofs. Sources of pollution shall be
identified.
(3) Basin floor soils, impervious strata is required.
(4) Aeration requirements (dissolved oxygen). Basins with onsite
recharge only may require supplementary aeration.
(5) Aquatic community development to include water depth
minimum five (5) feet, fish stocking species.
(b) A safety edge five (5) feet wide and eighteen (18) inches below
the design high water level shall be constructed around the
entire interior perimeter of the basin slope.
4. Maintenance. Detention basins shall be constantly maintained by
the owner to ensure continual functioning of the systems at design
capacity and to prevent the health hazards associated with debris
build-up and stagnant water. In no case shall water be allowed to
remain in any facility long enough to constitute a mosquitobreeding,
disease or any other type health problem, unless
approved as a multifunction facility to include water such as a
pond. Failure to maintain detention basins to the degree that
mosquito or other noxious pest habitats develop is a violation of the
Mosquito Extermination Act (N.J.S.A. 26.9-1, et seq.) and shall
subject the owner to civil sanctions by the Township Health
Department. An annual maintenance report addressing the
function, condition, safety and aesthetics of the facility shall be
prepared by the owner and submitted to the Township Manager by
December 1 of each year.
f. Review and Approval of Plans. Surface water management plans shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board, which may receive the advice and
assistance of the Township Engineer, the Freehold Soil Conservation
District, the Monmouth County Mosquito Control Commission and the
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.23
1:533
Environmental Commission. The Planning Board's consideration of
applications shall be guided by, but not limited to, the following factors:
1. The suitability and effectiveness of the plan.
2. The existing topography, vegetation, hydrologic factors and soil
conditions.
3. The groundwater supply, groundwater recharge, and discharge
areas, wet soils and the depth to the seasonal high water table.
4. The natural drainage flow and pattern.
5. Rainfall intensity and duration for two (2)-year, ten (10)-year,
twenty-five (25)-year and one hundred (100)-year storms.
6. Critical and environmentally sensitive areas on the site.
7. Land uses in both the immediate vicinity of the site and the
surrounding drainage region.
8. Aesthetics and compatibility with the adjoining uses both on and off
site.
9. Other applicable environmental, resource or public health
protection ordinances, statutes or regulations.
g. Application Procedure for Plan Unrelated to a Development
Application.
1. Copies of Plan and Application. At least ten (10) days and no more
than twenty (20) days before a regular meeting of the Planning
Board, the applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of a surface
water management plan as set forth in subsection 25-5.23d and
three (3) completed copies of an application form which shall be
obtained from the Secretary of the Planning Board.
2. Copies to Municipal Officials; Reports. The Secretary of the
Planning Board shall forward a copy of the application to the
Township Engineer, the Planner and such other officials as the
Board shall direct and shall request that each of them file a written
report of his findings and recommendations, giving full
consideration to the standards and principles set forth in this
section and stating whether the application is feasible and sound
from an engineering standpoint.
3. Hearing. A public hearing shall be held and shall follow the
requirements set forth in subsection 25-7.6c and the applicant shall
give notice as set forth in subsection 25-7.6d.
4. Signatures upon Approval. If the application is approved, said
approval shall be noted on the plan, and it shall be signed by the
Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Board.
§ 25-5.23 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.23
1:534
§ 25-5.24. Stormwater Control. [Ord. No. 14-2006 § 25-5.24; Ord.
No. 9-2011 §§ 1-6]
5. Time for Approval or Denial. Approval shall be granted or denied
within forty-five (45) days after submission of a complete
application to the Secretary of the Planning Board or within such
further time as may be consented by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
final approval, and a certificate of the Township Clerk as to the
failure of the Board to act shall be issued at the request of the
applicant.
a. Purpose.
1. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
2. Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development.
3. Applicability.
(a) This subsection shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(1) Nonresidential major developments; and
(2) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This subsection shall also be applicable to all major
developments undertaken by Aberdeen Township.
4. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this subsection are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
§ 25-5.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:535
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by
any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this subsection
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This subsection
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this subsection imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
b. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this subsection its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Costal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores
and CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing
and access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review
agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — shall mean the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as Designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — shall mean a person professionally qualified
and duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that
may include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:536
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the division of a parcel of land into
two (2) or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or
structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change
in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of
use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under
the Municipal Land Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of
development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity
that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1 C-I et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving
waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — shall mean an area or
feature which is of significant environmental value, including but not
limited to: stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat
of endangered or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open
space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and
groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened
species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as
approved by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species
Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — shall mean cumulative square feet of impervious
surface on any given property. "Impervious surface" shall mean a
surface that has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly
resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — shall mean the process by which water seeps into the
soil from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land or creates more than
one quarter acre of new Impervious Area. Disturbance for the purpose
of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/
or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:537
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean any city, borough, town, township, or
village.
NODE — shall mean an area designated by the State Planning
Commission concentrating facilities and activities which are not
organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT — shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, Aberdeen Township, or political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical
wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff,
or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground
waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — shall mean solid material, mineral, or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of
any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — shall mean an area
delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State
Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the
state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — shall mean the geographic application of
the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goal and statewide
policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:538
STORMWATER RUNOFF — shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or
other method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and
associated pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or
groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal
non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — shall mean a neighborhood given priority access
to State resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et. seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — shall mean an area that is inundated
or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapt for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) at the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores, or
Nodes;
1.
2. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores, or Nodes;
3. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
4.
c. General Standards.
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:539
1. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality standards in paragraph d. of this subsection. To the
maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards
shall be incorporated into the design.
(b) The standards in this subsection apply to major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff
on water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies
and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not
apply to new major development to extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a
regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality
Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules. Such alternative standards shall provide at least as much
protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater
recharge. Stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of
major development projects as would be provided under the
standards in the subchapter.
(c) For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall
apply in addition to this section except to the extent the RSIS
are suspended by this section or alternative standards
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
d. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development.
1. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with paragraph j. of this
subsection.
2. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhinebergi (bog turtle).
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:540
3. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of paragraph d6 and d7:
(a) The construction of an underground utility line provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet,
provided that the access is made of permeable material.
4. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of paragraphs d6 and d7 may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of paragraphs d6, and
d7 to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of paragraphs d6 and d7, existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph 4(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of paragraphs d6 and d7 that were not
achievable on-site.
5. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
paragraphs d6 and d7 shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
paragraph d5(b) below into the design. The applicant shall
identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the
design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:541
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management
measures identified in paragraph (b) below into the design of
a particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
(1) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(2) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(3) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(4) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
(5) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(6) Minimize soil compaction;
(7) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(8) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(9) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy 5(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:542
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under paragraph 5b(9)[a] and
[b] above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see paragraph 5(c)(1)[c] below.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996) with type "S' inlet heads as
manufactured by Campbell Foundry;
Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portions (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeway plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[b] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet,
the clear space in that curb opening (or each
individual clear space, if the curb opening has two (2)
or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more
than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no greater than
two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
[c] This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be
overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:543
[2] Where the flows from the water quality design
storm as specified in paragraph d7(a) are
conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device,
or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and
floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space four and five-eighths
(4 5/8) inches long and one and one-half (1 1/
2) inches wide (this option does not apply for
outfall netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half
(0.5) inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack
that has parallel bars with one-inch (1) spacing
between the bars, to the elevation of the water
quality design storm as specified in paragraph
d7(a); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determines, pursuant
to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4- 7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(2) Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting.
[a] Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph (2) is to
require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets
which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of
facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge
of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans,
food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Aberdeen so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
[b] Definitions. For the purpose of paragraph (2), the
following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:544
singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
(MS4) — shall mean a conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is
owned or operated by Township of Aberdeen or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation,
company, partnership, firm, association, or political
subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — shall mean an opening in
a storm drain used to collect stormwater runoff and
includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and
its estuaries, all springs, streams and bodies of
surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
[c] Prohibited Conduct. No person in control of private
property (except a residential lot with one (1) singlefamily
house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with
asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen),
reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct
contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
[1] Already meets the design standard below to
control passage of solid and floatable materials;
or
[2] Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in
paragraph [d] below prior to the completion of the
project.
[d] Design Standard. Storm drain inlets identified in
paragraph [c] above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended,
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:545
or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard
see paragraph [d][3] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater
from that surface into a storm drain or surface
water body under that grate:
[i] The New Jersey Department of
Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and
Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines
(April 1996); or
[ii] A different grate, if each individual clear
space in that grate has an area of no more
than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate
portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and
grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening
inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or each
individual clear space, if the curb opening has two
(2) or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[i] Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that
this standard would cause inadequate
hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional
or larger storm drain inlets that meet these
standards;
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:546
[ii] Where flows are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to
prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of
the following:
A. A rectangular space four and fiveeighths
inches long and one and onehalf
inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
B. A bar screen having a bar spacing of
0.5 inch.
[iii] Where flows are conveyed through a trash
rack that has parallel bars with one-inch (1")
spacing between the bars; or
[iv] Where the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
[e] Enforcement. This paragraph (2) shall be enforced by
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of
Aberdeen.
[f] Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation
of the provisions of this paragraph (2) shall be subject
to a minimum fine of one hundred ($100) dollars per
day with a maximum fine not to exceed one thousand
($1,000) dollars per day.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
paragraph d6 and d7 shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:547
obtained from the address identified in paragraph d7(b) or
found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
6. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standard.
(a) This paragraph contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
(1) The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
and implementing rules.
(2) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at paragraph e. either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain one hundred
(100%) percent of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for
the site; or
[2] Demonstrate though hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from pre-construction to postconstruction
for the 2- year storm is infiltrated.
[b] The groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the "urban redevelopment
area," or to projects subject to iii below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[1] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:548
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[2] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source
material." "Source material" means any
material(s) or machinery, located at an industrial
facility, that is directly or indirectly related to
process, manufacturing or other industrial
activities, which could be a source of pollutants in
any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are
not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; byproducts;
industrial machinery and fuels, and
lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic include, but are not limited to, exacerbating
a naturally or seasonally high water table so as to
cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or
interference with the proper operation of subsurface
sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
(3) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at paragraph e. of this
subsection complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events do not exceed, at any point in
time, the pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the
same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:549
increase flood damage at or downstream of the site.
This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events are fifty (50%), seventy-five
(75%) and eighty (80%) percent, respectively, of the
preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff
that is attributable to portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
will not increase flood damages below the point of
discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs [a], [b] and [c]
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages
below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at paragraph b,
Definitions, shall be submitted to the Freehold Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in accordance
with the requirements of this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff
quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
subsection, "agricultural development" means land uses
normally associated with the production of food, fiber and
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of
land for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing
of agriculturally related products.
7. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by eighty (80%) percent of the
anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an
annual average. Stormwater management measures shall only
be required for water quality control if an additional onequarter
(1/4) acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The water quality design storm is one and
one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall in two (2) hours. Water
quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:550
rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in Table
1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into
account the implementation of non-structural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 000 65 0.8917
5 083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in paragraph g. of this
subsection, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in paragraph g. of this
subsection. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:551
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty (80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS
reduction:
R = A + B — (AxB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.7(c)
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60
Wet Pond 50-90
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty
(80%) percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage
area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site in
which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance in
paragraphs d6 and d7 of this subsection.
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:552
may be obtained from the address identified in paragraph g. of
this subsection.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all water designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(1) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A 300-foot special water resource protection area
shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top
of the bank outwards or from the centerline of the
waterway where the bank is not defined, consisting of
existing vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow
natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph 7h(1)[a]
above shall only be allowed where previous
development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as
measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or centerline of the waterway where the
bank is undefined. All encroachments proposed under
this subparagraph shall be subject to review and
approval by the Department.
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:553
(2) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(3) If stormwater discharge outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with
the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the Category One
waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent
TSS post-construction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachment proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(4) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to paragraph d7(h)
has been approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection, then the provisions of the plan shall be the
applicable special water resource protection area
requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:554
protection plan for a waterway subject to paragraph d7(h)
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in paragraph d7(h)(1) above. In no case
shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction
of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than
one hundred fifty (150) feet as measure perpendicular to
the waterway subject to this subsection.
(5) Paragraph d7(h) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
e. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge.
1. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(1) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 —
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds; or
(2) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded
land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff
coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
paragraph e1(a)(1) and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at paragraph e1(a)(2). A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five (5) years without
interruption prior to the time of application. If more than one
land cover has existed on the site during the five (5) years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover
with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the
site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is
pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use type is
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:555
woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation
treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(c) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55
— Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods
may be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
2. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual; at http://wwwstate.ni.us/de/njgs/; or at New
Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
f. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
1. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type; permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:556
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one (1) inch spacing between
the bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm.
For elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than one-third (1/3) the width of the diameter of the orifice or
one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between the bars of one (1) inch and a maximum spacing
between bars of six (6) inches. In addition, the design of trash
racks must comply with the requirements of paragraph h2.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21- 7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half
(2.5) inches in diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at paragraph h.
2. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by paragraph d. of this subsection.
3. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of paragraph d. of this subsection, provided the
pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
g. Sources for Technical Guidance.
1. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at (a) and (b) below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as: bioretention
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:557
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
2. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540 or the Freehold Soil Conservation District, 4000
Kozloski Road, P.O. Box 5033, Freehold, New Jersey, (732)
683-8500.
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306.
h. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
1. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. The section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
2. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape
Provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(1) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six (6) inch spacing between the bars.
(2) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
(3) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under
the full range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be
computed on the basis of the net area of opening through
the rack.
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:558
(4) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
lbs./ft. sq.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has on overflow
grade, such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(2) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two (2)
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading 300
lbs./ft. sq.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph (c) escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management
basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
(1) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in paragraph h3 a freestanding outlet structure
may be exempted from this requirement.
(2) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than two and one-half (2.5) feet. Such
safety ledges shall be comprised of two (2) steps. Each
step shall be four (4) to six (6) feet in width. One step shall
be located approximately two and one-half (2 1/2) feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step
shall be located one (1) to one and one-half (1 1/2) feet
above the permanent water surface. See paragraph h4 for
an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater
management basin.
(3) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
3. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
(a) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon a
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:559
written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
(municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
4. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management
Basin.
i. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this subsection, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the Checklist for the
Site Development Stormwater Plan at paragraph i3 below as
part of the submission of the applicant's application for
subdivision or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this subsection.
(c) The applicant shall submit nineteen (19) copies of the
materials listed in the checklist for site development
stormwater plans in accordance with paragraph i3 of this
subsection.
2. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
official shall consult the engineer end environmental commission
retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied
and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this
subsection.
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:560
3. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be
required (maps in hard copy and GIS format):
(a) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of two hundred (200) feet
beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of
1"=200' or greater, showing two (2) foot contour intervals. The
map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains
along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and
other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high ground water elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
(d) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
paragraphs d. through f. are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:561
(1) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(2) Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after all construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
(1) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and post-development
conditions for the design storms specified in paragraph e.
of this subsection.
(2) When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of paragraph j.
(h) Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this subsection may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in paragraphs 3(a) through 3(f) of this
paragraph i. when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
j. Maintenance and Repair.
1. Applicability.
(a) Projects subject to review as in paragraph a3 shall comply with
the requirements of paragraphs j2 and 3, and paragraph k.
2. General Maintenance.
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.24
1:562
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph j2(b) above is not a public agency, the maintenance
plan and any future revisions based on paragraph j2(g) below
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on
which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan
must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph j2(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph j2(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
§ 25-5.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.24
1:563
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
paragraph j2(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
paragraphs j2(f) and (g) above.
(i) The requirements of paragraphs j2(c) and j2(d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another government agency. If
the municipality does not want to take this responsibility, the
ordinance should require the posting of a two (2) year
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is
approved by the Municipal Engineer or his designee. The
municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for
effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to
the responsible person.
3. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
k. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
subsection shall be subject to a base penalty of two hundred fifty ($250)
dollars to one thousand ($1,000) dollars per day for each day of the
violation.
l. Effective Date. This subsection shall take effect immediately upon the
approval by the County Review Agency, or sixty (60) days from the
receipt of the ordinance by the County Review Agency if the County
Review Agency should fail to act.
m. Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this ordinance shall be judged invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect
or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this ordinance.
§ 25-5.24 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:564
§ 25-5.25. Stormwater Management Plan.28 [Ord. No. 18-2006 §§ IIV]
a. Purpose. It is the purpose of the Township of Aberdeen to comply with
the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93, which requires every municipality in the State
to prepare and implement a stormwater management plan to establish
the minimum stormwater management requirements and controls for
major development.
b. Stormwater Management Plan. The Township of Aberdeen implements
the Stormwater Management Plan in paragraph d. of this subsection as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 and in conjunction with Section 25-5.24,
Stormwater Control, of the Revised General Ordinances Township of
Aberdeen.
c. Applicability.
1. The Stormwater Management Plan and Section 25-5.24 shall be
applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the following major
developments that require preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards per
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This subsection shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Aberdeen.
d. Stormwater Management Plan.
1. Introduction. This Municipal Stormwater Management Plan
(MSWMP) documents the strategy for Aberdeen Township to
address existing and prevent future stormwater-related impacts.
The creation of this plan is a required element as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-25 Municipal Stormwater Regulations. This plan
contains all of the required elements described in N.J.A.C. 7:8
Stormwater Management Rules. The plan addresses groundwater
recharge, stormwater quantity, and stormwater quality impacts by
incorporating stormwater design and performance standards for
new major development, defined as projects that disturb one or
more acres of land or contain one quarter (1/4) acre of land or more
of new impervious coverage. These standards are intended to
minimize the adverse impact of stormwater runoff on surface water
quality and water quantity and the loss of groundwater recharge
that provides baseflow in receiving water bodies. The plan
28.Editor's Note: Figures #1 through #10 referred to herein and adopted by Ordinance No.
18-206 can be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:565
describes long-term operation and maintenance measures for
existing and future stormwater facilities.
The plan addresses the review and update of existing ordinances,
the Township Master Plan, and other planning documents, to allow
for project designs that include low impact development
techniques. The final component of this plan is a mitigation
strategy for when a variance or exemption of the design and
performance standards is sought. As part of the mitigation section
of the stormwater plan, specific stormwater management measures
have been identified, and may be further modified in the future, to
lessen the impact of existing and new developments.
2. Goals. The goals of this MSWMP are to:
Reduce flood damage, including damage to fife and property;
Minimize, to the extent practical, any increase in stormwater runoff
from any new development;
Reduce soil erosion from any development or construction project;
Assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
and other in-stream structures to handle existing and projected
future flows;
Maintain groundwater recharge;
Provide, to the greatest extent feasible, a decrease in nonpoint
pollution;
Maintain the integrity of steam channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage;
Minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and existing
development;
Restore, enhance, and maintain the chemical, physical, and
biological integrity of the waters of the State;
Protect the public health;
Safeguard fish and aquatic life and scenic and ecological values;
Enhance recreational and other uses of water;
Protect the public safety through the proper design and operation
of stormwater detention/retention systems.
Encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or
development of lands in the Municipality in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters;
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:566
Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources in the
Municipality;
Prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land; and
Promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
To achieve these goals, this plan outlines specific stormwater
design and performance standards for new development and,
where possible, through the development application review
process, to mitigate impacts from existing development.
Preventative and corrective maintenance strategies are included
in the plan to ensure long-term effectiveness of stormwater
management facilities. The plan also outlines safety standards for
stormwater infrastructure to be implemented to protect public
safety.
3. Stormwater Discussion. Land development can dramatically alter
the hydrologic cycle (See Figure 1) of a site and, ultimately, an
entire watershed. Prior to development, native vegetation can
either directly intercept precipitation or draw that portion that has
infiltrated into the ground and return it to the atmosphere through
evapotranspiration. Development can remove this beneficial
vegetation and replace it with lawn or impervious cover, reducing
the site's evapotranspiration and infiltration rates. Clearing and
grading a site can remove depressions that store rainfall.
Construction activities may also compact the soil and diminish its
infiltration ability, resulting in increased volumes and rates of
stormwater runoff from the site. Impervious areas that are
connected to each other through gutters, channels, and storm
sewers can transport runoff more quickly than natural areas. This
shortening of the transport or travel time quickens the rainfallrunoff
response of the drainage area, causing flow in downstream
waterways to peak faster and higher than natural conditions. These
increases can create new, and aggravate existing, downstream
flooding and erosion problems and increase the quantity of
sediment in the channel. Filtration of runoff and removal of
pollutants by surface and channel vegetation is eliminated by storm
sewers that discharge runoff directly into a stream. Increases in
impervious area can also decrease opportunities for infiltration to
streams that depend on base flows in summer months and also
decrease the potential for ground water recharge. Reduced base
flows and increased peak flows produce greater fluctuations
between normal and storm flow rates, which can increase channel
erosion. Reduced base flow can also negatively impact the
hydrology of adjacent wetlands and the health of biological
communities that depend on base flows. Finally, erosion and
sedimentation can destroy habitat and thus adversely impact some
species that cannot readily adapt.
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:567
In addition to increases in runoff peaks and volumes and loss
of ground water recharge, land development often results in the
accumulation of pollutants on the land surface that runoff can
mobilize and transport to streams. New impervious surfaces and
cleared areas created by development can accumulate a variety
of pollutants from the atmosphere, fertilizers, animal wastes, and
leakage and wear from vehicles. Pollutants can include metals,
suspended solids, hydrocarbons, pathogens, and nutrients.
In addition to increased pollutant loading, land development can
adversely affect water quality in more subtle ways. For example,
stormwater falling on impervious surfaces or stored in detention
or retention basins can become heated and raise the temperature
of the downstream waterway, adversely affecting cold water fish
species such as trout. Development can remove trees along stream
banks that normally provide shading, stabilization, and leaf litter
that falls into streams and becomes food for the aquatic community.
4. Aberdeen Township Background.
4.1. General.
Aberdeen Township, first established in 1677 and incorporated
in 1857, encompasses a 5.4 square mile area in the northeast
corner of Monmouth County, New Jersey. See Figure 2 for
existing land uses. The population of the Township has
remained relatively stable with minor fluctuations from 17,235
in 1980, to 17,038 in 1990, to 17,454 in 2000. See Figure
3 for existing zoning districts. However, in recent years, the
Township has been under significant development pressure
where several large development projects have either been
approved and constructed or have received preliminary and
final approval from the Township Planning Board and have
intent to be under construction by early 2007. These
developments are estimated to increase the population by
approximately 1,600 individuals.
Changes in the landscape will most likely increase stormwater
runoff volumes and pollutant loads to the waterways of the
municipality. Figure 4 illustrates the waterways in the
Township. Figure 5 depicts the Township boundary on the
USGS quadrangle maps. Figure 6 shows vacant lands, a
portion of which may be available for future development.
4.2. Waterways.
The Township of Aberdeen is traversed by multiple waterways,
generally flowing from the south/southwest to north/northeast
to Raritan Bay.
Whale Creek forms a portion of the Township boundary with
Old Bridge. Long Neck Creek and Treasure Lake discharge
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:568
both flow into Whale Creek. Whale Creek is tidal up to
approximately Route 35
Matawan Creek and Birch Swamp Brook both flow into Lake
Lefferts (located in both Aberdeen and Matawan Borough).
Gravelly Brook and its tributaries flow into Lake Matawan
located in Matawan Borough. Both lakes discharge into
Matawan Creek, which is tidal below the dams, and who flows
into Raritan Bay. Mohingson Brook and its tributaries flow
through the Strathmore section of the Municipality and into
Matawan Creek. A portion of the Mohingson is also tidal to
approximately the New Jersey Transit Railroad culvert.
Luppatong Creek flows northerly then easterly through a
portion of the Strathmore section of the Township then crosses
over into Hazlet Township and ultimately to Raritan Bay.
A substantial amount of the flows in the various brooks and
creeks originate in communities beyond the borders of
Aberdeen Township.
Raritan Bay is subject to restricted shellfish activities and is
deemed as being moderately impaired.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) has established an Ambient Biomonitoring Network
(AMNET) to document the health of the State's waterways.
There are over 800 AMNET sites throughout the State of New
Jersey. These sites are sampled for benthic macroinvertebrates
by NJDEP on a five-year cycle. Streams are classified as nonimpaired,
moderately impaired, or severely impaired based
on the AMNET data. The data is used to generate a New
Jersey Impairment Score (NJIS), which is based on a number
of biometrics related to benthic macroinvertebrate community
dynamics. The one major water body that borders the
Township to the northeast, the Raritan Bay, is moderately
impaired. Accordingly, the various lakes, brooks, and creeks
located within the Township, although are not individually
listed in the AMNET data, as they are all tributary to the
Raritan Bay, by definition, the tidal portions thereof must be
considered as moderately impaired.
In addition to the AMNET data, the NJDEP and other
regulatory agencies collect water quality chemical data on
the streams in the State. This data shows that total Mercury,
Bioxine, Pathogen and PCB concentrations of the Raritan Bay
frequently exceed the State's criteria. This means that the bay
is an impaired waterway and the NJDEP is required to develop
a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) of these pollutants for the
bay (see appendix).
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:569
Further, per the Proposed 2004 Integrated List, Gravelly Brook
is classified as severely impaired. Mohingson (or Wilkson's
Brook), Whale Creek and Lake Lefferts are also impaired.
A TDML is the amount of a pollutant that can be accepted by
a waterbody without causing an exceedance of water quality
standards or interfering with the ability to use a waterbody
for one or more of its designated uses. The allowable load is
allocated along with a margin of safety to the various sources
of the pollutant, such as stormwater and wastewater
discharges, which require an NJPDES permit to discharge, and
to nonpoint sources, which includes stormwater runoff from
agricultural areas and residential areas. Provisions may also
be made for future sources in the form of reserve capacity. An
implementation plan is developed to identify how the various
sources will be reduced to the designated allocations.
Implementation strategies may include new or improved
stormwater treatment facilities or plants, adoption of
ordinances, reforestation of stream corridors, retrofitting
stormwater systems, and other Best Management Practices
(BMPs).
The New Jersey Integrated Water Quality Monitoring and
Assessment Report (305(b)and 303(d)) (Integrated List) is
required by the Federal Clean Water Act to be prepared
biennially (every 5 years) and is a valuable source of water
quality information. This combined report presents the extent
to which New Jersey waters are attaining water quality
standards, and identifies waters that are impaired. The
Integrated List (proposed 2004) constitutes the list of waters
impaired or threatened by pollutants, for which one or more
TMDLs are needed. As previously indicated Raritan Bay and its
various (tidal) tributaries, Mohingson Brook, Whale Creek and
Lake Lefferts are moderately impaired, and Gravelly Brook is
listed as severely impaired.
4.3. Existing Stormwater Infrastructure.
Due to the age and the location of the Township, a substantial
portion of the community, as well as its existing stormwater
infrastructure, was built with minimal regard for stormwater
control or management. Few detention or recharge facilities
were constructed serving single family or commercial
properties. Some facilities were constructed to serve multifamily
projects and are owned and maintained by various
homeowner associations. However, said facilities would not
meet today's standards.
The Township previously located the majority of its stormwater
outlet structures, numbering approximately 300 headwalls or
pipe terminuses, in the early 1990's. In addition, the
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:570
Municipality mapped a significant portion of the stormwater
facilities in 1995+/-. However, said mapping was not in GIS or
Arcview format.
Accordingly, in conformance with its Tier A Municipal
Stormwater Permit requirements and its Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan, the Township will remap all of its outfall
facilities by 2009.
The Township's stormwater infrastructure has been well
maintained. Should any difficulties arise, the Township
endeavors to resolve them immediately. The Township has
instituted a complaint hotline and response protocol that
requires an investigation and response within 24 hours. For
example, the Township's Public Works received complaints
from a resident who reported a driveway cavein on her
property. As a result, preliminary excavation and television
investigations determined the bottom of the pipe rotted out.
The soils within Aberdeen Township are very acidic clays
creating a detrimental environment for pipes that have not
been treated properly. Once the pipe started to corrode and
create a rough surface on the inside of the pipe, debris began
catching and collecting within the pipe. This significant
amount of debris in the pipe created clogs reducing the
effectiveness of the pipe leading to flooding around the
troubled site.
After the pipe was televised and thoroughly cleaned out, it was
slip-lined using a cured in place (CIP) liner. The liner created
a smooth surface within the pipe which prevents any debris
from accumulating and eliminated the eroded bottom while
providing structural strength against potential future collapse.
The residents confirmed that the pipe functioned well without
flooding, thus demonstrating this project to be a success.
4.4. Localized Flooding.
Although Aberdeen Township has many waterways, the
Township has only limited flooding areas that are of concern
to the Township itself. The flooding is caused by one or two
categories-runoff or tidal.
4.4.1. Tidal.
This type of flooding is normally caused by some type of
storm event, such as a hurricane or northeaster coincident
with high tide(s). There are several locations within the
Township affected by these events.
Amboy Avenue proximate to the Matawan Creek Bridge
into Keyport. This problem cannot be corrected due to the
existing coastal wetlands and two commercial businesses
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:571
on either side of the road that would be adversely
impacted by raising the road and the fact that Keyport
would have to undertake a similar project.
Prospect Avenue at Route 35 Northbound. The
intersection would have to be raised, impacting two
commercial access drives. The project is of low priority
as an alternate route is easily accessed and the flooding
frequency is low.
Lakeshore Drive between Ravine Drive and Ocean
Boulevard. This area floods at extreme high tides and
during storm events. Reconstruction would be exceedingly
difficult and expensive due to poor subsoils, coastal
wetlands on either side of the road, and NJDEP permitting
requirements. However, this project has a higher priority
due to the higher frequency of occurrence but
reconstruction could not address hurricane events.
Beach Drive at the end of Shore Concourse during
hurricane events. Flooding is periodic but controlled by a
municipally operated tide gate.
Aberdeen Road (Matawan Borough). Extreme high tides
and storm events cause road closures. Due to its location
in an adjoining community, this problem area cannot be
addressed by the Township.
4.4.2. Runoff.
This type of flooding occurs as a result of a rainfall event
whereby the capacity of existing stormwater
infrastructure facilities is exceeded, i.e. a stream
overflows its banks; a culvert backs up; or an inlet is
clogged with debris or accumulated materials.
Route 35 at Whale Creek and at Long Neck Creek. The
primary cause of flooding at these locations is runoff down
the stream bed exceeding the culverts' capacity. These
floodings have occurred regardless of high tide events.
This problem is being addressed by NJDOT, who has a
project under final design with anticipated construction in
2007 whereby the culverts will both be increased in size
to permit flow passage and the roadway elevation will be
raised by approximately three (3) feet.
Woodman Place off Warren Drive south of Lloyd Road
experiences roadway flooding due to deficient pipe size to
carry contributory flows. The Municipality has this project
scheduled as a capital drainage project anticipated in
approximately 2008.
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:572
Nutmeg/Normandy proximate to the NJ Transit Railway
Line. This area floods due to a blocked culvert. Currently,
NJ Transit is applying for permits to reconstruct its
mainline culvert crossing and permit the secondary culvert
to be cleared. Said project is scheduled for Fall 2006.
Ravine Drive (Matawan Borough). During severe rainfall
events, Lake Lefferts overflows its spillway causing
flooding of Ravine Drive causing road closings. Several
plans have been formulated to address spillway
reconstruction by the Borough but they lack funding for
implementation. The Township's concern is interrupted
access to other portions of its community for emergency
response.
4.5. Groundwater Recharge.
Groundwater recharge is a desirable element of an overall
stormwater management plan in that recharge of the
groundwater maintains subsurface flows, recharges potable
water aquifers, and supports surface stream flows during base
summer months.
The Township of Aberdeen's groundwater recharge areas are
indicated on Figure 7. However, a substantial portion of said
recharge areas have already been covered with developments,
both residential and commercial, thus adversely impacting
groundwater recharge rates.
The Municipality has every intent to pursue, through the
development application review process and, when
appropriate and practical, through mitigation projects,
increasing groundwater recharge.
4.6. Wellhead Protection.
Wellhead protection is required to protect drinking water
supply wells from contamination; the wellhead protection
areas are illustrated in Figure 8.
Wellhead protection is the primary responsibility of the potable
water well owner starting with construction in accordance with
NJDEP regulations, control (ownership) of lands immediately
surrounding the well itself and controlling the pollutant
sources, which can be done by, but not limited to, the following:
minimizing hazardous substance use, pollution source
removal, education, and training of operations personnel.
However, the Municipality in which the wellhead protection
area is located also has an obligation to provide for and assist
in the development of wellhead protection.
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:573
Potable wells located in Aberdeen are those owned and
operated by New Jersey American Water Company. The
Township's prior potable water wells, located in the Cliffwood
section, were abandoned and sealed in accordance with the
requirements of the NJDEP. The Borough of Matawan has its
well field located off of Middlesex Road south of Ravine Drive.
The Borough of Keyport has its wellhead off of Route 35
proximate to Perry Street.
The Township will pursue wellhead protection through its
development review process with a view towards eliminating
the potential for pollution and/or contamination associated
with stormwater facilities. Further, the Municipality will
pursue education of the general public through brochures and
newsletters and will perform annual training of its personnel
in the observation of potential pollution sources and the
elimination of same.
4.7. Proactive Stormwater Efforts.
Even prior to the issuance by NJDEP of the NJPDES Tier
A Municipal Stormwater General Permit, the Township of
Aberdeen has actively pursued the improvement of stormwater
quality throughout the Municipality. Some examples include:
Revised its Land Development Ordinances to provide for:
Buffers of 100' from top of bank of water courses for all
residential uses.
Tree save/restore provision to replace all trees removed
during site clearance or pay for differential into a tree
replacement fund.
Redefine and clarify its "critical areas" including steep (>15%)
slopes.
Update its Natural Resources Inventory (2002)
Expand its "CR" Conservation/Recreation Zoning District
Update its Open Space and Recreation Plan 2004/Jan '05
Acquire 24 acres of land along Matawan Creek as open space
in lieu of 48 housing units
Acquire 31 acres of land proximate to Long Neck Creek as
open space in lieu of 34 housing units
Revise its development application review process to
anticipate compliance with yet to be adopted stormwater
regulations for recharge, TSS removal and flow reduction in
both development and redevelopment projects
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:574
Change its roadway reconstruction projects standards to
incorporate Campbell Foundry "J" Inlet, Eco-castings with
bicycle grates for debris and trash control
Initiate labeling of inlet heads (approximately 100 units)
contributory to Gravelly Brook with decals
Distribute educational handouts to its residents on Aberdeen
Day relative to stormwater pollution prevention
Adopt required ordinances for: litter; pet waste control;
wildlife feeding; proper waste disposal; illicit connection
elimination; and stormwater control
Initiate annual Township personnel stormwater pollution
prevention training
Maintain and upgrade existing street sweeping program to
control litter and debris from entering storm sewers
Initiate education of residents through calendar, newsletter
and website as to recycling, yard waste, stormwater pollution
control, etc.
5. Stormwater Design and Performance Standards.
On September 6, 2005, the Township passed Ordinance 18-2005,
adopting the design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures as presented in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 to minimize
the adverse impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and
water quantity and loss of groundwater recharge in receiving water
bodies. The design and performance standards include the
language for maintenance of stormwater management measures
consistent with the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.8 Maintenance Requirements, and language for safety
standards consistent with N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Safety Standards for
Stormwater Management Basins. The ordinance has been
submitted to the County for review and approval within 24 months
of the effective date of the NJPDES Stormwater permit.
During construction, Township inspectors will observe the
construction of approved projects to ensure that the stormwater
management measures are constructed and function as designed.
If said measures are not taken to conform with these design
standards, work will be stopped, a summons will be issued, fines
will be implemented, and construction will be resumed and
completed correctly. Code Enforcement will continue to inspect the
stormwater facilities after construction to ensure that maintenance
is performed and that facilities remain operational and structurally
sound. Fees may be assessed against the developer's or responsible
party's performance or maintenance guarantees.
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:575
6. Plan Consistency.
The Township is not within a Regional Stormwater Management
Planning Area and no TMDLs have been developed for waters
within the Township; therefore this plan does not need to be
consistent with any regional stormwater management plans
(RSWMPs) nor any TMDLs. If any RSWMPs or TMDLs are
developed in the future, this Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan will be updated to be consistent therewith.
The Municipal Stormwater Management Plan is consistent with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
The municipality will utilize the most current update of the RSIS
in the stormwater management review of residential areas. This
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan will be updated to be
consistent with any future updates to the RSIS.
The Township's Stormwater Management Ordinance requires all
major (greater than one acre disturbed lands or greater than one
quarter acre of new impervious cover created) development plans
to comply with the stormwater management regulations, including
groundwater recharge. These regulations will also apply, to the
greatest extent possible, to redevelopment projects as well. During
construction, Township inspectors will observe on-site soil erosion
and sediment control measures and report any inconsistencies to
the Freehold Soil Conservation District.
7. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.29
The Township is currently reviewing the master plan and existing
ordinances and has provided a list of some of the sections in the
Township land use and zoning ordinance that are to be modified
to incorporate nonstructural stormwater management strategies as
follows:
Section 4-4: Removal of grass, weeds, brush and other debris.
Sections 4-14.7a and 4-14.8: Removal of grass, bushes, branches,
etc. Overhanging or obstructing sidewalks, streets, etc. and
removal of same.
Section 4-15: Litter.
Section 7-2: Harboring, keeping and maintaining of certain
animals: Licensing.
Section 12-10.14: Protection of watercourses.
Section 12-10.17: Surface restoration.
29.Editor's Note: The references to section numbers refer to sections of the 1973 Code.
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:576
Sections 15-8.3 and 15-8.8: Improvements and design standards:
curbs, gutters, catch basins and drainage system.
In addition to the above ordinances being revised to reference the
requirements of the statutes, the following additional ordinances
have been adopted for their compliance with the regulations:
Pet Waste (control and disposal)
Improper Disposal of Waste
Wildlife Ordinance (non-feeding)
Illicit Connection Ordinance (elimination of illicit connections or
pollutant sources to stormwater facilities)
Once the ordinance texts are completed, they will be submitted to
the County review agency for review and approval. A copy will be
sent to the DEP at the time of submission.
The Township will evaluate all of the different zoning districts and
standards within each district with regard to impervious cover to
determine whether a reduction in impervious cover is appropriate.
Figure 9 shows existing impervious surface percentage coverages.
The Township will also evaluate a maximum percent of disturbance
for each zone for areas identified as natural features. Also, if a
developer is given a variance to exceed the maximum allowable
percent of impervious cover, the developer must mitigate the
impact of the additional impervious surfaces including water
quality, flooding and groundwater recharge.
8. Mitigation Plans.
This mitigation plan is provided for a proposed development
(residential, commercial or industrial) that is granted a variance
or exemption from the stormwater management design and
performance standards. Such variance or exemption include
projects reviewed by the Township under MLUL with waiver from
Numerical Standards and projects performed by the Township
under NJPDES Permit not in full compliance with Numerical
Standards. Note that said variances or exemptions can only be
a last resort after all other options, both non-structural and
structural BMPs, have been explored and found to be unfeasible.
Presented is a hierarchy of options, which may be eliminated,
updated or revised by the Township when deemed necessary. The
plan will be periodically updated with a list of additional
stormwater capital projects as outfall pipe investigations continue
and areas of outlet erosion are discerned and the necessity for bank
and channel stabilization of streams is determined.
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.25
1:577
The Township Engineer should be consulted to determine
availability of mitigation projects. All mitigation projects are
subject to approval of the Township Engineer and Governing Body.
Mitigation Project Criteria.
A mitigation project proposed by an applicant to mitigate for
incomplete compliance with design and performance standard
must include sensitive receptor analysis, including the impacts to
stormwater quantity and stormwater quality. These impacts will
be incorporated into the Mitigation Project. The Mitigation Project
must be close to the original project, have legal authorization
from the property owner/s and have no adverse impacts on other
properties.
Submission requirements include impacts from noncompliance,
narrative regarding waiver, design details, responsible party,
maintenance, permits, and construction.
The mitigation project must be implemented within the same
drainage area as the proposed development. If a suitable site
cannot be located in the same drainage area as the proposed
development, the mitigation project may provide mitigation that is
not equivalent to the impacts for which the variance or exemption
is sought, but that addresses the same issue. The project must
provide additional groundwater recharge benefits, or protection
from stormwater runoff quality and quantity from previously
developed property, which does not currently meet the design and
performance standards as outlined in the Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan. The developer must ensure the long- term
maintenance of the project, including the maintenance
requirements under Chapters 8 and 9 of the NJDEP Stormwater
BMP Manual.
Listed below are potential projects to compensate for the deficit
from the performance standards resulting from the proposed
project. More detailed information on the projects can be obtained
from the Township Engineer. The Township maintains the right
to update the projects listed below and is not held accountable
for time frames or to construct any of the mitigation projects or
potential mitigation projects.
Water Quality
Rehabilitation of Mohingson Creek, including redefining stream
channel and floodplains between Nutmeg Road and NJ Transit
R.O.W.
Rehabilitation of Mohingson Creek tributary behind Duda Lane,
including redefining stream channel and floodplains.
Water Quantity
§ 25-5.25 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.25
1:578
§ 25-5.26. Improper Disposal of Waste. [Ord. No. 25-2005 §§ I—VII
[25-5.25]]
Rehabilitation of Gravelly Brook, including redefining stream
channel and floodplains between Route 34 and Church Street.
Redesign and reconstruct existing stormwater culvert on Woodman
Place proximate to Warren Drive.
Rehabilitation of unnamed tributary off of Aberdeen Road
proximate to Union Avenue, including redefining stream channel
and floodplains.
The listed mitigation projects are generalized environmental
enhancement projects that provide groundwater recharge, control
flooding or control nonpoint source pollution. The Township
Engineer should be contacted for availability, description and any
other necessary information pertaining to the projects listed above
and those not listed.
Mitigation projects are subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer and Governing Body. Each project is approved upon an
individual basis considering the extent of the variance, waiver or
exception granted. Mitigation projects may require cooperation
with outside agencies such as the Freehold Soil Conservation
Districts, Mosquito Commission, Army Corp of Engineers, etc.
The Municipality may allow a developer to provide funding or
partial funding to the Municipality for an environmental
enhancement project that has been identified in a Municipal
Stormwater Management Plan, or towards the development of a
Regional Stormwater Management Plan. Funding quantities are
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer and Governing
Body and will include costs or partial costs, including those
associated with purchasing a property or easement for mitigation,
and those associated with the long-term maintenance requirements
of the mitigation measure.
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
difference meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Aberdeen
Township or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
§ 25-5.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.26
1:579
and conveying stormwater or is owned or operated by a private person
or entity that is contributory to the storm sewer system of the
Township.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
b. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by Aberdeen Township is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or
disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to
cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system is also prohibited.
c. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
2. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters);
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water);
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff);
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows;
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges;
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water;
8. Flows from fire fighting activities;
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
§ 25-5.26 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.26
1:580
§ 25-5.27. Illicit Connection. [Ord. No. 24-2005 §§ 1—6 [25-5.26]]
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
d. Enforcement and Penalties. This subsection shall be enforced by the
Aberdeen Police Department and Code Enforcement official of
Aberdeen Township. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a minimum fine of one
hundred ($100) dollars per day with a maximum fine not to exceed one
thousand ($1,000) dollars per day.
e. Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this subsection is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this subsection to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for
any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this
subsection.
f. Effective Date. This subsection shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as required by law.
a. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
difference meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the same
as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — shall mean waste and wastewater from humans
or household operations, including nonresidential washing of vehicles.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated
by Aberdeen Township, unless that discharge is authorized under a
NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General
Permit (NJDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections
may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
§ 25-5.26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5.27
1:581
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — shall mean non-domestic waste, including, but
not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or
(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Aberdeen
Township or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater or is owned or operated by a private person
or entity that is contributory to the storm sewer system of the
Township.
NJPDES PERMIT — shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other
than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product,
finished product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater
includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than
non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by Aberdeen Township, any domestic
sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other
industrial waste (other than stormwater).
c. Enforcement and Penalties. This subsection shall be enforced by the
Aberdeen Police Department and code Enforcement Official. Any
person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
subsection shall be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred ($100)
§ 25-5.27 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-5.27
1:582
§ 25-6. EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
§ 25-6.1. Area Requirements.
Whenever the owner of a lot existing at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance has dedicated or conveyed land to the Township in order to
meet the minimum street width requirements of the Land Development
Chapter or to implement the Official Map or Master Plan of the Township,
the Construction Official shall issue construction and occupancy permits for
the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered substandard in area only
because of such dedication and where the owner has no other available
adjacent lands to provide the minimum requirements.
§ 25-6.2. Cluster Single-Family Residential Development.
dollars per day with a maximum fine not to exceed one thousand
($1,000) dollars per day.
d. Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this subsection is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this subsection to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for
any cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this chapter.
e. Effective Date. This subsection shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
a. The purpose of this section is to provide a method of developing singlefamily
detached dwellings which will preserve desirable open spaces,
conservation areas, flood plains, school sites, recreation and park areas
and lands for other public purposes by permitting the reduction of lot
sizes and certain other regulations hereinafter stated without
increasing the number of lots in the total area to be developed.
b. All Cluster Single-Family Residential Developments shall meet the
following requirements:
1. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning
public water and sanitary sewer systems.
2. The minimum size of a tract of land proposed for development
under the cluster development provisions of this chapter shall be
twenty (20) acres.
3. Total lots permitted shall be calculated by subtracting fifteen (15%)
percent of the site area as an allowance for streets and dividing the
remaining land area by twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
which is the minimum area for non-clustered lots with functioning
public water and sewerage.
4. Allowable area and yard requirements for lots developed as part of
a Cluster Single-Family Residential Development:
§ 25-5.27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.2
1:583
Principal Building
Minimum
Lot area 10,000 sq. ft.
Lot frontage 80 ft.
Lot width 80 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft.
Side yard (each) 15 ft.
Front yard 30 ft.
Rear yard 30 ft.
Accessory Building
Minimum
Distance to side line 10 ft.
Distance to rear line 10 ft.
Distance to other building 10 ft.
Maximum
Building coverage of principal
building
20%
Building coverage of accessory
building(s)
5%
5. All land area not included in lots and not utilized for street rightsof-
way shall be delineated on the plat submitted to the Board and
may be offered to the Township or held in common ownership. (See
subsection 25-6.4 hereinbelow.) A portion of this land area, such
portion equivalent to a minimum of twenty (20%) percent of the
total tract of land proposed for development, shall be specifically
set aside for recreation or park areas, school sites or other public
purposes and shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements stipulated in subsection 25-6.2b6 below. All lands not
offered to and accepted by the Township and not held in common
ownership shall be used to enlarge the sizes of the lots. In any case,
all streets within the development shall be dedicated to the
Township.
6. At least twenty (20%) percent of the total tract of land proposed for
development shall be specifically set aside for recreation or park
areas, school sites or other public or common ownership purposes
and shall be designed as follows:
(a) The minimum contiguous acreage of each parcel shall be two
(2) acres.
(b) Lands set aside for recreational purposes whether or not they
will be offered to the Township shall be improved by the
developer, including equipment, walkways and landscaping, to
§ 25-6.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.2
1:584
§ 25-6.3. Fee Simple Townhouse Development.
standards which would qualify the lands for acceptance by the
Township.
(c) All land areas shall be optimally related to the overall plan and
design of the development and improved to best suit the
purpose(s) for which it is intended.
7. The lands offered to the Township shall be subject to review by the
Planning Board which in its review and evaluation of the suitability
of such land shall be guided by the Master Plan of the Township, by
the ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan and
by the accessibility and potential utility of such lands. The Planning
Board may request an opinion from other public agencies or
individuals as to the advisability of the Township's accepting any
lands to be offered to the Township.
8. Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the Township shall
be conveyed to the Township by deed at the time final plan approval
is granted by the Township. The deed shall contain such
restrictions as may reasonably be required by the Board to
effectuate the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the use of
such areas. Should the subdivision consist of a number of
development stages, the Board may require that acreage
proportionate in size to the stage being considered for final
approval be donated to the Township simultaneously with the
granting of final subdivision approval for that particular stage, even
though these lands may be located in a different section of the
overall development.
9. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building or part
thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities and water and
sewer facilities servicing the said structure are properly completed
and functioning. In lieu of landscaping requirements only, an
adequate performance bond properly guaranteeing completion
may be accepted.
a. Any applicant desiring to subdivide property for townhouse residential
construction in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may
apply to the Board for a major subdivision under the following
improvement requirements. The Board shall examine each request to
determine whether it meets the following minimum standards and
specifications. Only those applicants having already received site plan
approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or those
applicants applying for simultaneous approval, may apply for
subdivision for fee simple townhouse development.
b. An association shall be established for the purpose of owning and
maintaining common lands and facilities, including conservation, open
space, flood plain, recreation and park areas, streets, sidewalks and
§ 25-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.3
1:585
§ 25-6.4. Common Ownership.
other lands and facilities not dedicated to the Township according to
the provisions of subsection 25-6.4 hereinbelow.
c. All construction permits shall be issued for entire buildings of
townhouse dwelling units as such buildings are indicated on the
approved site plan, except that construction permits may be issued for
the reconstruction or renovation of existing dwelling units provided
such construction is structurally and architecturally compatible with
the adjacent existing dwelling unit(s).
d. Occupancy permits will be issued only when the exterior of the entire
townhouse structure is complete, the installation of any curb, all
utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities,
all necessary storm drainage to insure proper drainage of the lot and
surrounding land, rough grading of lots, base course for the driveway
and base course for the streets are installed to serve the lot and
townhouse dwelling units for which the permit is requested. Streets, if
installed prior to final approval, shall not be paved until all heavy
construction is completed; shade trees shall not be planted until all
grading and earth moving is completed; seeding of grass areas shall be
the last operation. The issuance of Certificates of Occupancy will follow
the procedures outlined in Section 25-9 of this chapter.
a. In any apartment, townhouse or cluster single-family residential
development, an association may be established for the purpose of
owning and maintaining common lands and facilities including
conservation, open space, flood plain, recreation and park areas and
other lands which would otherwise be dedicated to the Township,
according to the following provisions:
1. Membership in any created association by all property owners shall
be mandatory. Such required membership in any created
association and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in
writing between the association and the individual in the form of a
covenant with each member agreeing to his liability for his pro rata
share of the association's costs and providing that the Township
shall be a party beneficiary to such covenant entitled to enforce its
provisions.
2. Executed deeds shall be tendered to the Township simultaneously
with the granting of site plan or final subdivision approval, stating
that the prescribed use(s) of the lands in the common ownership
shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for possible future
development.
3. The association shall be responsible for liability insurance, local
taxes, maintenance of land and any facilities that may be erected
on any land deeded to the association and shall hold the Township
harmless from any liability.
§ 25-6.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.4
1:586
4. The assessment levied by the association shall become a lien on the
private properties in the development. The duly created association
shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs,
and any deeded lands may be sold, donated or in any other way
conveyed to the Township for public purposes only.
5. The association initially created by the developer shall clearly
describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any dwelling
unit owner and tenant in the development, along with the covenant
and model deeds and the Articles of Incorporation of the
association prior to the granting of approval by the Township. The
bylaws shall not be amended to contravene any Township
ordinance.
6. Part of the development proposals submitted to and approved by
the Township shall be provisions to insure that control of the
association will be transferred to the individual dwelling unit
owners in the development based on a percentage of the dwelling
units sold and/or occupied, together with assurances in the bylaws
that the association shall have the maintenance responsibilities for
all lands to which they hold title and other areas of the
development as required by the Board at the time of site plan
approval and as stipulated in the bylaws of the association.
7. The association shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any
open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an association
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space for
the benefit of such development, and thereafter such association
shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without
first offering to dedicate the same to the municipality wherein the
land is located.
8. In the event that such association shall fail to maintain the open
space in reasonable order and condition, the Construction Official
may serve written notice upon such association or upon the owners
of the development setting forth the manner in which the
association has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be cured within thirty-five (35) days
thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon
which shall be held within fifteen (15) days of the notice. At such
hearing, the designated Construction Official may modify the terms
of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time not to exceed sixty-five (65) days within which
they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the modification thereof shall not be cured within said
thirty-five (35) days or any permitted extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the open space and maintain the
same for a period of one (1) year may enter upon and maintain such
land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any
rights to use the open space except when the same is voluntarily
§ 25-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.4
1:587
§ 25-6.5. Height Limits.
No building shall exceed the height limits as prescribed in Section 25-4.
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment required
to operate and maintain the building; skylights; spires; cupolas; flagpoles,
chimneys; antennas and radio towers; or similar structures may be erected
on the building above the height limits prescribed by this chapter, but in no
case may the combined height of the structure and facility be more than one
hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the maximum height permitted for
the use in the district.
§ 25-6.6. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 22-1990; Ord. No. 18-1996;
Ord. No. 22-1998, § 6]
dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration of
said year, the Construction Official shall, upon his initiative or
upon the request of the association theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon fifteen
(15) days written notice to such association and to the owners of
the development, to be held by the Construction Official at which
hearing such association and the owners of the development shall
show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not,
at the election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year,
and subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Construction Official shall constitute
a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
9. The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
pro rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed
value at the time of imposition of the lien, and shall become a lien
and tax on said properties and be added to and be a part of the
taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected
with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
b. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building or part
thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities and water and
sewer facilities servicing the said structure are properly completed and
functioning.
a. Application Procedures. Before a construction permit or Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued for a conditional use as permitted by this
chapter under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., application shall be made to
the Planning Board for site plan review.
The Planning Board shall approve or deny conditional uses
simultaneously with site plan or subdivision review.
§ 25-6.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.6
1:588
The ninety-five (95) day time period for action by the Planning Board
on conditional uses shall apply to such site plan review. Public notice of
the hearing shall be required as stipulated in subsection 25-7.6e of this
chapter.
In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of proof
shall be on the applicant. The Board shall give due consideration to
all reasonable elements which could affect the public health, welfare,
safety, comfort and convenience such as, but not limited to, the
proposed use(s), the character of the area, vehicular travel patterns and
access, pedestrian ways, landscaping, lighting, signs, drainage, sewage
treatment, potable water supply, utilities and building and structure
location(s) and orientation(s). Conditional uses must meet the
requirements listed below in addition to those outlined elsewhere.
b. Car Washes.
1. All activities must be conducted within a totally enclosed building.
2. Drainage from inside the building(s) shall feed into a sanitary
sewer system. No dry well or septic tank will be permitted in
connection with this use.
3. This use shall not include a self-service or coin-operated car wash
area in any form.
c. Hotels and Motels.
1. Any hotel or motel that may be constructed must be on a lot with a
minimum of three (3) acres and must contain a minimum of twenty
(20) units of accommodation exclusive of a permanent on-site
superintendent's living quarters. The minimum number of units of
accommodation which may be constructed in any single building
shall be ten (10).
2. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of
two hundred fifty (250) square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of
seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet in height.
3. Each unit of accommodation shall include a minimum of two (2)
rooms, a bedroom and a separate bathroom which affords privacy
to a person within said room and which is equipped with a toilet, a
wash basin and a bathtub or shower, all properly connected to a
water and sewer system.
4. All of the area, yard, building coverage and height requirements of
the respective zone and other applicable requirements of this
chapter must be met.
d. Public Utility Uses.
1. For purposes of this chapter, the term "public utility uses" shall
include such uses as telephone, dial equipment centers, power
§ 25-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.6
1:589
substations, CATV towers and other public utility services, but shall
not include service or storage yards or similar uses.
2. The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably
necessary for the satisfactory provision of service by the utility to
the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be
located.
3. The design of any structure built in connection with such facilities
must conform to the general character of the area and not
adversely affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights
in the zone in which it is located.
4. Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may
be required. Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities
such as electrical power substations, shall be built in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the New Jersey Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and the National Electrical Safety Code in
effect at the time of construction.
5. Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, shall be
provided and be periodically maintained.
6. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
7. All of the area, yard, building coverage and height requirements of
the respective zone must be met.
e. Auto Service Stations.
1. No service stations shall be located within five hundred (500) feet
of any fire house, school, playground, church, hospital, public
building or institutions nor shall any service station be located
within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another service
station. These distances shall be measured on a straight and
horizontal plane from the outer boundaries of the property lines.
2. All appliances, pits, storage areas and trash facilities, other than
gasoline filling pumps or air pumps, shall be within an enclosed
building. Gasoline filling pumps and air pumps shall be permitted
within the required front yard space of service stations but shall be
no closer than fifty (50) feet to any future street line and twenty
(20) feet from any property line. All lubrication, repair or similar
activities shall be performed in a fully enclosed building, and no
dismantled parts shall be displayed outside of an enclosed building.
3. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof shall be permitted on the
premises of any service station. It shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of violation of this chapter if more than three (3) motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one (1) time upon
any premises and not within a closed and roofed building, except,
however, that a number not exceeding six (6) motor vehicles may
§ 25-6.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.6
1:590
be located at any one (1) time outside a closed or roofed building
for a period of time not to exceed two (2) days, providing that the
owners of said motor vehicles are awaiting their repair.
4. Landscaping shall be provided in the front yard area equal to at
least twenty-five (25%) percent of the front yard area, and such
landscaping shall be reasonably distributed throughout the entire
front yard area.
5. The exterior display and parking of motor vehicles, trailers, boats
or other similar equipment for sale or rental purposes shall not be
permitted as part of a service station.
6. No parking shall be permitted on unpaved areas.
7. Auto service stations shall be permitted the following signs:
(a) One (1) free-standing sign advertising the name of the station
or garage and the principal products sold on the premises,
including any special company or brand name, insignia or
emblem, provided that each such sign shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet in area on a side and shall be set back twenty (20)
feet from street lines and fifty (50) feet from side lot lines and
provided further that the sign shall be not less than ten (10),
nor more than twenty (20), feet above the ground.
(b) One (1) temporary sign located inside the property line and
specifically advertising special seasonal servicing of
automobiles, providing that said sign does not exceed seven (7)
square feet in area.
(c) Directional signs or lettering displayed over individual
entrance doors or bays and consisting only of the words
"washing," "lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic on duty" or
other words closely similar in import, provided that there shall
not be more than one (1) such sign over each entrance or bay.
(d) Customary lettering or other insignia which are a structural
part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of a
gasoline sold, lead warning sign, a price indicator and any
other sign required by law.
f. Offices.
1. Buildings for business and professional offices may be integrated
into the overall plan for the site. Consideration shall be given to the
compatibility of the design with the residential structures, safe
integration of the traffic circulation system, and harmonious and
complementary landscaping.
2. Office uses may not occupy the same building as residential uses.
§ 25-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.6
1:591
3. Office buildings must be located so as to minimize traffic impact on
the residential portions of the site.
4. Minimum tract size shall be eighty thousand (80,000) square feet.
5. Buildings may cover no more than twenty (20%) percent of the site.
6. There shall be no external evidence of business use except for
signage. (See subsection 25-5.18a and b2.)
7. Parking requirements. (See subsection 25-5.11.)
8. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and two and
one-half (2.5) stories except as allowed in subsection 25-6.5.
g. Local Retail Sales of Goods and Services.
1. The purpose of permitting local retail sales of goods and services in
the "RA-PRD" District as conditional uses is to provide for the
opportunity for neighborhood retail activities proximate to a
planned residential development which is developed at a higher
density than other permitted residential developments.
2. The lot size devoted to the local retail sales of goods and services
shall be between twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and twentyfive
thousand (25,000) square feet in area, provided that all area,
yard and coverage requirements specified in subsection 25-4.5e for
uses in the "NC" District are met.
3. Retail sales of goods and services shall be located on a lot which
has vehicular access frontage on a road under the jurisdiction of
Monmouth County.
4. The lands to be utilized for retail sales of goods and services shall
be contiguous to a planned residential development (PRD) and the
total acreage of lands devoted to such uses shall not exceed one
(1%) percent of the land area of the planned residential
development.
5. Retail uses shall be suitably screened from adjacent residential
uses. If provisions for such screening exist or have been approved
off-site in such a manner as to satisfactorily screen the
nonresidential uses from the residential uses, then, upon review
and approval by the Planning Board, this condition may be deemed
to have been met.
6. All other requirements specified in subsections 25-4.5c, 25-4.5d,
25-4.5f, and 25-4.5g for uses in the "NC" District also shall be met.
h. Amusement Arcades.
1. Amusement arcades shall be permitted only within the "HC"
Highway Commercial, the "RC" Regional Commercial or the "LI"
§ 25-6.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.6
1:592
Light Industrial zoning districts and only on tracts of land which
directly abut New Jersey State Highway 35.
2. An amusement arcade may be the sole use within a building or may
be one (1) of a number of uses within a building (i.e., a "Shopping
Center", "Strip Mall", etc.), provided only one (1) amusement
arcade shall be located within any building.
3. An amusement arcade shall be oriented towards families and
particularly to children and young adolescents.
4. No amusement arcade shall be open for business earlier than 10:00
a.m. nor close later than 11:00 p.m.
5. An amusement arcade may sell food and drinks except that no
alcoholic beverages of any kind may be sold or consumed on the
premises.
6. All activities of an amusement arcade shall occur indoors.
7. All of the requirements specified for the "Retail Sales of Goods and
Services" within the "HC" zoning district (i.e., subsections
25-4.6a—g), the "RC" Zoning District (i.e., subsections 25-4.7a—g)
or the "LI" Zoning District (i.e., subsections 25-4.11a—g) shall be
applicable, although the Planning Board shall have the right to
grant variances from any of these requirements without
necessitating the applicant to proceed to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for any variance approval.
8. An amusement arcade shall only have "amusement games"
authorized under the provisions of the "Amusement Games
Licensing Law", N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq., provided a license for the
"amusement games" has been obtained from Aberdeen Township in
accordance with the regulations promulgated by the New Jersey
State Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
i. Storage Yards for Towed Inoperable Vehicles.
1. The operator of the storage yard shall be in possession of a towing
contract with the Township of Aberdeen.
2. A zoning permit for the use of the lot as a storage yard for towed
inoperable vehicles shall be required, or the appointment approval
from the Township with jurisdiction over the lot.
3. The storage yard shall only used for the storage of inoperable
vehicles and tow trucks of the towing contract operator.
4. Parking of inoperable vehicles outside the required fence shall not
be permitted.
5. There shall be no piling of vehicles.
§ 25-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.6
1:593
§ 25-6.7. Affordable Housing Provisions. [Ord. No. 24-1990; Ord.
No. 12-2010; amended 6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
6. The size of the storage yard area which is required to be enclosed
by a fence shall be no less than four thousand (4,000) square feet
and no greater than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area.
7. The storage yard shall be surrounded by a fence not less than six
(6) feet in height and not greater than eight (8) feet in height. The
fence shall be a stockade wood fence where the fence fronts on, or
is visible from, a street or residential zoning district or use, with the
finished side of the fence facing outward so that the supporting
members of the fence are internal to the storage yard. (See Section
508 for additional standards.)
8. At least the first twenty-five (25) feet adjacent to a street line or lot
line common with a residential zoning district or use and the first
ten (10) feet adjacent to any lot line shall be a landscaped buffer
area with adequate evergreen shrubbery to screen the storage yard
from view. The fence shall be placed behind the buffer area. (See
subsection 25-5.5 for additional standards.)
9. The surface of the storage yard may be of towing gravel or earth.
The area outside the fenced storage yard shall be suitably
landscaped. The lot shall be adequately drained and shall not
adversely affect any adjoining property. (See subsection 25-5.6 for
additional standards.)
10. When access is needed to the storage yard during hours of
darkness, lighting shall be required in the storage yard. (See
subsection 25-5.9 for additional standards.)
11. One (1) sign of twelve (12) square feet shall be permitted in
addition to other permitted signs, provided the sign displays the
name of the towing service only and that it is located as required
for any other sign in the applicable zoning district. (See subsection
25-5.18 for additional standards.)
12. All of the height, building setbacks and general requirements of the
respective zoning districts and other applicable requirements of
this chapter must be met.
a. Purpose and Applicability.
1. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a realistic
opportunity for the construction of Aberdeen Township's
constitutional obligation to provide for its fair share of affordable
housing for households with low- and moderate-incomes, as
directed by the Superior Court and is consistent with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, et seq. and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
2. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply:
§ 25-6.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:594
(a) To all affordable housing developments and affordable housing
units that currently exist within Aberdeen Township;
(b) To all affordable housing developments and affordable housing
units that are proposed to be created pursuant to Aberdeen
Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan;
(c) To all other affordable housing developments and housing units
that are created pursuant to actions by Aberdeen Township, its
Planning Board, or its Zoning Board of Adjustment, including
projects that may be funded with Low Income Housing Tax
Credit financing, which shall comply with the income and
bedroom distribution requirements of this section.
b. Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have
the following meanings:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.30
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township
to administer affordable units in accordance with this section, N.J.A.C.
5:93,31 and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing
development are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means
of a low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4,32 and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as
may be amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit,
that the rent for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.12, as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project, or a 100% affordable housing development.
30.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
31.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
32.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:595
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by COAH, its successor entity, or the
Court and/or funded through an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein
the unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of
the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older;
or 3) the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated
by the DCA; residential health care facilities as regulated by the New
Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartmentstyle
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.) or its successor
entity.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:596
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an
option to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in Holmdel Builder's Association
v. Holmdel Township, 121 NJ 550 (1990).
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the
municipality in which the property is situated.
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety, and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
limited to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential use, and the creation of new affordable units
through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median income
per household by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:597
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
regional median income per household by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential
development that is located in buildings that contain five or more
dwelling units, including, but not limited to, dwelling units that are
located one over another, garden apartments, townhouse
developments, multistory apartment or condominium buildings, and
mixed-use developments containing a combination of nonresidential
and residential uses.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at
80% of the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income
limits published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the property owner, as well as an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by
DCA for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, "rent" does
not include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:598
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median
income per household by household size for the applicable housing
region.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a
rehabilitation program.
c. Mandatory Requirement for Affordable Housing in Multifamily
Residential Developments.
1. If the Township permits the construction of multifamily or singlefamily
attached residential development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,33 at a gross
residential density of six or more units per acre, the Township shall
require that an appropriate percentage of the residential units be
set aside for very-low-, low-, and moderate-income households. For
inclusionary projects in which the low and moderate units are to be
offered for sale, the appropriate set-aside percentage is 20%; for
projects in which the low and moderate-income units are to be
offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside percentage is 15%.
(a) This requirement shall apply to any multifamily or single-family
attached residential development, including the residential
portion of a mixed-use project, which consists of five or more
new residential units, whether permitted by a zoning
amendment, a variance granted by the Township's Planning or
Zoning Board, or adoption of a Redevelopment Plan or
amended Redevelopment Plan in areas in need of
redevelopment or rehabilitation.
(b) In any such development for which the Township's land use
ordinances or an adopted Redevelopment Plan already
permitted residential development as of February 16, 2017,
this requirement shall only apply if the Township permits an
increase in approvable and developable gross residential
density as of the effective date of this Agreement.
2. When calculating the set-aside requirement for a particular site, if
the imposition of the required set-aside requirement results in a
fractional unit, the requirement shall be rounded up to the next
whole number. For example, in the case of a fifteen-unit multifamily
residential development, a total of three affordable units would be
required (i.e., 15 units x 15% set-aside requirement = 2.25
33.Editor’s Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:599
affordable units required, which is rounded up to three affordable
units required).
3. Nothing in this section precludes the Township from imposing an
affordable housing set-aside requirement on a development that is
not required to have an affordable housing set-aside pursuant to
this section, when such imposition is consistent with N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311(h) and other applicable law.
4. This affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not create any
entitlement to a special dispensation or approval for a property
owner or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption
of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan.
5. This affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not apply to
any sites or specific zones identified in the Township's Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan or the settlement agreement between
the Township and Fair Share Housing Center, Inc., which was
signed and dated February 16, 2017. For such sites, density and
set-aside standards shall be governed by the specific standards set
forth therein.
6. This affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not apply to
development containing four or less dwelling units.
7. All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential
developments shall be conditioned upon compliance with the
provisions of this section.
8. Where a developer demolishes existing dwelling units and builds
new dwelling units on the same site, the provisions of this section
shall apply only if the net number of new dwelling units is five or
more units.
d. Phasing of Certificates of Occupancy. Certificates of occupancy for
developments that include affordable housing units shall be subject to
the following additional provisions:
1. Phasing Schedule for Inclusionary Development. Affordable
housing units shall be built, occupied, and receive certificates of
occupancy in accordance with the following schedule:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:600
2. No initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income housing sales
unit shall be permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and no certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of
a low- or moderate-income housing sales unit shall be issued unless
there is a written determination by the administrative agent that
the unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien
as required by UHAC.
3. A certificate of reoccupancy for any occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income housing sales unit resulting from a resale shall be
required, and the Township shall not issue such certificate unless
there is a written determination by the administrative agent that
the unit is to be controlled by the deed restriction and mortgage
lien required by UHAC.
4. The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required where there is
a written determination by the administrative agent that controls
are allowed to expire or that the repayment option is being
exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.3.34
e. Administration.
1. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(a) Aberdeen Township shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as the Municipal Housing Liaison,
responsible for administering the affordable housing program,
including affordability controls, the Affirmative Marketing
Plan, monitoring and reporting, and, where applicable,
supervising any contracted administrative agent. Aberdeen
Township shall adopt a resolution appointing a Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or parttime
municipal employee. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
be approved by COAH, its successor entity, or the Court, and
shall be duly qualified through a training program sponsored
by the Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey before
assuming the duties of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(b) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for Aberdeen Township, including the following
responsibilities, which may not be contracted out to the
administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Aberdeen Township's primary point of contact
for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing
providers, administrative agents, and interested
households;
34.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:92 is reserved.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:601
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Aberdeen
Township's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting, and posting all of the
required annual monitoring reports in accordance with all
applicable statutes and regulations in effect at the time;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
(c) Subject to the approval of COAH, its successor entity, or the
Court, Aberdeen Township shall designate one or more
administrative agent(s) to administer newly constructed
affordable units in accordance with the UHAC. An operating
manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided
by the administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of
the governing body and subject to approval of COAH, its
successor entity, or the Court. The operating manual(s) shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the
office(s) of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent(s).
2. Administrative Agent.
(a) The administrative agent shall be an independent entity
serving under contract and reporting to the municipality. The
fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by the owners of
the affordable units for which the services of the
administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an
administrative agent as set forth in the UHAC, including those
set forth in §§ 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which include:
(1) Affirmative Marketing:
(i) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively
market affordable housing units in accordance with
the Affirmative Marketing Plan of Aberdeen Township
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and,
(ii) Providing counseling or contracting to provide
counseling services to low- and moderate-income
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:602
(2) Household Certification:
(i) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(ii) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which
to base a determination of income eligibility for a lowor
moderate-income unit;
(iii) Providing written notification to each applicant as to
the determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(iv) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted
units execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental
certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(v) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working
in the housing region where the units are located; and
(vi) Employing a random selection process as provided in
Aberdeen Township's Affirmative Marketing Plan
when referring households for certification to
affordable units.
(3) Affordability Controls:
(i) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of
deed restrictions and mortgages for recording at the
time of conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(ii) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit
for its control period, including the recorded deed
with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as
appropriate;
(iii) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the Monmouth County Register of
Deeds or Monmouth County Clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(iv) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures;
and
(v) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of
occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:603
(4) Resales and Re-rentals:
(i) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or re-rental; and
(ii) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderateincome
households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing Requests from Unit Owners:
(i) Reviewing and approving requests for determination
from owners of restricted units who wish to take out
home equity loans or refinance during the term of
their ownership that the amount of indebtedness to be
incurred will not violate the terms of this section;
(ii) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales
prices from owners of restricted units who wish to
make capital improvements to the units that would
affect the selling price, such authorizations to be
limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of
central air-conditioning systems;
(iii) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell
a restricted unit; and
(iv) Making determinations on requests by owners of
restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(i) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all
affordable housing units for which tax bills are mailed
to absentee owners, and notifying all such owners that
they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(ii) Securing from all developers and sponsors of
restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in the
processing of the project or development, written
acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(iii) The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent together with the telephone number of
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:604
the administrative agent where complaints of excess
rent or other charges can be made;
(iv) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(v) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund; and
(vi) Creating and publishing a written operating manual
for each affordable housing program administered by
the administrative agent, to be approved by the
Township Council and COAH, its successor entity, or
the Court, setting forth procedures for administering
the affordability controls.
(7) Additional Responsibilities:
(i) The administrative agent shall have the authority to
take all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out
its responsibilities hereunder;
(ii) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring
reports for submission to the Municipal Housing
Liaison in time to meet any monitoring requirements
and deadlines imposed by COAH, its successor entity,
or the Court; and
(iii) The administrative agent shall attend continuing
education sessions on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
3. Affirmative Marketing Requirements.
(a) Aberdeen Township shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of COAH, its successor
entity, or the Court, which is compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
(b) The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing
strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all
majority and minority groups, regardless of: race; creed; color;
national origin; ancestry; marital or familial status; gender;
affectional or sexual orientation; disability; age; or number of
children, to housing units that are being marketed by a
developer, sponsor, or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those
potentially eligible persons who are least likely to apply for
affordable units in that region. The Affirmative Marketing Plan
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:605
is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 4 and shall be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
(c) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional
preference for all households that live and/or work in Housing
Region 4, comprised of Monmouth, Mercer, and Ocean
counties.
(d) The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting
the Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper
administration of the Affirmative Marketing Program,
including initial sales and rentals and resales and re-rentals.
The administrative agent designated by the Township shall
implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
(e) In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
administrative agent shall provide a list of counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(f) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be
used in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing.
In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the
administrative agent shall consider the use of language
translations where appropriate.
(g) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable
units shall begin at least four months (i.e., 120 days) prior to
the expected date of occupancy.
(h) Applications for affordable housing shall be available at the
Aberdeen Township Municipal Building, the Matawan
Aberdeen Public Library, the developer's sales office, the
Monmouth, Mercer, and Ocean County Administration
Buildings, and at the Monmouth, Mercer, and Ocean County
Library Headquarters. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
(i) The Township shall as part of its regional affirmative marketing
strategies during the period of its judgment of repose provide
direct notice to the Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey
State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network,
and the Long Branch, Bayshore (Matawan), Red Bank, and
Asbury Park/Neptune Branch Units of the NAACP of all
available housing units, pursuant to the Township's Affirmative
Marketing Plan.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:606
(j) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the
affordable units shall be the responsibility of the developer,
sponsor, or owner.
4. Occupancy Standards.
(a) In referring certified households to specific restricted units,
the administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and
without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit,
strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sexes with separate
bedrooms;
(3) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
5. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and Enforcement
Mechanisms.
(a) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at
least 30 years, until Aberdeen Township takes action to release
the unit from such requirements; prior to such action, a
restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented.
(b) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit
shall commence on the date the initial certified household
takes title to the unit.
(c) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale
during the period of restricted ownership, the administrative
agent shall determine the restricted price for the unit and shall
also determine the nonrestricted, fair-market value of the unit
based on either an appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed
value without the restrictions in place.
(d) At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser
shall execute and deliver to the administrative agent a
recapture note obligating the purchaser (as well as the
purchaser's heirs, successors, and assigns) to repay, upon the
first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
restrictions set forth in this section, an amount equal to the
difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair-market value
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:607
and its restricted price. The recapture note shall be secured by
a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the
unit.
(e) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain
in effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(f) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a
continuing certificate of occupancy or a certified statement
from the Construction Official stating that the unit meets all
Code standards upon the first transfer of title following the
removal of the restrictions provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
6. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units, Homeowner
Association Fees and Resale Prices.
(a) Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit
shall be approved by the administrative agent;
(2) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in
writing and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance
with the foregoing standards;
(3) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall
provide no distinction between the condominium or
homeowner association fees and special assessments paid
by low- and moderate-income purchasers and those paid
by market purchasers; and
(4) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price
for the unit based on anticipated capital improvements.
Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render
the unit suitable for a larger household or the addition of a
bathroom.
7. Buyer Income Eligibility.
(a) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less
than or equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income
ownership units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of median income.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:608
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative
agent may, upon approval by the Township Council, and subject
to the Court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to
buy low-income units in housing markets if the administrative
agent determines that there is an insufficient number of
eligible low-income purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of
the units. All such low-income units to be sold to moderateincome
households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
(c) A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership
unit must occupy it as the certified household's principal
residence and shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that
the administrative agent may permit the owner of a restricted
ownership unit, upon application and a showing of hardship, to
lease the restricted unit to another certified household for a
period not to exceed one year.
(d) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible
for a restricted ownership unit when the household is a lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost
for the particular unit (including principal, interest, taxes,
homeowner and private mortgage insurance, and
condominium or homeowner association fees, as applicable)
does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
8. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership Unit;
Subordination.
(a) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a
restricted ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the
administrative agent for a determination in writing that the
proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this
section, and the administrative agent shall issue such
determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
(b) With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither
an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the
total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit,
as such price is determined by the administrative agent in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
9. Capital Improvements to Ownership Units.
(a) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for
the unit based on capital improvements made since the
purchase of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be
those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:609
that add an additional bathroom. In no event shall the
maximum sales price of an improved housing unit exceed the
limits of affordability for the larger household.
(b) Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of
property that are permanently affixed to the unit or were
included when the unit was initially restricted (e.g.,
refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall
carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale
price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable
price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The
purchase of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the
initial sale of the unit and not included in the base price may be
made a condition of the unit resale provided the price, which
shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation, has
been approved by the administrative agent. Unless otherwise
approved by the administrative agent, the purchase of any
property other than central air conditioning shall not be made
a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no
unapproved transfer of funds for selling and receiving property
has taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
10. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units.
(a) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted rental unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at
least 30 years, until Aberdeen Township takes action to release
the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
(b) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units
shall contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction
shall have priority over all mortgages on the property, and the
deed restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with
the records office of Monmouth County. A copy of the filed
document shall be provided to the administrative agent within
30 days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
(c) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the
unit; or
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:610
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure
on the property containing the unit.
11. Rent Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases.
(a) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
and tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the
full amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the
current lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided
to the administrative agent.
(b) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved
rent (except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence,
to cover the customary charges for food and services) without
the express written approval of the administrative agent.
(c) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check)
shall not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable
restricted unit and shall be payable to the administrative agent
to be applied to the costs of administering the controls
applicable to the unit as set forth in this section.
(d) No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in
any development in which at least 15% of the total number of
dwelling units are restricted rental units in compliance with
this section.
12. Tenant Income Eligibility.
(a) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall
be determined, as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 30% of median income;
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of
median income; and
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
(b) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible
for a restricted rental unit when the household is a very-lowincome
household, low-income household, or a moderateincome
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent
proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40% for agerestricted
units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:611
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit
may be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances
exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will
reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40%
for households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible
monthly income for rent in the past and has proven its
ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with
which the household proposes to supplement the rent
payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family
member in a form acceptable to the administrative agent
and the owner of the unit.
(c) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish
the existence of the circumstances enumerated in this
subsection with the administrative agent, who shall counsel
the household on budgeting.
13. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices:
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD and the calculation procedures set forth in
the Consent Order entered on December 16, 2016, by the
Honorable Douglas K. Wolfson, JSC, in In the Matter of the
Township of East Brunswick for a Judgment of Compliance of
its Third Round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, Docket
No.: MID-L-004013-15.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:612
both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to very-low-income households, earning 30% or
less of the regional median household income. [Amended
8-16-2018 by Ord. No. 20-2018]
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(4) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
(5) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
(1) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(2) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
(3) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:613
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
f. Requirements for Affordable Housing. Developments that include
affordable housing units shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. Low-income housing. Low-income housing shall be affordable,
according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or other recognized standards for home ownership
and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to 50% or less of
the median gross household income for households of the same size
within the housing region in which the housing is located, and
subject to affordability controls.
2. Moderate-income housing. Moderate-income housing shall be
affordable, according to Federal Department of Housing and Urban
Development or other recognized standards for home ownership
and rental costs, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or more than
50% but less than 80% of the median gross household income for
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:614
households of the same size within the housing region in which the
housing is located, and subject to affordability controls.
3. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 (P.L. 2008, C. 46) at least
13% of the affordable units provided within the Township shall be
reserved for very-low-income households, i.e., households earning
30% or less of the median income and of that amount at least 50%
shall be reserved for very-low-income families (i.e., non-age
restricted and not reserved for special needs populations). For
developments with eight or more affordable housing units on site,
at least 13% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 30% of median
income. A minimum of 50% of these units shall be reserved for
very-low-income families. The very-low-income housing
requirements shall be counted as part of the low-income housing
requirement.
4. Age restriction. The number of affordable housing units that are
age restricted to senior citizens shall not exceed 25% of the total
number of affordable housing units constructed within the
Township, as defined by and in accordance with the Federal Fair
Housing Act and as regulated by N.J.A.C. 5:92-14.35 A request to
age restrict housing units may only be granted after the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment has received the consent of the
Township Council. In designing its project, the applicant may
propose constructing the senior citizen restricted affordable units
in the same building or buildings in order to maximize the potential
of preserving a more tranquil lifestyle for the senior citizen
resident; and to the foregoing extent, the requirement of
integration of the affordable units with conventional units is
modified.
5. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable
Housing Units:
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit.
(b) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low- and/or
very-low-income units.
(c) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
35.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:92 is reserved.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:615
(1) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
is no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are
two-bedroom units;
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are
three-bedroom units; and
(4) The remainder, if any, may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom (or larger) units at the discretion of the
developer.
(d) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the
number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
within the inclusionary development. The standard may be met
by having all one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom
unit for each efficiency unit.
6. Location and design. Low- and moderate-income housing shall be
designed in accordance with the following provisions:
(a) The very-low-, low-, and moderate-income housing units shall
have access to the same common open space and community
facilities as market-priced dwelling units.
(b) The exterior design of the low- and moderate-income housing
units shall be harmonious in scale, texture, and materials with
the market-priced units on the tract.
(c) Deed restrictions. Developers of housing units for low- and
moderate-income households shall enter into a written
agreement, binding on all successors-in-interest, in accordance
with current COAH regulations or Court requirements for
Resale/Rental Control, at the time of sale, resale, rental or rerental
regardless of the availability of federal, state, county or
Township subsidy programs.
(d) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units. Rental units may be separated from for-sale units in a
development for financing, ownership, and management
reasons.
7. Utilities.
(a) Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as
market units within an inclusionary development.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:616
(b) Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be
set forth in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by the DCA for its Section 8 program.
8. Accessibility Requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,36 and the following:
(1) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted
units in other multistory buildings in which a restricted
dwelling unit is attached to at least one other dwelling unit
shall have the following features:
(i) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first
floor;
(ii) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(iii) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(iv) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom,
with a door or the casing for the installation of a door,
on the first floor;
(v) If not all of the foregoing requirements in this
Subsection can be satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel must be provided between
stories within an individual unit, but if all of the
foregoing requirements in this subsection have been
satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel
shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(vi) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c.
350 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,37 or evidence that
Aberdeen Township has collected funds from the
developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
(vii) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
(viii) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall
deposit funds within the Aberdeen Township
36.Editor’s Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
37.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:617
Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install
accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable units
that have been constructed with adaptable entrances.
(ix) The funds deposited under the terms of this
subsection shall be used by Aberdeen Township for
the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of
an affordable unit accessible when requested to do so
by a person with a disability who occupies or intends
to occupy the unit and requires an accessible
entrance.
(x) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate to the Aberdeen
Township Construction Official for the conversion of
adaptable to accessible entrances.
(xi) Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,38 and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Aberdeen Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(2) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall comply with the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
g. Alternative Living Arrangements.
1. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.839 and the UHAC, with the
following exceptions:
2. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
3. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
4. With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
38.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
39.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:618
affordability in accordance with the UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Court.
5. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the administrative agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
h. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
1. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer, or tenant, the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums
due under a mortgage, recuperation of any funds from a sale in
violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further
violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and specific
performance.
2. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer,
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the owner,
developer, or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer,
or tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any
provision of the regulations governing affordable housing
units, the owner, developer, or tenant shall be subject to one or
more of the following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(1) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each
and every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(2) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Aberdeen
Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross
amount of rent illegally collected;
(3) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:619
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable
as if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or
moderate-income unit.
(1) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff,
at which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the
violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not
less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the
costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by the
municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have his right to possession terminated as well as his
title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(2) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any
prior liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The
excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse the
municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that
the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to
reimburse the municipality in full as previously mentioned,
the violating owner shall be personally responsible for the
full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with
collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum
period of two years or until such earlier time as the owner
shall make a claim with the municipality for such. Failure
of the owner to claim such balance within the two-year
period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or
earned on such balance while being held in escrow shall
belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(3) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.7
1:620
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions
and provisions of the regulations governing the affordable
housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation
of the provisions of this plan and from whom title and
possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall
not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(4) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if
insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens, the municipality may
acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit by
satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an
amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderateincome
unit could have been sold under the terms of the
regulations governing affordable housing units. This
excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
that would have been realized from an actual sale, as
previously described.
(5) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either
sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality
shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase
from any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the
owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and
moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(6) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and
liable for complying with the terms and restrictions of
governing affordable housing units until title is conveyed
from the owner.
i. Monitoring and Reporting Requirements.
1. Starting on February 17, 2019, and on each anniversary until
February 17, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of
trust fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or Local Government
Services, or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey,
with a copy provided to the Fair Share Housing Center and posted
on the municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose
by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing, or Local Government Services. The reporting
shall include an accounting of all housing trust fund activity,
including the source and amount of funds collected and the amount
and purpose for which any funds have been expended.
§ 25-6.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.7
1:621
§ 25-6.8. Critical Areas. [Ord. No. 11-2002 § 5]
2. Starting on February 17, 2019, and on each anniversary until
February 17, 2025, the Township shall provide annual reporting of
the status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such
posting provided to the Fair Share Housing Center, using forms
previously developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable
Housing or any other forms endorsed by the Special Master and the
Fair Share Housing Center.
3. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township will post
on its municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share
Housing Center, a status report as to its implementation of its Plan
and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled
mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity and
whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to
present a realistic opportunity and whether any mechanisms to
meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented. Such posting
shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
municipality, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center, regarding
whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and
should be replaced and whether any mechanisms to meet unmet
need should be revised or supplemented. Any interested party may
by motion request a hearing before the Court regarding these
issues.
4. For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of February 17, 2020, and
every third year thereafter, the Township will post on its municipal
website, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a
status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low-income
requirements, including the family very-low-income requirements.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments
to the municipality and to the Fair Share Housing Center on the
issue of whether the municipality has complied with its very-lowincome
housing obligation under the terms of this settlement.
j. Appeals.
1. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed
pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the Court.
a. Basis for Establishing Critical Areas. The Critical Areas Map
accompanies and is part of this section.40 The Critical Areas Map
generally shows the location of 100-year flood plains, freshwater
wetlands and lands with a topographic slope fifteen (15%) percent and
40.Editor's Note: The Critical Areas Map referred to herein is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 25-6.7 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:622
greater within Aberdeen Township. Although not identified on the
Critical Areas Map, wetlands transition areas where required by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) are
considered "Critical Areas" for the purposes of this section.
The mapped data is from the following sources and not from on-site
investigation:
1. The 100-year flood plains were drafted from the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (Panels 3403 12 0002B and 3403 12 0001B, revised to
August 3, 1992 and Panel 3403 12 0010A, dated March 18, 1985);
2. The freshwater wetlands were drafted from information mapped by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection from
March 1986 infrared photographs.
3. The topographic slopes fifteen (15%) percent and greater were
drafted from U.S. Geological Survey Slope Maps for the Keyport
Quadrangle, photo revised 1970 and photo inspected 1977, and
South Amboy Quadrangle, photo revised 1981.
Regarding the 100-year flood plains and freshwater wetlands
areas, it is recognized that more flood plain and wetland areas
exist in Aberdeen Township than those indicated on the Critical
Areas Map. Any mapping prepared by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection of flood plain and wetland areas in
Aberdeen Township shall take precedence.
Additionally, while the information presented on the Critical Areas
Map is appropriate for general planning purposes, it is not
intended to take the place of specific on-site engineering
investigation and data presented to and subjected to independent
verification by the Township at the time applications are submitted
for approval of a subdivision, site plan, construction permit,
variance, and/or any other application which considers
construction permits, and/or other application which considers the
"critical areas" categories of information depicted on the map.
b. Purpose of Regulations for Flood Plain and Stream Corridor Areas. The
purpose of these regulations is:
1. To protect flood plains and stream corridors so that flood water
may have a natural course to follow and so that the watercourse is
not constricted or altered in a manner that will increase water
velocities or create a dam.
2. To allow water levels to rise without danger to persons, animals or
property and cover larger land surfaces for the purposes of greater
water percolation and recharge of the underground water supply.
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:623
3. To promote the development of a parklike network throughout
Aberdeen Township along stream corridors.
4. To permit only that development of flood prone areas and stream
corridors within Aberdeen Township which:
(a) Is appropriate in light of the probability of flood damage and
the need to reduce flood losses;
(b) Represents an acceptable social and economic use of the land
in relation to the hazards involved;
(c) Does not increase the danger to human, plant or animal life;
and
(d) Provides that no decreases in the amount of available storage
for flood waters within the flood plain results from any
development.
5. To prohibit any other types of development including, without
limitation, the dumping of solid or hazardous waste, the
construction of subsurface sewage disposal systems, the storage of
any petroleum products, the addition or removal of fill and the
altering of watercourses, temporary roadways and grading, and to
retain areas adjacent to streams free from structures and other
obstructions.
6. To protect property from the adverse effects of flooding, erosion,
loss of vegetation, seepage, and downstream deposits of silt, gravel
and stone, and to prevent burdensome costs to the public arising
from such damage and its repair.
7. To protect other municipalities within the same watersheds from
improper stream corridor development and the increased potential
for flooding or for reduced stream flows in dry weather.
8. To prevent disturbance to the ecological balance between wildlife,
plant and marine life, which are dependent upon watercourses, and
their protective flood plains and slopes.
9. To maintain the quality of streams in the Township, and to the
extent any streams are impaired, improve their quality.
c. Applicability and Interpretation of Flood Plain and Stream Corridor
Areas Regulations.
1. This subsection regulates development in the following two (2)
ways:
(a) By protecting stream corridors, as defined in subsection
25-6.8d28 below, from the type and intensity of development
which would be destructive to their special environmental
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:624
importance and harmful to the health and general welfare and
to properties downstream; and
(b) By mitigating flood hazards within flood hazard areas pursuant
to the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
These regulations are, in part, intended to satisfy federal
requirements in order to make flood insurance available within
Aberdeen Township.
2. Except in limited cases, the stream corridor requirements of
subsection 25-6.8 do not permit structures within the stream
corridor as defined in subsection 25-6.8d hereinbelow which, by
that definition, includes flood hazard areas. The flood hazard
mitigation requirements in subsection 25-6.8f apply only in those
limited cases where structures or substantial improvements to
structures are permitted.
d. Definitions.
1. Appeal shall mean a request for the review of the Township
Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this section or a
request for a variance from the Planning Board.
2. Area of shallow flooding shall mean a designated AO or VO Zone on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range
from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not
exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and,
velocity flow may be evident.
3. Area of special flood hazard shall mean land in the flood plain
within the Township subject to a one (1%) percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
4. Base flood shall mean the flood having a one (1%) percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
5. Basement shall mean the area of any building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
6. Breakaway wall shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
7. Channel shall mean the bed and banks of the watercourses located
within the boundaries of the Township of Aberdeen which convey
the normal flow of said watercourses most of the time.
8. Delineated stream shall mean a stream that has a delineated
floodway officially adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:13.
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:625
9. Design floor profile shall mean the elevations of the water surface
of the floodway design flood and the flood hazard area design flood.
10. Development shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or
other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.
11. Elevated building shall mean a non-basement building built to have
the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by
means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair
the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood. "Elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters.
12. Flood elevation determination shall mean the determination of the
water surface elevations of the design flood, i.e., the flood level that
has a one (1%) percent or greater chance of occurrence in any
given year.
13. Flood fringe area shall mean the portion of the flood hazard area
not designated as the floodway.
14. Flood hazard area shall mean the floodway and the flood fringe
area of a delineated stream.
15. Flood hazard area design flood shall mean the one hundred (100)
year storm in non-delineated areas and the one hundred (100) year
storm plus twenty-five (25%) percent in delineated areas.
16. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall mean the official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
17. Flood Insurance Study shall mean the official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood
profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
18. Flood or flooding shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry areas from:
(a) Inland or tidal waters; and
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water
from any source.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:626
19. Flood plain shall mean the relatively flat area adjoining the channel
of a natural stream which has been or may be hereafter covered by
flood water.
20. Flood Plain Management Regulations shall mean State or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
21. Flood proofing shall mean any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
22. Floodway shall mean the channel of a natural stream and portions
of the flood hazard area adjoining the channel which are
reasonably required to carry and discharge the flood water or flood
flow of any natural stream without accumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation any more than two-tenths (0.2) feet.
23. Freeboard shall mean a factor of safety usually expressed in feet
above the base flood elevation. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the base flood elevation.
24. Historic structure shall mean any structure that is:
(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(c) Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places
approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places:
(1) Approved by a State program as authorized by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(2) Directly approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
25. Lowest floor shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:627
as to render the structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation
design requirements.
26. Manufactured home shall mean a structure, transportable in one
(1) or more sections which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required facilities. For the purposes of flood plain
management the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. For
insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not
include park trailers, travel trailers or other similar recreation
vehicles.
27. Manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivisions shall
mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
28. New construction shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of this
Ordinance.41
29. Recreational vehicle shall mean a vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
30. Start of Construction shall mean and include substantial
improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring
of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms,
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
41.Editor's Note: This Ordinance No. 11-2002 was adopted June 16, 2002.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:628
31. Steep slopes shall mean topographic slopes fifteen (15%) percent
or greater.
32. Stream shall mean a watercourse having a drainage area of over
fifty (50) acres.
33. Stream corridor shall mean and include the area within the
floodway, flood plain, flood hazard area and buffer strips one
hundred (100) feet from the top of the channel banks of the main
tributaries of the rivers and streams for stream corridor
preservation. If the flood plain or flood hazard area extends for
more than one hundred (100) feet from the top of the channel bank,
said larger area shall be the stream corridor.
34. Structure shall mean for flood plain management purposes, a
walled or roofed building, a manufactured home, including without
limitation, gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally above
ground. For insurance purposes, "structure" means a walled and
roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site. For the
latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of
construction, alteration or repair but does not include building
materials or supplies intended for use in such construction,
alteration or repair, unless such material or supplies are within an
enclosed building on the premises.
35. Substantial Damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by
a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
36. Substantial Improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
fifty (50%) percent of the assessed value of the structure on an
equalized basis either:
(a) As determined before the improvement or repair is started; or
(b) As determined before the damage occurred, if the structure
has been damaged and is being restored. For the purpose of
this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, floor or other
structural part of the floor commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project or improvement of a structure to comply with
existing State or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which is solely necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:629
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic
Places.
37. Variance shall mean a grant of relief by the Planning Board from
the requirements of this subsection permitting construction in a
manner otherwise prohibited by this subsection because the literal
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
e. Site Plan Review for Development Within a Flood Plain or Stream
Corridor Area.
1. All proposals for any development within a flood plain or stream
corridor area shall require site plan approval by the Planning Board
in accordance with Section 25-8 of this chapter; provided, however,
that when a plan does not include the construction of permanent
buildings or structures but, instead, includes such work as grading,
landscaping, work associated with agricultural uses and similar
uses, and where, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer, the proposed work is of such a minor nature that
Planning Board review is not required, the need for site plan
approval by the Planning Board may be waived by the Board. In any
case all other requirements of this section shall apply and before
the work actually begins, the Township Engineer shall have issued,
in writing, his/her approval to proceed with the work.
2. When a proposal for development within a flood plain or stream
corridor is made to the Township, initially the Township Engineer
shall review the proposal to:
(a) Determine that the requirements of this section have been
satisfied;
(b) Determine that all necessary approvals have been obtained
from those Federal, State or other local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required;
(c) Determine if the proposed development is located in the
floodway, and, if so, assure that the encroachment provisions
pertaining to floodways are met; and
(d) Determine whether any plans for walls to be used to enclose
space below the base flood level comply with applicable
requirements.
After the review is completed, the Township Engineer shall
inform the Planning Board of his/her findings.
3. Fees shall be provided for site plans in subsection 25-9.1 of this
chapter and public notice of public hearings shall be given as
stipulated for site plans in subsection 25-7.6d of this chapter.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:630
In addition to the applicable information required for preliminary
site plan approval stipulated in subsection 25-8.4 of this chapter,
the following additional information shall be provided:
(a) Proposed finished grade elevations at the corners of any
structure or structures.
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures, existing and proposed.
(c) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure,
existing or proposed, has been or will be floodproofed.
(d) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria established by this
section.
(e) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
Where alteration or relocation of a watercourse is proposed,
notification of the proposed alteration or relocation must be
provided to adjacent municipalities and proof of such
notification submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(f) The extent of proposed or previous filling, cutting or regrading
of the land, if any.
(g) The location, type and size of all existing and proposed erosion
and siltation control measures, such as slope protection soil
stabilization, sedimentation basins, sediment trap headwalls
and aprons.
(h) Proof of stream encroachment lines (floodway) obtained from
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
Where stream encroachment lines have not been established
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
the following rules shall be utilized to determine the floodway
delineation:
(1) Concerning hydrology, methods that are acceptable are
those outlined in "Technical Manual For Stream
Encroachment" August, 1984, Section 3.1 published by the
State of New Jersey, Division of Coastal Resources, Bureau
of Flood Plain Management, as amended.
(2) Concerning hydraulics:
(i) Water surface profiles shall be computed using the
Step-Backwater method of analysis;
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:631
(ii) Computations shall begin at a suitable control point at
least five hundred (500) feet downstream from a
project;
(iii) Normal depth computed using Manning equation may
be used as the starting elevation if the channel is of
uniform cross section and slope, and it can be
demonstrated that flow is not affected by backwater
caused by downstream obstructions;
(iv) Water surface profiles shall be computed based upon
existing topography, proposed structures, and
changes of topography proposed by the applicant; and
(v) Encroachment lines shall be set at or outside the
floodway.
4. The applicant should be prepared to present evidence that the
proposal:
(a) Has an inherently low flood damage potential.
(b) Either acting alone or in combination with the existing or
future uses will not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
heights and/or velocities or reduce ground absorption or
storage volume of stormwater.
(c) Does not affect adversely the water carrying or storage
capacity of the channel, floodway or flood fringe areas.
(d) Does not increase local run-off and erosion and provides
proper drainage of the area to an existing adequate
watercourse or drainage system.
(e) Does not unduly stress or degrade the natural environment of
the flood plain or degrade the quality of surface water or the
quality or quantity of ground waters.
(f) Does not require channel modification or relocation.
(g) Is set forth in this Ordinance as a permitted use.
(h) Is not a prohibited use in that portion of the floodway, flood
plain or stream corridor where proposed to be located.
(i) Cannot be located totally outside the stream corridor area.
5. Where required by the Planning Board, the applicant shall furnish
information relating to subsurface conditions based on percolation
tests and soil borings or probes. Test borings or probes shall be
performed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be in
accordance with acceptable engineering standards and practices.
Written notification of intention to conduct such tests shall be
forwarded to and received by the Township Engineer at least two
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:632
(2) working days prior to testing. A detailed report of the test shall
be submitted to the Planning Board and the Township Engineer for
review.
6. When base flood elevation data has not been provided by the
Township, its agents, servants and employees shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a Federal, State or other source to administer this
section.
f. Uses in Floodways, Flood Fringe and Stream Corridor Areas.
1. Prohibited Uses. No person shall hereafter engage in, cause or
permit other persons to engage in prohibited uses in the floodway,
flood fringe, flood plain and stream corridor areas. All uses not
specifically permitted by subsections 25-6.8f2 and 3 hereinbelow
shall be prohibited.
2. Permitted Uses in Floodways. The following uses shall be permitted
in floodways provided the requirements of subsection 25-6.8f2(e)
and subsection 25-6.8g of this chapter are satisfied:
(a) Channel improvements or changes may be permitted only in
connection with stream improvements and stabilization, which
improvements or changes have the approval of the New Jersey
Department Of Environmental Protection, the Monmouth
County Planning Board and the Aberdeen Township Planning
Board.
(b) Soil husbandry and farming, provided with the advice and
assistance of Rutgers Cooperative Extension, that conservation
practices as designed and approved by the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture, the State Agriculture Development
Committee, and the United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service are implemented.
(c) Recreational uses in the nature of parks, wildlife preserves,
unpaved trails, undeveloped common open space, and boat
landings, provided a maintenance program to promote
stabilization of stream banks is established.
(d) Installation, repairs or replacement of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances, and other utility lines and appurtenances.
(e) Culverts, bridges, road or driveway crossings where no other
locations are feasible.
(f) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless
a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall
not result in any increase in flood lands during the occurrence
of a flood having a one (1%) percent chance of being equaled or
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:633
exceeded in any given year. Any proposed use involving the
removal of trees shall be undertaken in accordance with the
approval of the Aberdeen Township Planning Board and New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Material,
equipment or vehicles related to and used in conjunction with
a permitted use shall not be parked or stored in the floodway
area.
(g) Stormwater management facilities.
3. Permitted Uses in the Stream Corridor Areas. Stream corridors
shall remain in their natural state, with no clearing or cutting of
trees and brush (except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning
for reasons of public safety), altering of watercourses, regrading or
construction, except for the following activities outside the
floodway:
(a) Soil husbandry and farming, provided, with the advice and
assistance of Rutgers Cooperative Extension, that conservation
practices as designed and approved by the New Jersey
Department of Agriculture, the State Agriculture Development
Committee, and the United States Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service are implemented.
(b) Recreational uses in the nature of parks, wildlife preserves,
unpaved trails, undeveloped common open space, and picnic
areas, provided a maintenance program to promote
stabilization of stream banks is established.
(c) Rebuilding existing structures provided the requirements of
subsection 25-6.8g hereinbelow are met.
(d) Additions to preexisting structures not to exceed twenty-five
(25%) percent of the gross floor area of the structure
preexisting the adoption of this Ordinance.
(e) Farm fences allowing free passage of floodwaters and debris.
(f) Installation, repairs or replacement of sanitary sewers and
appurtenances and other utility lines and appurtenances.
(g) Stormwater management facilities.
(h) Culverts, bridges, road or driveway crossings where no other
locations are feasible.
g. Conditions of Approval. The Planning Board may impose such
conditions on permitted uses as it deems appropriate in order to
promote the public safety, health and welfare to protect public and
private property, wildlife and fisheries and to preserve and enhance the
natural environment of the stream corridor. No Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued unless all conditions of approval have been
complied with.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:634
In all flood hazard areas, the following conditions are specified in any
case:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
3. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
4. All new and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system and discharged from the system into the flood waters.
5. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
6. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
7. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, the use of over the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
8. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
9. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
10. All new construction shall have electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities designed and/or located as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
11. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
12. Appropriate and adequate controls on operations, sureties, deed
restrictions and maintenance bonds shall be provided.
13. The construction of stormwater detention and/or retention
facilities, channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective
measures shall be required.
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:635
14. The installation of an adequate flood warning system shall be
required.
15. The postponement of development until such a time as any
necessary and required preconstruction protective measures are
installed or implemented shall be required.
16. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest habitable floor, including a cellar or
basement, elevated to one (1) foot above the flood hazard area
design flood elevation (a one [1] foot freeboard) and a limit of
disturbance shall be established a minimum of ten (10) feet from
the stream corridor.
17. All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls, by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect and must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two (2)
openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1)
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
unimpeded gravity flow entry and exit of floodwater.
18. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including a cellar or basement, elevated to one (1) foot
above the design flood elevation (a one [1] foot freeboard) or,
together with the attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
floodproofed so that below the design flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards and methods of construction of this section are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Planning
Board. Any or all of the following floodproofing measures may be
required:
(a) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters, or
similar devices.
(b) Reinforced walls to resist water pressure.
(c) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls.
(d) Addition of weights to structures to resist flotation.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:636
(e) Installation of pumps to lower water levels of structures.
(f) Pumping facilities or comparable measures for the subsurface
drainage systems of the building to relieve external foundation
walls and basement flood pressures. Over the sidewalk and
under the sidewalk gravity or sump pump drains are not
permitted. All such drains shall outlet into an existing adequate
watercourse or drainage system.
(g) Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
(h) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains
which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of
sewage or stormwaters into the structure; gravity drainage of
basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices.
(i) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed
electrical appliances in a manner which will assure that they
are not subject to inundation and flooding.
(j) Annual inspection and recertification of all nonresidential
structures which have been floodproofed to assure that
floodproofed structures and attendant facilities have been
properly maintained.
19. Where and when permitted, fill shall be no lower than one (1) foot
above the flood hazard area design flood elevation and shall extend
at such height for a distance of at least fifteen (15) feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon.
20. Where and when permitted, structures on fill shall be so built that
the lowest floor is at a minimum of one (1) foot above the flood
hazard design elevation.
21. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the finished floor elevation of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
22. All necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State
or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required.
23. Adequate maintenance shall be provided within any altered or
relocated portion of a watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
24. Where the lands proposed for development include a portion of the
stream corridor, a condition of any major subdivision or major site
plan approval shall be the revegetation of any portions of the
required stream corridor which were disturbed by prior land uses,
such as agriculture, and any necessary disturbance permitted in
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:637
subsection 25-6.8f3 of this section. The vegetation plan shall utilize
native trees and plant species, subject to the review and approval
of the Township Engineer.
h. Variances From Conditions. Variances from the conditions of this
subsection may only be issued by the Aberdeen Township Planning
Board in conformance with the following provisions:
1. For the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Register of Historic Places.
2. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway, flood
fringe area or stream corridor if an increase in flood levels during
the design flood would occur.
3. Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief considering the
flood hazards.
4. Variances may only be issued upon a determination that failure to
grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant and a determination that the granting of the variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
i. Flood Insurance. Flood insurance in accordance with the Federal
Insurance Agency shall be required for all developments in the flood
plain.
j. Warning and Disclaimer. The degree of flood protection required herein
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will
occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside flood
hazard areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This section
shall not create liability on the part of the Township of Aberdeen or by
any other officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
k. Flood Hazard Area Searches.
1. Official Designated to Make Flood Hazard Searches. The Township
Council shall, annually, designate an official of the Township to
make and prepare flood hazard area searches. Such official shall
thereafter be vested with the power to make certificates with
respect to flood hazard areas on behalf of the Township.
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:638
2. Issuance of Certificates. The official appointed to make such
searches shall issue certificates within a reasonable time after
receipt of the following:
(a) A written request for a flood hazard area search containing a
diagram or description showing the location and dimensions of
the tract of land to be covered by the certificate, and the name
of the owner of the tract of land; and
(b) The total fees as herein provided.
3. Fees for Certificates. The following fees shall be received prior to
the issuance of any certificate:
(a) Where the property described in the application is shown on
the tax map as consisting of five (5) acres or less, a fee of five
($5) dollars.
(b) Where the property described in the application is shown on
the tax map as consisting of more than five (5) acres but less
than twenty (20) acres, a fee of ten ($10) dollars.
(c) Where the property described in the application is shown on
the tax map as consisting of twenty (20) acres or more, a fee of
twenty ($20) dollars.
l. Steep Slopes.
1. The purpose of designating steep slopes as critical areas is to
prevent soil erosion and stormwater runoff resulting from
development of such steep slope lands. Development throughout
the Township shall occur only on the portion of a lot or tract outside
the steep slope area.
2. The applicant may seek variance relief under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c
for disturbance of steep slopes, provided that the applicant also
shall address the performance standards in subsection 25-6.8l.3
hereinbelow to the satisfaction of the Board.
3. Performance Standards. The Board, in considering a variance to
allow the disturbance of steep slopes, shall be guided by, but not
limited to, the following:
(a) The developer shall demonstrate that the disturbance of the
critical steep slope area is necessary for the proposed
development of the subject tract, indicating that such
development can be in accordance with Sections 25-4 and 25-6
of this chapter.
(b) The developer shall demonstrate that the proposed
development has utilized the noncritical areas of the tract as
reasonably practicable and has attempted to minimize the
disturbance of the critical steep slope areas by limiting
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.8
1:639
development to either isolated area(s) of steep slopes and/or
those slopes with less of a steep grade prior to the disturbance
of more environmentally sensitive critical areas.
(c) Appropriate revegetation and landscaping of the disturbed
steep slope areas shall be provided to adequately stabilize the
slopes and enhance the attractiveness of the site, if necessary,
and shall be in accordance with accepted soil conservation and
stormwater management techniques as promulgated by the
Soil Conservation District and the Township Engineer.
(d) The proposed disturbance of the steep slope area should
minimize the impairment of the visual quality of the site.
Moreover, the higher elevations which present visual amenities
should be protected, where possible.
(e) The environmental impacts shall be satisfactorily controlled by
the development proposal in a manner acceptable to the
Township Engineer so that soil erosion, excess stormwater,
run-off, degradation of water quality, concentration of
stormwater and water flow, and flooding do not occur.
(f) The developer also shall demonstrate that:
(1) Unless an EIS is otherwise required, endangered or
threatened plants and wildlife shall not be harmed;
(2) The geologic disturbance, including blasting, cutting or
excavating, resulting from the development of any
"critical" steep slope area shall be satisfactorily mitigated;
and
(3) The cost of providing and maintaining public facilities and
services to those areas where critical steep slopes may be
disturbed shall not be substantially increased as a result of
such disturbance.
m. Wetlands. The purpose of designating wetlands and wetland transition
areas as critical areas is to assure that density calculations for various
types of planned developments result in a unit construction that can be
accommodated on the subject lands without encroaching upon the
wetlands. The designation of wetlands and wetland transition areas as a
critical land factor is to signal the location of environmentally fragile
lands which should be incorporated in open space plans or located
within a portion of a lot which need not be physically developed.
Further, Aberdeen Township embraces the policy of the State of New
Jersey as established by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq., that freshwater wetlands are a finite and
valuable resource and that activities in or affecting wetlands should not
destroy the natural wetland functions important to the public safety and
general welfare. Any disturbance of wetlands and wetland transition
§ 25-6.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.8
1:640
§ 25-6.9. Freneau Redevelopment Plan. [Ord. No. 8-2003 § 7; Ord.
No. 13-2003 § 7; Ord. No. 6-2004 §§ 6, 7, 8; Ord. No. 16-2005
§§ 1—8; Ord. No. 8-2014]
areas is subject to the approval of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
a. Purpose, Effect, and Redevelopment.
1. The purpose of the Freneau Redevelopment Plan (the
"Redevelopment Plan") is to provide for the development of up to
two hundred fifty (250) market-rate, for-sale non-age restricted
residential townhouse units in two or more residential development
clusters (each a "residential townhouse cluster development") on
approximately 56.5 acres of land consisting of Block 151 — Lots 1,
2, 3 & 4 and Block 149 — Lot 1; as shown on the Tax Maps of
Aberdeen Township (the "Freneau Redevelopment Area"). More
specifically, the Redevelopment Plan provides for family housing in
Aberdeen Township while at the same time preserving open space
and conservation areas for future generations.
2. The Freneau Redevelopment Area has been the subject of litigation
between the current owner and the Township of Aberdeen (the
"Township"). The Township has entered into a Settlement
Agreement (the "Settlement Agreement") with the current owner to
settle this ongoing litigation. The Settlement Agreement has been
memorialized by a Final Judgment on Consent Entered on the Basis
of Settlement Agreement by the Honorable Lawrence M. Lawson;
A.J.S.C. dated December 23, 2013. The Redeveloper has entered
into a contract with Raritan Baykeeper, Inc. d/b/a NY/NJ Baykeeper,
a New Jersey non-for profit corporation ("Baykeeper") for the sale
of the property that comprises the Redevelopment Area to the
Baykeeper (the "Baykeeper Contract"). In accordance with the
Settlement Agreement, this Redevelopment Plan, including all
zoning, bulk, and design standards and other development
regulations for the Freneau Redevelopment Area set forth below in
this subsection 25-6.9, shall automatically become effective,
without the need for any further action by the Township, upon
expiration and termination by Redeveloper of the Baykeeper
Contract without the Baykeeper acquiring the Property.
3. Redeveloper Agreement. If the Freneau Redevelopment Area is to
be developed with up to 250 market rate for sale townhome units
as provided for in this Redevelopment Plan, such development
must be undertaken by a redeveloper (the "Redeveloper")
designated by the Township pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. ("LRHL") in
accordance with an agreement to govern development in the
Redevelopment Area to be approved by the Township Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-8(f) ("Redeveloper Agreement").
Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, the current owner or its
§ 25-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:641
designee shall be the Redeveloper. Development in the Freneau
Redevelopment Area is contemplated to consist of two interrelated
residential townhouse cluster developments with a total of two
hundred fifty (250) market-rate, for sale non-age restricted
residential townhouse units.
b. Principal Permitted Uses in the Freneau Redevelopment Area. If the
zoning, bulk, and design standards and other development regulations
for the Freneau Redevelopment Area set forth below in this subsection
25-6.9 have become effective in accordance with subsection 25-6.9a2
(above) and upon approval and execution by the Township Council of
the Redeveloper Agreement in accordance with subsection 25-6.9a3
(above), then the following principal uses will be permitted in the
Freneau Redevelopment Area:
1. Non age-restricted townhouse dwelling units, not to exceed a total
of 250 non-age restricted, market-rate for sale townhouse dwelling
units within the entirety of the Freneau Redevelopment Area;
2. Elevated water storage tanks;
3. The "Required Recreational Facilities," set forth in subsection
25-6.9k (below);
4. Public parks, conservation areas, open space, common space and
public purpose uses.
c. Accessory Uses Permitted in the Freneau Redevelopment Area.
1. Common recreational facilities, recreation centers, pools,
playfields and courts, clubhouses, and other similar facilities within
specified open space areas.
2. Landscaping features including benches, trellises, gazebos and
other such features customarily associated with the permitted
principal uses, as the case may be.
3. Underground sprinkler systems within specified open space areas
and within individual lots.
4. Fences and walls if standard for the type of development, location,
and region.
5. Subject to the requirements of subsection 25-6.9p5(a) below, Patios
and decks in the side or rear yard areas of townhouse dwelling
units.
6. Off-street parking and private garages.
7. Signs.
8. Sheds and other accessory structures not specifically identified
above are strictly prohibited.
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.9
1:642
9. Satellite dishes and other uses that would typically be found affixed
to the residential building will be subject to the discretion of the
Homeowners Association.
d. Maximum Building Height.
1. No building containing townhouse dwelling units shall exceed
forty-eight (48) feet in height, except that chimneys shall have no
height restrictions. Furthermore, no townhouse dwelling unit shall
exceed three (3) stories in height. Moreover, where applicable, the
height of a building shall be measured on the side facing an
internal courtyard and/or on the front side of a townhouse dwelling
unit. Additionally, walk-out basements are not to be calculated into
the overall height of a building.
2. No recreation center building or clubhouse building shall exceed
thirty-eight (38) feet in height and two and one-half (2 1/2) stories,
except that chimneys shall have no height restrictions, and no
other accessory building, as may be approved by the Planning
Board, shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and one and one-half
(1 1/2) stories.
e. Yard and Distance Requirements for Townhouse Buildings. Minimum
distances between townhouse buildings (i.e., buildings containing one
or more townhouse units) ("Townhouse Buildings") shall be measured
horizontally in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side and
rear of each building. The total minimum separation between the
buildings shall be the sum of the two (2) abutting distances, and each
building shall have one (1) front, one (1) rear and two (2) side yards:
1. The minimum distances shall be twenty (20) feet for the front of a
building; ten (10) feet for the side of a building; and twenty (20)
feet for the rear of a building;
2. No portion of any building shall be closer to any portion of any
other building than the combined distances of the abutting
requirements for each building, providing that the corner of a
building off-set more than a fifteen (15) degree angle from a line
drawn parallel to another building shall be considered a side of the
building and the building separation requirement shall be twenty
(20) feet for townhouses; and
3. In any case, and notwithstanding the distances specified
hereinabove, no building or structure (not including the proposed
water tower, pump station and public utilities) shall be located
closer than forty (40) feet to the right-of-way line of any existing
public street or any tract boundary line with privately owned
property, no closer than fifty (15) feet to any tract boundary line
with municipally owned property, no closer than twenty (20) feet to
the right-of-way line of any public or private internal street, and no
closer than ten (10) feet to any off-street parking area.
§ 25-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:643
4. The maximum building length is no greater than one hundred fifty
(150) feet in length along any building façade.
f. Requirements for Townhouse Buildings.
1. All Townhouse Buildings shall have a dual pitched, single ridge roof
(such as gable, hip, gambrel or mansard roof) with a minimum
pitch of one (1) foot vertical to six (6) feet horizontal, and no flat
roof shall be permitted; provided, however, that where roof
mounted equipment is necessary and/or preferable for the
operation of the building, a façade roof treatment exhibiting the
appearance of such a dual pitched, single ridge roof is permitted.
2. The entirety of all portions of all buildings shall be provided both
heat alarms and smoke alarms and, except for outside balconies
and attics, all interior areas of all such buildings shall have a "wet"
fire suppression sprinkler system.
g. Off-Street Parking Private Garages and Driveways. Notwithstanding
any other ordinance provisions to the contrary, each individual use shall
be provided off-street parking spaces according to the following
minimum provisions:
1. Townhouses shall be provided 1.8 off-street spaces for each
1-bedroom unit, 2.3 spaces for each 2-bedroom unit, and 2.4 spaces
for each 3-bedroom townhouse unit. Where the bedroom count per
dwelling unit is not specified, 2.3 spaces per unit shall be provided.
2. For townhouses, each garage space shall be counted as 1.0 offstreet
parking space, regardless of the length of the driveway.
Internal roadways will be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width to
provide for on-site parking.
(a) A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as two
(2) off-street parking spaces for the subject unit, provided that
the driveway measures a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length
between the face of the garage door and the right-of-way or
between the face of the garage door and a sidewalk, whichever
distance is less.
(b) A two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 3.5
off-street parking space for the subject unit, provided a
minimum parking width of twenty (20) feet is provided for a
minimum length of twenty (20) feet as specified for a one-car
garage and driveway combination (above).
3. Any recreation center or clubhouse shall be provided a minimum of
0.132 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit.
h. Trash and Recycling Requirements for Townhouse Uses. It is
encouraged that curb-side trash and recycling be provided, should
curb-side pick-up not be available, an indoor or outdoor recycling area
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.9
1:644
for the collection and storage of residentially-generated trash and
recyclable materials shall be provided as follows:
1. A suitable location within the building shall be provided to
accommodate trash and recycling;
2. If located outside the building, the trash and recyclable containers
for each unit shall be stored in an area finished with materials used
to construct the building(s) being served, and located in a manner
to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent
residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting, or
combination of all three. The storage area associated with the
buildings shall be attached to the building and shall observe all
relevant area and bulk standards.
3. The dimension of any area provided for the collection and pickup of
recyclable materials shall be consistent with the district recycling
plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13), as amended.
4. The area provided for the collection and pickup of recyclable
materials shall be well-lit and shall be safely and easily accessible
by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be
able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles.
5. The area provided for the collection and pickup of recyclable
materials, and the bins or containers placed therein, shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located
in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
6. Signs clearly identifying the area provided for the collection and
pickup of recyclable materials shall be posted adjacent to all points
of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein.
i. Permitted Signage.
1. One (1) ground mounted freestanding sign no larger than fortyeight
(48) square feet per face and up to a 60 degree angle between
sign faces shall be permitted at the entrance to each portion of the
residential townhouse cluster development from an existing public
street. For example if the Redeveloper undertakes to develop the
Redevelopment Area, as currently contemplated, with two (2)
interrelated residential townhouse cluster developments, the
Redeveloper will then be permitted to place one (1) ground
mounted freestanding sign no larger than forty-eight (48) square
§ 25-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:645
feet at each entrance to the two (2) residential townhouse cluster
developments from an existing public street.
(a) In addition to the maximum sign size of forty-eight (48) square
feet, the sign may include supporting framework, including
columns, pillars and walls, provided that the supporting
framework is incidental to the display itself, is compatible with
the architectural design of the development.
(b) In any case, each sign and any supporting framework or
bracing shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height and shall be set
back at least twenty (20) feet from all property and street lines.
(c) Any sign illumination shall be external to the sign and shall be
designed and oriented to prevent any sight of the lamp from
any street or neighboring properties.
2. Additional signage within the interior of the site may be approved
by the Planning Board for directional purposes as part of the site
plan approval.
j. Conservation Requirement. Whatever portion of the Freneau
Redevelopment Area is not utilized for site and/or unit construction,
storm water detention, recreational facilities, parking and utility
easements, or other needs of the contemplated development, etc. shall
be permanently restricted by conservation easement in perpetuity, or
conveyed to the Township or to a designee of the Township for
preservation purposes, as determined by the Township.
k. Required Recreational Facilities.
1. The residential townhouse cluster development shall provide active
recreational facilities, including, by way of example only,
recreational facilities such as the following:
(a) One (1) swimming pool with a minimum water surface of
eighteen hundred (1,800) square feet, and a deck/patio equal
to an area equivalent to one hundred fifty (150%) percent of
the water surface area;
(b) One (1) clubhouse/recreation building with adjacent off-street
parking as approved by the Planning Board; the clubhouse/
recreation building shall be a minimum size equivalent to
fifteen (15) gross square feet in area per each dwelling in the
subtract area;
(c) Children's playground equipment;
(d) Play courts or game areas; and
(e) Jogging, bicycle and cardiovascular exercise paths.
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.9
1:646
2. The preceding listing and ratios of recreational facilities are
guidelines for the Redeveloper and Planning Board in their
evaluation of the adequacy of proposed recreational facilities for
the residential townhouse cluster development. Alternative
recreational facilities and ratios similar to those listed above may
be proposed by the Redeveloper are permitted at within the
Redevelopment Area and may be approved by the Board.
3. All recreational facilities shall adhere to the standards set forth in
the Barrier Free Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code of the
State of New Jersey.
l. Lighting Requirements.
1. Lighting shall be minimal for security and safety purposes, and a
lighting plan indicating the location of the lighting fixtures, the
direction of illumination, the wattage and isolux curves for each
fixture, and the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries shall
be submitted by the Redeveloper in connection with any
application for site plan approval.
2. The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting height
not higher than eighteen (18) feet. Street lighting is intended to be
provided in areas of concentrated parking, points of intersection
and at terminus or angle points along the circulation roadways for
public safety as may be deemed necessary and appropriate.
3. The lighting fixtures are to include non-glare lights with recessed
lenses focused downward and with "cut-off" shields as appropriate
in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon adjacent and
nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent roadways and
overhead skyglow.
4. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated in
footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not less than
five-tenths (0.5) footcandles at intersections and shall average not
more than one (1.0) footcandle throughout any area to be
illuminated. Lighting levels for pathways shall maintain an average
of approximately 0.25 footcandles along the pathways to be lighted.
5. The lighting of any sidewalk and/or pathway, where provided, shall
be via bollard lighting not more than four (4) feet in height and/or
other decorative fixtures with a mounting height not higher than
twelve (12) feet.
m. Landscaping Requirements.
1. The landscaping within the residential townhouse cluster
development(s) shall be conceived as a total pattern throughout the
developed area, integrating the various elements of the
architectural design of the buildings and creating an aesthetically
pleasing environment.
§ 25-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:647
2. The landscaping shall be in accordance with subsection 25-5.10 of
the Township's Land Development Ordinance and shall include
shade trees, decorative flowering trees, evergreen trees, shrubs
and hedges, ground cover, perennials and annuals, and may include
other materials such as rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and
decorative brick or paving materials provided, however, that street
trees do not have to be planted in a linear configuration, and can be
clustered in groupings so long as the total number of street trees is
the same as if they had been planted in a linear configuration at
forty (40) feet on center. Additionally, street trees shall have a
caliper of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches.
3. In areas where the applicant is successful in preserving existing
trees within fifteen (15) feet of the new curb of a roadway, the
Planning Board may waive the otherwise applicable street tree
requirements.
n. Fee Simple Townhouse Lots.
1. Lot and yard dimensions encompassing individual townhouse
dwelling units may be freely disposed and arranged on a tract of
land, provided they are superimposed upon an approved site plan
for the subject development in accordance with the following:
(a) The boundaries of any lot shall not infringe upon any common
open space land areas. Notwithstanding this requirement, a lot
line may be located within a buffer or setback area provided
they are consistent with the requirements of paragraphs (b)
and (c) below;
(b) No lot line shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to
any tract boundary line or to the right-of-way line of any
existing public street; and
(c) No lot line shall be located closer than five (5) feet to any offstreet
parking area or to the private roadway or driveway
accessing the parking area.
2. For a fee simple townhouse unit, no construction permit shall be
issued for the dwelling unit, an addition thereto, or for an accessory
structure unless the proposed construction is in accordance with
the site plan as approved by the Planning Board.
o. General Requirements for a Residential Townhouse Cluster
Development.
1. The residential townhouse cluster development shall be planned
and developed with a common architectural theme; the
architectural theme shall include the appearance of buildings,
signing, fencing, lighting, paving, curbing, and landscaping.
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.9
1:648
2. The residential development shall comply with the Township's lookalike
requirements pursuant to subsections 25-5.3 and 25-5.4
except that the orientation of buildings to the natural features of
the site as well as the orientation of the sun so that solar energy
may be utilized, if viable, at the discretion of the developer.
3. The residential townhouse cluster development shall require that
adequate public sewerage and potable water be provided. In the
event off-site improvements for sewerage or potable water are
necessitated by the proposed development, same will be addressed
in the Redeveloper Agreement between the Township and the
Redeveloper. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sewerage and
potable water improvements to be provided for the proposed
development must be in accordance with the following general
guidelines:
(a) The proposed wastewater collection/transmission facilities
should, in general, comply with the "Executive Report on
Sewer Service for the Freneau Section", dated September 16,
1993 and prepared by Birdsall Engineering, Inc. It should be
noted that the subject report was prepared for the former
Aberdeen Township Municipal Utilities Authority, which
Authority was subsequently dissolved by Aberdeen Township,
and the Township then assumed responsibility as the
implementing agency for wastewater facilities. Said 1993
report was subsequently updated on behalf of the Township, by
CME Associates in a 2010 Planning Document Report. The
proposed sanitary sewer infrastructure should be sufficiently
sized to service the adjoining Woodfield Estates area.
(b) The station (or stations) would discharge by force main
generally to a manhole located on the east side of Route 34
near Gravelly Brook and Brookview Lane.
(c) Redeveloper will be responsible for paying the costs of
constructing any potable water lines or other potable water
improvements (including, but not limited to a five hundred
thousand (500,000) gallon water storage tank necessary to
convey potable water to the Freneau Redevelopment Area.
(d) It is anticipated that the potable water line shall run down
Route 516 from Old Bridge Township.
(e) The specific nature and extent of the obligations of the
Redeveloper to comply with paragraph 3(a) through 3(e)
hereinabove shall be determined in the context of the
Redeveloper Agreement.
p. Certain Zoning and Design Provisions. Any residential townhouse
cluster development in the Freneau Redevelopment Area is subject to
the following regulations and design standards:
§ 25-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:649
1. All residential dwelling units and buildings shall be located a
minimum of thirty (30) feet from any existing or proposed detention
(i.e., dry) basin, and a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any existing
or proposed retention (i.e., wet) basin, measured from the 100-year
water surface elevation of the basin.
2. All residential dwelling units and buildings shall be located a
minimum of fifty (50) feet from any existing or proposed pond, lake
or other naturally occurring water body or water course, as
measured from the edge of the design high water level or from
100-year flood plain, whichever measurement results in the
greatest setback distance, except as follows:
(a) In instances where the top of bank, i.e., the edge the highest
topographic grade associated with the water course, is further
set back than the edge of the design high water level or
100-year flood plain, then the setback for any dwelling unit or
building shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the
top of bank, with the "top of bank" being defined as the general
top of a ravine, excepting out minor transverse variations; and
(b) In such instances, the definition of "stream corridor" in
subsection 25-6.8d33 of the LDO shall not be applicable.
3. No additional setback for the limit of disturbance as required in
subsection 25-6.8g16 shall be required from a stream corridor or
other "critical area", provided that adequate measures are taken to
ensure that there will be no disturbance of the subject land areas
during construction.
4. All new residential dwelling units and buildings within the
residential townhouse cluster development shall be located a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any existing or proposed
sanitary sewage treatment plant and a minimum of fifty (50) feet
from any sanitary sewage pumping station.
5. The required buffer area width within the residential townhouse
cluster development shall be forty (40) feet and shall be in
accordance with the requirements of subsection 25-5.5, except as
follows:
(a) Any permitted entry signs, decorative fencing or walls, decks,
patios, pathways and/or sidewalks may be permitted in the
required buffer area, provided that the erection of such
structures does not require the removal of any vegetation that
would otherwise be retained.
(b) The required mixture and amount of plant material in the
buffer areas shall consider the existing conditions on the tract
and may be modified accordingly, provided that the residential
townhouse cluster development is reasonably shielded from
existing residential development adjacent and nearby.
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.9
1:650
(c) The minimum buffer area may include the area necessary to
satisfy the minimum yard or building distance requirements for
the uses within the residential townhouse cluster development.
6. The landscaping requirements of subsection 25-5.10 shall
reasonably be applied to any residential townhouse cluster
development, except that the requirements of subsection 25-5.10 of
the "LDO" for a Tree Removal and Replacement Plan shall not
apply, provided that the removal of existing trees in the residential
townhouse cluster development is the minimum necessary.
7. Notwithstanding any provisions of the ordinance to the contrary, an
isolated area or a narrow band of steep slopes, State open waters,
freshwater wetlands and wetlands transition areas may be
disturbed or developed where it is determined by the Planning
Board that soil erosion, land disturbance and/or other
environmental concerns have been adequately addressed by the
Redeveloper.
q. Additional Requirements for a Residential Townhouse Cluster
Development.
1. All provisions within Section 25-5 of the Land Development
Ordinance (LDO) regulating improvements and design standards,
which are not inconsistent with the provisions specified
hereinabove, shall govern the design and construction of a
residential townhouse cluster development, provided that,
notwithstanding any provisions of the ordinance to the contrary,
waivers may be granted by the Planning Board from the provisions
in Section 25-5 for good cause shown, and provided further that the
following design standards shall apply to a residential townhouse
cluster development notwithstanding anything to the contrary
within Section 25-5:
(a) Vehicles shall be permitted to be parked perpendicular to
internal roadways and/or driveways, and shall be permitted to
back out into the roadway and/or driveway.
(b) There shall be no off-street loading requirement for any
recreation building.
(c) Continuous open driveways shall be permitted to access
garages as necessary for the approved architectural design.
2. Any residential townhouse cluster development shall satisfactorily
address and comply to the extent practicable with all applicable
existing utility Master Plans and utility ordinances of Aberdeen
Township. The specific nature and extent of the obligations of the
Redeveloper to comply with same shall be determined in the
context of the Redeveloper Agreement.
§ 25-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.9
1:651
§ 25-6.10. Wireless Communication Facilities. [Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1,
609; Ord. No. 25-2010]
3. The Redeveloper's specific monetary contribution for any off-site
improvements made necessary by the development will be
determined in accordance with the MLUL and the Redeveloper
Agreement.
4. Any developer of a residential townhouse cluster development shall
obtain site plan approval for the development in accordance with
the requirements contained in the Land Development Ordinance
and the MLUL.
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION — shall mean any personal wireless
service as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996
("FTA"); i.e., FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services, including cellular, PCS, SMR, ESMR, paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
"Wireless communications" does not include any amateur radio facility
that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated
only by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively to receive transmissions, nor does it include any parabolic
satellite antennas, nor does it include non-wireless telephone service.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — shall mean any device
which is used for the transmission and reception of wave frequencies
for the purpose of any wireless communication as defined hereinabove.
For the purposes of this ordinance, wireless communication antennas
shall not be considered to be a public utility.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER — shall mean a free-standing
monopole structure on which one (1) or more antennas are attached,
but shall not mean existing structures such as silos, steeples, cupolas
or water tanks.
b. Overall Purposes.
1. It is the overall purpose of this section to provide specific zoning
conditions, standards and limitations for the location, approval and
operation of wireless communication antennas within the Township
of Aberdeen that recognize the need to safeguard the public good,
health, safety and welfare and preserve the intent and the purposes
of the Aberdeen Township Master Plan and Land Development
Ordinance.
2. It is understood by the Township of Aberdeen that the Federal
government, through the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), issues licenses for wireless communications, and that the
§ 25-6.9 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.10
1:652
FCC requires the license holders to provide coverage within the
areas so licensed.
3. However, it also is understood by the Township of Aberdeen that
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("FTA") expressly
preserves the zoning authority of the Township to regulate the
placement, construction and modification of personal wireless
service facilities subject to the six (6) limitations noted at § 332
(c)(7)(B) of the FTA.
4. In this regard, the FTA does not abrogate local zoning authority in
favor of the commercial desire to offer optimal service to all current
and potential customers, and the providers of the personal wireless
services must bear the burden of proving that any proposed service
facility is the least intrusive means of filling a significant gap in
wireless communication services in the area.
c. Overall Objective. The overall objective of this section is to allow the
provision of wireless communication services while, at the same time,
limiting the number of antennas and supporting towers to the fewest
possible, and only in those locations which do not negatively impact the
prevailing suburban, residential character of the Township and the
quality of life enjoyed by its residents.
d. Specific Goals.
1. To minimize the total number of wireless communication towers
within the Township of Aberdeen;
2. To limit the impact of wireless communication antennas, towers
and related facilities upon the residences and the streetscapes
throughout the Township of Aberdeen;
3. To safeguard the prevailing suburban, residential character of
development throughout the Township of Aberdeen, with particular
emphasis on maintaining the prevailing character of the residential
neighborhoods throughout the Township;
4. To encourage the location of antennas upon, or within,
appropriately located existing structures including, but not limited
to, existing towers, poles, and steeples;
5. To encourage the collocation of antennas on the fewest number of
existing structures within the Township of Aberdeen;
6. To encourage the communication carriers to configure their
facilities in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse
impacts upon affected properties, streetscapes and viewsheds
through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
§ 25-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.10
1:653
7. To encourage the use of alternate technologies which do not
require the use of towers, or require towers at relatively lesser
heights;
8. To enhance the ability of the carriers of wireless communications
services who adhere to the letter and intent of these ordinance
provisions to provide such services quickly, effectively and
efficiently; and
9. To comply with the mandate of the Federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section 332 (c) (7), which preserves local
government authority to enforce zoning requirements that protect
public safety, public and private property and community
aesthetics.
e. Exemptions of Applicability. This section shall not apply to any tower or
the installation of any antenna that is under seventy (70) feet high and
is owned and operated only by a Federally licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively to receive transmissions, nor
shall it apply to any parabolic satellite antennas or non-wireless
telephone services.
f. Locations Where Wireless Communication Antennas May be Located.
Wireless communication antennas may be located only at the following
two (2) prioritized locations:
1. First Priority Locations. The first priority locations for wireless
communication antennas shall be on the existing towers and poles
or within the existing church steeples in the Township of Aberdeen
which are specifically identified in the Addendum I Table42 and the
accompanying Map to this section, each of which are dated January
30, 2006; antennas so located are permitted uses in the zoning
districts in which the identified existing structures are located,
notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary;
except, there shall be no requirement for an existing antenna or
tower if the proposed location is on Township property.
2. Second Priority Locations: The second priority locations for
wireless communication antennas shall be on new wireless
communication towers on land areas within the "HC" Highway
Commercial zoning district or within the "LI" Limited Industrial
zoning district, and antennas so located are conditionally permitted
uses.
g. Requirements for First Priority Locations.
1. Notwithstanding any provision of these "Land Development
Ordinance" provisions of the Township of Aberdeen to the contrary,
the location and height of antenna(s) on, or within, any of the
42.Editor's Note: The Addendum I Table and Map are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 25-6.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.10
1:654
existing structures within the Township identified in the Addendum
I Table and any accessory cabinets enclosing the related electronic
equipment, shall be considered permitted uses in the subject
zoning district and, therefore, shall not require "conditional use"
approval in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 of the Municipal
Land Use Law, nor shall any variance be required in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. of the Municipal Land Use Law. Towers
and antennas located on a municipal property shall not exceed one
hundred fifty (150) feet in height.
2. Moreover, the location and height of the antenna(s) on, or within,
any of the existing structures within the Township identified in the
Addendum I Table, and any accessory cabinet(s) enclosing the
related electronic equipment, shall not require "site plan" approval,
but shall require an application to the Aberdeen Township Planning
Board for administrative review after said application is reviewed
and approved by the Aberdeen Township Engineer and the
Township Land Use Planner.
Editor's Note: The Addendum I Table and Map can be found at the
end of this subsection 25-6.10, Wireless Communication Facilities.
3. The applicant first shall meet with the Township Engineer and the
Township Land Use Planner to discuss the proposed location of the
wireless communication antennas, the proposed location and
possible landscape screening of any accessory cabinet(s) enclosing
the related electronic equipment, and any other construction that
may be proposed or required regarding the installation of the
proposed antennas.
4. (Reserved)
5. Once approved by the Aberdeen Township Engineer, the Aberdeen
Land Use Planner and the Aberdeen Township Planning Board, no
construction permit shall be issued by the Township Construction
Official until he or she is in receipt of final plans signed by the
Aberdeen Township Engineer, Aberdeen Land Use Planner, and the
Aberdeen Planning Board Secretary and Chairman.
6. In any case, the height of any proposed antenna extending above
any existing structure shall not exceed twenty (20) feet and, if
feasible, all antennas shall be flush mounted antennas totaling no
more than six (6) in number.
7. An escrow account of five thousand ($5,000) dollars shall be
established by the applicant with Aberdeen Township to pay for the
time expended by the Township Engineer and Township Land Use
Planner.
h. Requirements for Second Priority Locations.
§ 25-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.10
1:655
1. Regarding the second priority locations for wireless
communication antennas (i.e., on lands within the "HC" Highway
Commercial zoning district or on lands within the "LI" Limited
Industrial zoning district), any such proposed tower, antennas and
related equipment shall require conditional use review and
approval in accordance with the applicable requirements of
subsection 25-6.6a; as well as preliminary and final site plan
reviews and approvals in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Section 25-8 of this chapter.
2. The following information shall be submitted for site plan approval
for second priority locations, and the referenced paragraphs i., j.,
k., and l. of subsection 25-6.10 contain the specific conditions,
standards and limitations for wireless communication antennas on
new wireless communication towers in the Township of Aberdeen:
(a) In order to be declared complete, the initially submitted
application shall include all of the applicable documentation
and items of information identified on the Township's
preliminary and final site plan application checklist related to
subsections 25-8.4 and 25-8.5 of this chapter;
(b) In order to be declared complete, the initially submitted
application shall include an "Overall Comprehensive Plan" in
accordance with paragraph i. of subsection 25-6.10
hereinbelow;
(c) In order to be declared complete, the initially submitted site
plan shall indicate conformance with all of the "Area and
Setback Conditions" set forth in paragraph j. of subsection
25-6.10 hereinbelow;
(d) In order to be declared complete, the initially submitted site
plan shall indicate conformance with each of the "Design
Conditions" set forth in paragraph k. of subsection 25-6.10
hereinbelow;
(e) In order to be declared complete, the initially submitted
application shall include the "Additional Conditions" indicated
in paragraph l. of subsection 25-6.10, hereinbelow; and
(f) During the public hearing process, the applicant shall schedule
the time for a crane test with the Secretary of the Planning
Board in order to provide the members of the Planning Board
and the general public the opportunity to view a crane at the
location and height of the proposed tower. Thereafter, a visual
sight distance analysis shall be prepared by the applicant and
presented to the Planning Board, including photographic
reproductions of the crane test, graphically simulating the
appearance of the proposed tower, with at least three (3)
antenna arrays attached thereto and from at least fifteen (15)
§ 25-6.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.10
1:656
locations around and within one (1) mile of any proposed tower
where the tower will be most visible.
i. Overall Comprehensive Plan for Second Priority Locations.
1. In order to effectuate the purposes, objectives and goals of these
ordinance provisions, any applicant for approval to erect a new
supporting tower for wireless communication antennas shall
provide threshold evidence that the proposed location of the tower
and antennas has been planned to result in the fewest number of
towers within and around the Township of Aberdeen at the time full
service is provided by the applicant.
2. The applicant shall provide an overall comprehensive plan
indicating how it intends to provide full service within and around
the Township of Aberdeen and, to the greatest extent possible, shall
indicate how its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with
the needs of all other providers of wireless communication services
within and around the Township.
3. The overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the following, and
this information shall be provided at the time of the initial
submission of the application:
(a) The mapped location and written description of all existing and
approved supporting towers for all providers of wireless
communication services within one (1) mile of the subject site,
both within and outside of Aberdeen Township;
(b) The mapped location and written description of all existing or
approved water towers or water standpipes and existing high
tension power line stanchions within one (1) mile of the subject
site, both within and outside of Aberdeen Township;
(c) Why the proposed antennas could not be located on any of the
structures listed and mapped in Addendum I attached to these
ordinance provisions;
(d) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the anticipated need for additional
antennas and supporting structures within and near the
Township of Aberdeen by the applicant and by other providers
of wireless communication services within the Township;
(e) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the objective of collocating the antennas
of many different providers of wireless communication services
on a single supporting structure; and
(f) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the overall objective of providing
adequate wireless communication services within the
§ 25-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.10
1:657
Township of Aberdeen while, at the same time, limiting the
number of towers to the fewest possible, including alternate
technologies which do not require the use of towers or require
towers of a lesser height.
j. Area and Setback Conditions for Second Priority Locations.
1. The proposed tower, antennas and ancillary related electronic
equipment are required to be located on a land area no less than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
2. The minimum required land area shall either be a separate
undeveloped lot or a leased portion of an existing undeveloped or
developed lot;
3. The proposed tower, antennas and related equipment, and any
approved building housing the electronic equipment and any
approved camouflaging of the tower, shall be the only land uses
located on the required twenty thousand (20,000) square foot land
area, whether a separate lot or a leased portion of a lot; and
4. Except for any access driveway into the property, required
landscaping and any underground utility lines reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board as part of the site plan submission,
no building, tower, other structure and/or disturbance of land shall
be permitted within the following areas:
(a) Within one hundred (100) feet of any Street line;
(b) Within two hundred (200) feet of any lot line other than a
Street line;
(c) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of an historic district or site
as duly designated by Aberdeen Township, Monmouth County,
the State of New Jersey and/or by the Federal government;
(d) Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing residential
dwelling unit; and
(e) Within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district
boundary line, except that this provision shall not apply to any
residential district boundary line within the right-of-way of the
Garden State Parkway.
k. Design Conditions for Second Priority Locations.
1. All towers shall be a monopole design.
2. All towers shall be camouflaged (e.g., housed in a bell tower, etc.,
or made to look like a tree or a non oversized flagpole) as may be
appropriate in the context of the visibility of the tower from
different vantage points throughout the Township and the existing
land uses and vegetation in the vicinity of the subject site.
§ 25-6.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.10
1:658
3. The height of any proposed new tower and the antennas attached
thereto shall not exceed one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet
from the existing ground level beneath the tower, unless a higher
height is approved by the Planning Board for collocation purposes.
4. No signage is permitted except such information signs deemed
necessary for safety purposes by the Planning Board.
5. Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed and as
specifically approved by the Planning Board.
6. No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that specifically
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and any
such required lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest
extent possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties. The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board all
applicable FAA standards regarding lighting that may apply to a
proposed tower.
7. Individual cabinets for the required electronic equipment related to
the wireless communications antenna(s) shall be permitted in
accordance with the following design criteria:
(a) Any proposed cabinet enclosing required electronic equipment
shall not be more than twenty (20) feet in height nor more than
two hundred and fifty (250) square feet in area, and only two
(2) such shelters shall be permitted for each provider of
wireless communication services located on the site;
(b) No electronic equipment shall interfere with any public safety
communications;
(c) All of the electronic equipment shall be automated so that the
need for on-site maintenance and the commensurate need for
vehicular trips to and from the site will be minimized;
(d) All of the cabinets for the required electronic equipment for all
anticipated communication carriers to be located on the
subject site shall be housed within a single one and one-half
(1 1/2) story building, which building shall not exceed two
thousand (2,000) gross square feet in area and twenty-five (25)
feet in height, and which shall be designed with a single-ridge,
pitched roof with a residential appearance; and
(e) The building may have one (1) light at the entrance to the
building, provided that the light is attached to the building, is
focused downward and is switched so that the light is turned
on only when workers are at the building.
8. Between the location of the tower and the building enclosing
related electronic equipment and any public Street or residential
dwelling unit or residential zoning district within view of the tower
§ 25-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.10
1:659
and the building, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
(a) The landscaping shall consist of a combination of existing and/
or newly planted evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of
sufficient density to screen the view of the tower during all four
(4) seasons of the year, particularly at its base, to the maximum
extent reasonably possible, and to enhance the appearance of
the building from the surrounding residential properties and
any public Street;
(b) The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect who shall present testimony to the
Planning Board regarding the adequacy of the plan to screen
the tower from view and to enhance the appearance of the
building; and
(c) Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least eight (8)
feet high at time of planting, and any newly planted deciduous
trees shall be a minimum caliper of three (3) inches at time of
planting.
l. Additional Conditions for Second Priority Locations.
1. Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed tower will
have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed
antennas and the anticipated future collocated antennas and that
the structural standards developed for antennas by the Electronic
Industries Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunication
Industry Association (TIA) have been met; and
2. A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form that is reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board Attorney, indicating that the
applicant will share the use of any tower with other approved
wireless communication carriers at reasonable rates that are
economically viable.
m. Location Preferences for New Towers. The following are not conditions,
standards and limitations for the location of new wireless
communication towers, but are preferences of the Township:
1. To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from
any historic district or site as duly designated by the Township of
Aberdeen, Monmouth County, the State of New Jersey and/or by the
Federal government.
2. To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from any street.
3. To the greatest extent possible, any tower shall be located behind
existing buildings and/or natural topographic elevations in order to
§ 25-6.10 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.10
1:660
§ 25-6.11. "The Glassworks" Mixed-Use Redevelopment Plan. [Ord.
No. 14-2010 § 6]
The Glassworks Mixed-Use Redevelopment Plan was adopted by Ord. No.
14-2010. Ord. No. 14-2010 may be found, in its entirety, on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk.
screen the tower from view from adjacent properties and from any
street right-of-way.
n. Other Requirements.
1. All other applicable requirements of this subsection not contrary to
the conditions, standards and limitations specified herein shall be
met, but waivers and/or variances of such other applicable
requirements may be granted by the Planning Board.
2. The applicant (and the landowner in the instance of a leased
property) shall provide a performance bond and/or other
assurances satisfactory to the Planning Board, in a form approved
by the Planning Board Attorney, that will cause the antennas, any
supporting tower, the electric equipment cabinets, any building
enclosing the electronic equipment shelters, and all other related
improvements to the land to be removed, at no cost to the
Township, when the antennas are no longer operative. Any wireless
communication facility not used for its intended and approved
purpose for a period of six (6) months shall be considered "no
longer operative" and shall be removed by the responsible party
within sixty (60) days thereof.
o. Technical Review. In addition to its normal professional staff, given the
technical and specialized nature of the testimony by the applicant's
radio frequency expert(s), the Planning Board may, at the applicant's
expense, hire its own radio frequency expert to review and comment
upon the testimony presented by the applicant. Additionally, based
upon other testimony presented by the applicant, the Planning Board
may hire other experts with specialized areas of expertise if deemed
necessary, also at the applicant's expense.
p. Application for "Use" Variances to the Zoning Board. Any application
submitted to the Aberdeen Township Zoning Board of Adjustment for a
"use" variance to construct or install wireless communication antennas
and/or a new wireless communication tower in a location not permitted
by this subsection or for a variance from any of the conditions,
standards and limitations established for second priority locations in
this subsection shall be required to submit all of the information
required herein for second priority locations, and no such application
shall be deemed complete unless all of the required information is
provided or unless the need to provide the required information is
specifically waived by the Zoning Board of Adjustment."
§ 25-6.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:661
a. Purposes. The purposes of "The Glassworks" Mixed-Use Redevelopment
Plan are as follows:
1. To eliminate the currently existing, vacant and/or obsolete
manufacturing facilities that substantially impair the sound
growth, planning and functioning of the subject area of Aberdeen
Township.
2. To remediate any and all environmental problems associated with
the "Brownfield" site to restore its environmental integrity.
3. To establish an economically viable mixed-use development
featuring a variety of residential, recreational, office, civic, retail
commercial and other nonresidential uses that will serve the
community as a destination location that will not only beautify the
community, but will be conducive to a wholesome living and
working environment.
4. To mitigate against the traffic impacts to the local road network by
making necessary and appropriate improvements to the existing
road network and by constructing a public bus transportation parkand-
ride facility with shuttles to the Aberdeen/Matawan Train
Station.
5. To diversify the housing stock within Aberdeen Township.
6. To create a site plan design generally in accordance with the
February 12, 2010 "Concept Plan and Program" map for "The
Glassworks" development which appears on Page 6 of this "The
Glassworks" Mixed Use Redevelopment Plan.
7. To create an open space network generally in accordance with the
February 12, 2010 "Open Space Diagram" map for "The
Glassworks" development shown on Page 8 of this "The
Glassworks" Mixed Use Redevelopment Plan.
8. To provide standards and guidelines in order to assure that the
appearance and design of buildings, parking areas, streetscapes,
landscaping and open spaces support a positive and lively
pedestrian experience.
9. To encourage efficient land use by facilitating compact, higher
density development and minimizing the amount of land needed for
surface parking.
10. To encourage an economically positive development, which will
support increased employment opportunities, provide upscale
residential dwellings, tax ratables and economic growth.
11. To promote the health, safety and general welfare of Aberdeen
Township and the neighborhood areas in vicinity to "The
Glassworks" development.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:662
b. The Permitted Maximum Number of Residential Units.
1. "The Glassworks" Mixed-Use Redevelopment Plan shall include up
to five hundred (500) residential units if only Block 155/Lot 1 is
redeveloped, with twenty-two (22%) percent of the units, or one
hundred ten (110) units, to be affordable family rental units set
aside for occupancy by eligible COAH households and to be in
accordance with all applicable COAH rules.
2. If one (1) or more of the outparcel lots (i.e., Block 155/Lots 2, 3, 4
and/or 5) are acquired by the redeveloper, the redeveloper shall be
permitted to develop an additional ten (10) market-rate units for
each lot acquired, and there shall be no additional requirement for
affordable housing units.
c. The Required Minimum Area of Retail and Other Commercial Space.
1. "The Glassworks" Mixed-Use Redevelopment Plan shall contain a
minimum of 75,000 square feet of retail, office and other permitted
nonresidential space.
2. Additionally, the redevelopment plan shall contain an
approximately 80,000 to 100,000 square foot hotel with
approximately 110-125 rooms, plus a boutique movie theater with
approximately 4 to 6 individual theaters.
d. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Retail sales of goods and services.
2. Offices.
3. Banks, including drive-through windows provided such windows do
not face a primary street.
4. Pharmacies, including drive-through windows, provided such
windows do not face a primary street.
5. Restaurants, excluding drive-through windows.
6. Theaters.
7. Hotels.
8. Health clubs, gyms, spas and similar facilities.
9. Libraries, museums and art galleries.
10. Child care centers.
11. Townhouse dwelling units.
12. Multi-family dwelling units, including units within freestanding
buildings and units on the second and/or above floors of buildings
with nonresidential uses on the first floor, provided that:
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:663
(a) All market-rate units shall have no more than 2-bedrooms; and
(b) All COAH qualified affordable units shall meet COAH's
bedroom distribution requirements.
13. Public bus park-and-ride facilities.
14. Houses of worship.
15. Public parks, conservation areas, open spaces, common spaces and
public purpose uses.
16. Public utility uses in accordance with the specifications and
standards for "Public Utilities" noted in subsection 25-5.15 of the
"LDO" ordinance.
e. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Common recreational facilities, recreation centers and/or
clubhouses as specifically approved by the Planning Board within
specified open space areas in order to satisfy the needs of the
residential population within the subject portion of the
development.
2. Landscaping features including benches, trellises, gazebos and
other such features customarily associated with the permitted
principal uses, as the case may be.
3. Underground sprinkler systems within specified open space areas,
provided that the water spray does not extend beyond the open
space area.
4. Fences and walls shall only be permitted if specifically approved by
the Planning Board as part of the site plan approval and/or if a
standard for the location and type of the fences and/or walls has
been approved by the Planning Board as part of the site plan
approval and has been included in any applicable open space
organization documents.
5. Patios and decks in the side or rear yard areas of a townhouse
dwelling unit, provided that no patio or deck shall be permitted
unless a standard for such patios and/or decks has been approved
by the Planning Board as part of the site plan approval and has
been included in any applicable open space organization
documents.
6. Off-street parking and private garages in accordance with
subsection 25-6.11i hereinbelow and the design provisions
specified in subsection 25-5.12 of the "LDO" ordinance which are
not in conflict with the provisions of subsection 25-6.11i.
7. Signs in accordance with subsection 25-6.11n hereinbelow and the
design provisions specified in subsection 25-5.18 of the "LDO"
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:664
ordinance which are not in conflict with the provisions of
subsection 25-6.11n.
f. Maximum Building Height.
1. No building shall exceed six (6) stories and sixty-five (65) feet in
height, provided and in accordance with the following:
(a) Building heights shall be measured from the elevation of the
street upon which and where the building fronts; where a
building fronts on more than one (1) street, the building height
shall be measured from the street with the highest elevation.
(b) No building shall have a wall height along the street frontage
of less than twenty (20) feet nor more than fifty (50) feet; for
buildings greater than fifty (50) feet in height, front elevations
shall provide a cornice at fifty (50) feet running the length of
the elevation.
2. (Reserved)
3. Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment and similar equipment
required for the operation of the building, skylights, spires,
cupolas, chimneys or similar structures may be erected above the
height requirements, but in no case shall be more than eighteen
(18) feet in added height. All roof structures shall be set back from
all roof edges by a distance equal to or greater than their height.
Ornamental architectural flourishes for decoration such as cupolas
and spires shall have no height limitation.
g. Building Separation Requirements.
1. Commercial and Mixed-Use Buildings, With or Without Residential
Units on the Second and/or Above Floors.
(a) No front yard setback is required for commercial and mixeduse
buildings, and commercial and mixed-use buildings may be
tied to each other without side yard separation.
(b) When separated, all commercial and mixed-use buildings shall
be separated by a minimum distance of fourteen (14) feet,
provided that such separation is to be used solely for
pedestrian circulation and/or landscaping.
(c) When separated, all commercial and mixed-use buildings shall
be separated by a minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet
where any part of such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation; this will enable a twenty (20) foot wide
travel-way and seven and one-half (7.5) feet on either side for
landscaping.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:665
(d) However, in any case, the required separation between
commercial/mixed-use buildings shall not be understood to
prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof of such
walkway extends between the buildings.
2. Freestanding Townhouse and Multi-Family Residential Buildings.
Minimum distances between townhouse and/or multi-family
buildings shall be measured horizontally in feet and shall be
measured away from the front, side and rear of each building. The
total required minimum separation between the buildings shall be
the sum of the two (2) abutting distances, and each building shall
have one (1) front, one (1) rear and two (2) side yards.
(a) The minimum distances shall be twenty (20) feet for the front
of a building, ten (10) feet for the side of a building, twenty-five
(25) feet for the rear of a building abutting a property line, and
twenty (20) feet for the rear of a building abutting an alley
right-of-way.
(b) No portion of any building shall be closer to any portion of any
other building than the combined distances of the abutting
yard requirements for each building, provided that the corner
of a building off-set more than a fifteen (15°) degree angle from
a line drawn parallel to another building shall be considered a
side of the building and the building separation, therefore,
shall be thirty (30) feet.
(c) In any case, and notwithstanding the distances specified
hereinabove, no building shall be located closer than fifty (50)
feet to the Cliffwood Avenue right-of-way, to the railroad rightof-
way or to the right-of-way of the Garden State Parkway.
h. Age Restrictions for Any Age-Restricted Dwelling Units.
1. Any age-restricted dwelling unit shall be deed restricted for
occupancy by households with at least one (1) person fifty-five (55)
years of age or older and with no person less than nineteen (19)
years of age, provided that visitors less than nineteen (19) years of
age are permitted for no more than eight (8) weeks during any
twelve (12) month time period.
2. The wording of the required deed restriction shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Planning Board for review as part of the
application for final subdivision approval, and the wording shall be
reviewed, modified as necessary, and finally approved by the
Township Council and incorporated within a developer's agreement
between the developer and the Township Council as a condition of
any final approval granted by the Planning Board for the agerestricted
dwelling units.
3. The wording of the required deed restriction as finally approved by
the Township Council shall be recited in the Master Deed and the
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:666
open space organization bylaws, which also shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Council as a condition of any final
approval granted by the Planning Board for the age-restricted
dwelling units.
i. Off-Street Parking, Private Garages and Driveways. Notwithstanding
any other ordinance provisions to the contrary, each individual use shall
be provided off-street parking spaces according to the following
minimum requirements as contained in the provisions of the State of
New Jersey's "Residential Site Improvement Standards" (RSIS);
provided that, in accordance with the RSIS, the following exceptions
shall apply:
"Alternative parking standard to those shown in Table 4.4 of the RSIS
shall be accepted if the applicant demonstrates these standards better
reflect local conditions" [see N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14 (c)]; and/or
"When, in the judgment of the local approving authority, on-street
parking is available, then only that proportion of the parking
requirement which is not available on the street shall be provided in offstreet
parking facilities. A length of 23 feet per on-street parking space
shall be used in calculating the number of available on-street parking
spaces" [see N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14 (f)].
1. Townhouse and Apartment Residential Units.
(a) Townhouses shall be provided 1.8 off-street spaces for each
1-bedroom unit, 2.3 spaces for each 2-bedroom unit, and 2.4
spaces for each 3-bedroom townhouse unit. Where the
bedroom count per dwelling unit is not specified, 2.3 spaces
per unit shall be provided.
(b) Apartments shall be provided 1.8 off-street spaces for each
1-bedroom unit, 2.0 spaces for each 2-bedroom unit, and 2.1
spaces for each 3-bedroom apartment unit. Where the
bedroom count per dwelling unit is not specified, two (2.0)
spaces per unit shall be provided.
(c) For both townhouses and apartments, each garage space shall
be counted as one (1.0) off-street parking space, regardless of
the length of the driveway.
(1) A 1-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
two (2) off-street parking spaces for the subject unit,
provided that the driveway measures a minimum of
eighteen (18) feet in length between the face of the garage
door and the right-of-way or between the face of the
garage door and a sidewalk, whichever distance is less.
(2) A 2-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
three and one-half (3 1/2) off-street parking spaces for the
subject unit, provided that the driveway measures a
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:667
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width for a minimum
eighteen (18) feet in length between the face of the garage
door and the right-of-way or between the face of the
garage door and a sidewalk, whichever distance is less.
(d) Any recreation center or clubhouse shall be provided a
minimum of 0.25 off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit
being served by the facility.
(e) All off-street parking spaces shall be located within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the nearest building entrance
providing access to the residential units for which the parking
spaces are provided.
(f) No off-street parking spaces shall be located within forty (40)
feet of the Cliffwood Avenue right-of-way, nor within fifteen
(15) feet of any other tract boundary.
2. Commercial and Other Nonresidential Uses:
(a) Retail uses shall provide a minimum of four (4.0) parking
spaces per one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Office uses shall provide 3.5 parking spaces per one thousand
(1000) square feet of gross floor area.
(c) Hotel and motel uses shall provide a minimum of one (1.0)
space per room.
(d) Restaurants, theaters and houses of worship shall provide a
minimum of one (1.0) space for every three (3) seats.
(e) All other uses shall provide 3.5 parking spaces per one
thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area.
3. Shared Parking Arrangements. In addition to the above
requirements pursuant to the RSIS standards and exceptions, a
shared parking arrangement may be approved by the Planning
Board where it can be shown to the Board's satisfaction that the
peak parking requirements of the various residential and
nonresidential uses occur at different times of the day or week in
the specific area(s) of the development where the parking spaces
are located.
(a) The applicant shall first calculate the minimum number of
parking spaces required in accordance with subsections
25-6.11i1 and 2, hereinabove.
(b) The calculated minimum number of parking spaces for each
use shall then be multiplied by the "occupancy rate" for the
subject use category in the following Parking Occupancy Rates
Table in order to produce an adjusted minimum requirement
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:668
for each use for weekday and weekend day, evening and night
time periods:
PARKING OCCUPANCY RATES TABLE
Weekdays (a) Weekends (a)
Use
Day
(7:00
am-6:00
pm)
Evening
(6:00
pm-11:00
pm)
Night
(11:00
pm-7:00 am)
Day
(8:00
am-5:00
pm)
Evening
(5:00
pm-12:00
am)
Night
(12:00
am-8:00 am)
a. Retail
Uses
85% 100% 5% 100% 90% 5%
b. Office
Uses
100% 20% 5% 50% 5% 5%
c.
Residential
Dwelling
70% 95% 100% 90% 95% 100%
d. Hotel 60% 95% 100% 70% 95% 100%
e. Theater 55% 100% 5% 80% 100% 10%
f. All Other
Uses
80% 80% 5% 80% 80% 5%
(a) Weekends are the period from 6:00 pm on Friday to 6:00 pm on Sunday. All other times are weekdays.
(c) Subject to review and approval by the Planning Board's traffic
consultants, the sum of the adjusted minimum number of
parking spaces for each use for each time period shall be
utilized in order to adjust the minimum number of spaces to be
required.
(d) Again subject to review and approval by the Planning Board's
traffic consultants, the largest number of the adjusted
minimum parking spaces for each time period shall be the
minimum number of shared parking spaces required.
(e) In any case, parking spaces reserved for specified individual
persons, positions, businesses or residences may not be used in
the shared parking analyses and, therefore, may not be
reduced in number by applying the occupancy rates in the
table hereinabove.
j. Perimeter Buffer and Open Space Requirements.
1. The perimeter of the property shall contain a buffer easement area
no less than fifteen (15) feet in depth.
(a) The designated buffer area shall be landscaped as approved by
the Planning Board.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:669
(b) Except for possible sidewalks and pathways, approved signage
and approved lighting, no other structures shall be permitted
in the designated buffer area, except that surface water
management facilities may be located within the buffer area
along the southerly side of the subject property adjacent to the
Garden State Parkway right-of-way.
2. Land area equal to a minimum of ten (10%) percent of the overall
redevelopment plan area shall be specifically set aside for usable
open space and shall be indicated on the submitted site plan
drawings, provided that the reviewing authority may approve a
lesser percentage of usable open space if, in the opinion of the
reviewing authority, sufficient areas and active and passive
recreation facilities are provided and are appropriately distributed
throughout the development.
(a) Land utilized for street rights-of-way, surface water
management facilities and perimeter buffer areas with no
other utility shall not be considered usable open space.
(b) The open space may be arranged in any manner that facilitates
public access and use.
(c) Such space must be accessible for use and enjoyment by the
general public, and shall include improvements to enhance the
amenity of the development such as landscaping features,
furniture, sculptures, artwork, etc.
(d) Additionally, the open space shall be designed and arranged to
achieve the following:
(1) Provision for usable place areas, recreation areas and/or
equipment made conveniently accessible to residents and
visitors throughout the site.
(2) Establishment of public open space, including squares,
plazas, greens and parks as focal points to the
development.
(3) At least two (2) open space areas each shall measure not
less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and at
least one (1) such area shall be appropriately sized and
designed as a civic gathering place for Township events.
(4) The arrangement and configuration of all open spaces
shall be designed as illustrated on the February 12, 2010
"Open Space Diagram" map for "The Glassworks"
development, which was prepared by Torti Gallas and
Partners, Inc. and which appears on Page 8 of this
redevelopment plan.
k. Architectural Design Requirements.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:670
1. General Architectural Requirements:
(a) The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including any
accessory buildings, shall be architecturally compatible and
shall be constructed of complementary materials.
(b) Architectural details, style, color, proportion and massing shall
create a pedestrian scale development.
(c) The appearance of mega-buildings shall be avoided by not
allowing the same or very similar exterior design to be used
along long expanses of buildings; therefore, while even smaller
units of design are encouraged, no more than two hundred fifty
(250) feet of continuous street frontage may appear to have
been designed by the same architect.
2. Building and Parking/Loading Orientation.
(a) All principal buildings shall have a front façade facing a
roadway and shall be designed to create a vertical edge to the
streetscape.
(b) In order to create a defining edge along the streetscape, a
building facade shall extend along a minimum of two-hundred
(200) feet of the property's street frontage, provided that the
Planning Board may reduce the building facade length due to
alternative methods proposed by the applicant to create a
defining edge along a streetscape and enable pedestrian
circulation.
(c) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be located to the
rear of the building (and, in limited situations, to the side of the
building) and shall be screened from public view and from
adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible and in
consideration of the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and car
drivers.
3. Building Entrances.
(a) All entrances to a building shall be articulated utilizing
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, or overhangs.
(b) Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible
with the style, materials, colors, door treatment and
architectural details of the overall building.
4. Facade Treatments.
(a) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets
to create visual breaks along each façade; long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls are not permitted.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:671
(b) To the extent appropriate to the architectural design, building
wall offsets, including projections such as balconies and
canopies, recesses, and changes in floor levels shall be used to
add architectural interest and variety and to mitigate the visual
appearance of a simple, long wall.
(c) Buildings with more than one (1) street frontage shall be
designed to have a front facade facing each frontage, and
where a building faces a driveway, the building also shall have
a front facade facing the driveway.
(d) The architectural treatment of the front facade(s) shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building.
(e) All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent regarding style, materials, colors and details.
(f) Natural materials such as wood composite and masonry are
recommended. High quality man-made materials also are
permitted. Stucco may be used only as an accent in limited
areas.
(g) Dormers, gables, windows and other similar design features
shall be provided across a building facade.
(h) Each building shall have a sign band along the ground floor
façade for the location of wall-mounted signs.
5. Roof Treatments.
(a) Rooflines that mix flat and pitched components are
encouraged.
(b) Pitched roofs shall have a minimum five foot to twelve (5 to 12)
foot pitch, except where otherwise approved by the Planning
Board. Both gable and hipped roofs shall provide overhanging
eaves that extend a minimum of one (1) foot beyond the
building wall along all sides of the building.
(c) Buildings with flat roofs shall provide that all visibly exposed
walls have an articulated cornice that projects horizontally
from the vertical wall in order to create the appearance of a
one and one-half (1 1/2) to two and one-half (2 1/2) story
facade.
(d) Long, monotonous, uninterrupted roof planes are not
permitted. Roof-line offsets, dormers or gables shall be
provided in order to provide architectural interest and variety
to the massing of a building and to mitigate the visual
appearance of a single, long roof.
6. Window Treatments.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:672
(a) Windows shall be appropriately proportioned to the building.
(b) The first story façade of retail, office and restaurant buildings
which faces a street and/or has a pedestrian access shall have
large-pane display windows which occupy at least seventy-five
(75%) percent of the first story facade.
(1) The area of actual windows may be reduced by the
Planning Board in consideration of the needs of a
particular use or for security purposes.
(2) However, where smaller windows are permitted, the
design of the facade must include materials outlining the
size of the windows equivalent to seventy-five (75%)
percent of the first story facade, within which the
permitted smaller windows can be located.
7. Additional Architectural Requirements.
(a) All lighting, benches, trash receptacles and signage shall be
designed to be compatible with the architecture of the
building(s).
(b) The mechanical equipment serving the building(s) shall be
screened from public view by the design of the building and/or
by landscaping features integrated with the overall design of
the building(s).
(c) The materials used for all internal sidewalks and pathways
connecting buildings, parking areas and public areas to
sidewalks along the street(s) and to the Township's pathway
network shall include decorative brick or paving materials
chosen to enhance the architecture of the building(s) and the
attractiveness of the site development.
l. Lighting Requirements.
1. Lighting shall be minimal for security, safety and operational
purposes, and a lighting plan shall be submitted indicating the
location of the lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the
wattage and isolux curves for each fixture, and the details of the
lighting poles and the luminaries. A point-by-point lighting plan
also shall be submitted as part of the lighting plan.
2. The lighting is to be provided by decorative fixtures with a
mounting height not higher than sixteen (16) feet, except that a
twenty (20) foot mounting height shall be permitted at street
intersections. The lighting fixtures are to include non-glare lights
with recessed lenses focused downward and with "cut-off" shields
as appropriate in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon
adjacent and nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent
roadways and overhead skyglow.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:673
3. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated in
footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not less than
five-tenths (0.5) footcandles at intersections and shall average not
more than one and one-half (1.5) footcandles throughout any area
to be illuminated. Lighting levels for pathways shall maintain an
average of approximately 0.25 footcandles along the pathways to
be lighted.
4. The lighting of any sidewalk and/or pathway shall be via bollard
lighting not more than four (4) feet in height and/or other
decorative fixtures with a mounting height not higher than twelve
(12) feet.
5. All lighting shall be operated and maintained by an association.
m. Landscaping Requirements.
1. The landscaping within "The Glassworks" development shall be
prepared by a licensed landscape architect and shall be conceived
as a total pattern throughout the development, integrating the
various elements of the architectural design of the buildings and
creating an aesthetically pleasing environment.
2. The landscaping shall be in accordance with subsection 25-5.10 of
this chapter and shall include shade trees, decorative flowering
trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and hedges, ground cover,
perennials and annuals, and may include other materials such as
rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and decorative brick or paving
materials provided, however, that street trees do not have to be
planted in a linear configuration, and can be clustered in groupings
so long as the total number of street trees is the same as if they had
been planted in a linear configuration at forty (40) feet on center.
Additionally, street trees shall have a caliper of two and one-half
(2 1/2) inches.
n. Signage Requirements.
1. Permitted Wall-Mounted Sign Areas and Locations.
(a) Wall-mounted signs shall be permitted on the front façade of
the ground floor of buildings fronting upon a street, except that
a hotel may have a wall-mounted sign attached to the upper
façade of the building.
(b) No more than one (1) wall-mounted sign shall be permitted for
each tenant.
(c) A wall-mounted sign shall not exceed an area equivalent to ten
(10%) percent of the area of the ground floor façade of the
building occupied by the subject tenant.
2. Permitted Free-Standing Sign Areas and Locations.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:674
(a) Three freestanding signs shall be permitted if they are erected
within a common area and advertise at least four separate
uses. [Amended 3-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
(b) Two free-standing signs may be located along the Cliffwood
Avenue frontage of the property, with one at each entrance to
the Glassworks redevelopment project, and one free-standing
sign may be located along the Garden State Parkway frontage
of the property. [Amended 3-1-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
(c) The freestanding sign along Cliffwood Avenue shall not exceed
one hundred (100) square feet in area, shall not exceed fifteen
(15) feet in height, and shall be set back at least twenty (20)
feet from the street right-of-way and all property lines.
(d) The freestanding sign along the Garden State Parkway shall
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area, shall not
exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, and shall be set back at
least twenty-five (25) feet from the parkway right-of-way line
and all property lines.
3. Permitted Directional and Postal Number Signs.
(a) A building shall have a postal number applied against the
building anywhere at the entrance area; the numbers shall not
be more than six (6) inches in height. Postal number signs shall
not be included in the calculation of permitted sign area.
(b) Directional signs shall be permitted where specifically
approved by the Planning Board; no directional sign shall
exceed three (3) square feet in area or thirty (30) inches in
height. Directional signs shall not be included in the
calculation of permitted sign area.
4. Window Signs.
(a) Tenant name and hours of operation may be etched or painted
on the glass portion of a door or window of an establishment,
provided that the letters shall not exceed four (4) inches in
height.
(b) Temporary unattached signs may be displayed in a window
provided that all such signs in aggregate occupy no more than
ten (10%) percent of the window area.
5. Awning and Canopy Signs.
(a) Signage in addition to the wall-mounted signage may be
permitted on an awning, canopy or on a hanging sign over a
covered walkway if such signage is secondary to the wallmounted
signage and is specifically approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:675
(b) The material of the awning or canopy shall be canvas cloth or
equivalent and, at its lowest point, shall be at least eight (8)
feet above the finished grade below.
(c) The lettering of any signage on an awning, canopy or hanging
over a covered walkway shall not exceed six (6) inches in
height.
6. Portable Signs.
(a) Portable signs advertising daily specials, such as sandwich
boards, shall be permitted only during normal business hours
or special extended business hours.
(b) Only one (1) portable sign shall be permitted per tenant.
(c) Portable signs shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area and
shall be placed directly in front of the business upon the
sidewalk in a location not obstructing the pedestrian walk
area.
7. Prohibited Signs.
(a) Roof signs.
(b) Billboards.
(c) LED or similar message boards.
(d) Animated, flashing or revolving signs.
(e) Wall-mounted signs larger than fifty (50) square feet in area.
o. First Floor Building Occupancy Requirements.
1. The ground floor area of buildings along the primary commercial
streets within the development must be fully occupied by retail
uses for the sale of goods and services.
2. The ground floor area of buildings along the secondary commercial
streets within the development must have at least fifty (50%)
percent of the area occupied by retail uses for the sale of goods and
services.
p. Minimum Ceiling Heights.
1. Retail spaces shall have a minimum ceiling height of twelve (12)
feet, but an eighteen (18) foot height is preferred to permit the
insertion of a partial mezzanine level.
2. Office spaces and other nonresidential uses shall have a minimum
ceiling height of nine (9) feet.
3. Residential units shall have a minimum ceiling height of eight (8)
feet.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:676
q. Sidewalk Requirements.
1. Sidewalks shall be provided along the frontage of the property
along Cliffwood Avenue.
2. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all new streets.
r. Screening of Waste Collection and Loading Areas.
1. Waste collection areas that are not within an enclosed building
must be screened so that they are not visible from public streets,
public sidewalks, internal pedestrian walkways or from residential
properties.
(a) The screening shall be accomplished by masonry walls
complementing the building(s) being served by the waste
collection area, augmented by landscaping.
(b) The wall enclosure and access gate shall be at least eight (8)
feet high.
2. Loading areas must be enclosed or adequately screened so that
they are not visible from public streets, public sidewalks, internal
pedestrian walkways or from adjacent uses.
(a) The screening shall be accomplished by masonry walls
complementing the building(s) being served by the loading
area, augmented by landscaping.
(b) The masonry wall shall be at least ten (10) feet high measured
from the loading dock floor elevation.
s. Performance Standards.
1. Regarding noise emissions, a noise mitigation plan must be
provided that indicates how noise will be mitigated to comply with
noise regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. Furthermore, any nonresidential use
sharing a building or otherwise in proximity with any residential
unit shall mitigate operational noise levels that may create a
nuisance to residents, either through noise mitigation barrier
technology, architectural design and/or through limitations on
business practices and operations.
2. Regarding vibration, any nonresidential use sharing a building or
otherwise in proximity with any residential unit shall mitigate
operational vibration levels that may create a nuisance to
residents, either through vibration mitigation barrier technology,
architectural design and/or through limitations on business
practices and operations.
3. Regarding odors, no odors generated by a nonresidential use in a
building shall be discernible into adjacent uses, particularly any
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:677
residential portion of the building. Moreover, no odor may be
vented within thirty (30) feet of any operable window, and no odor
may be vented below the second story of any building
t. Maintenance of Common Elements. A single controlling entity, such as a
commercial owner's association or a single owner of the entire
development, shall be established for the maintenance of the
landscaping, multiple tenant signs, open space areas, surface water
management facilities, lighting and other common elements or shared
structures and facilities.
u. Requirements for Initial Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
1. "The Glassworks" Mixed-Use Redevelopment Plan shall require
preliminary and final major site plan approval in accordance with
the procedures and requirements specified in subsections 25-8.4
and 25-8.5 of the this Land Development Ordinance (LDO).
2. However, prior to submitting plans in accordance with subsection
25-8.4 of the LDO, the applicant shall submit an initial preliminary
site plan for review and approval by the Planning Board. Any
approval of the initial preliminary site plan shall be conditioned
upon the submission, review and approval of a preliminary site plan
in accordance with subsection 25-8.4 of the LDO.
3. The purpose of the initial preliminary site plan (IPSP) is to afford
the developer and the Planning Board to review and agree upon the
design and parameters of the plan prior to finalizing the details of
the plan.
4. The IPSP application shall include the following information and
material, and submission waivers from other requirements for a
preliminary site plan submission may be favorable considered by
the Planning Board since they later shall be provided when a
preliminary site plan is submitted in accordance with subsection
25-8.4 of the LDO:
(a) Eighteen (18) copies of the IPSP shall be submitted to the
Secretary of the Planning Board at least three (3) weeks prior
to the meeting of the Board at which the applicant wishes to be
heard.
(1) Each IPSP shall be drawn by a professional engineer and/
or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey and shall bear the signature, seal, license number
and telephone number of the said professional engineer
and/or land surveyor; provided, however, that all
engineering data shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer and all surveying data shall be
signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:678
(2) Each IPSP shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall
be submitted on one (1) of four (4) of the following
standard sheet sizes (8-1/2" x 13"; 15" x 21"; 24" x 36"; 30"
x 42"). If one (1) sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire
tract, the map may be divided into sections to be shown on
separate sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each
sheet to the adjoining sheets.
(b) Certification that the applicant or applicants is/are the
owner(s) of the subject land or is/are a properly authorized
agent, or that the owner of a property has given his or her
consent under an option agreement.
(c) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and
assessments have been paid to date.
(d) A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas.
(e) A title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks
for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
(1) Name of development, Township of Aberdeen, Monmouth
County, New Jersey, with each sheet specifically titled with
appropriately descriptive words;
(2) Name, title, address and telephone number of applicant;
(3) Name, title, address, telephone number, license number
and signature of the professional or professionals who
prepared the plan;
(4) Name, title and address of the owner or owners of record;
(5) Scale (written and graphic); and
(6) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions entered
on each sheet.
(f) North arrow and meridian.
(g) Approval signature and date lines:
(1) Chairman;
(2) Secretary of the Board; and
(3) Township Engineer.
(h) Acreage to the nearest tenth of an acre and a computation of
the area of the tract to be disturbed.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:679
(i) The names and lot and block numbers of all property owners
within two hundred (200) feet of the extreme limits of the tract
as shown on the most recent tax list prepared by the Township
Tax Assessor.
(j) A Land Use Plan indicating the entire tract which shall include
the following:
(1) Both maps and text indicating the specific land areas to be
devoted to specific land uses;
(2) Residential land areas specifically indicating the acreage,
density and the type of dwelling units proposed;
(3) The conceptual footprints of all proposed buildings with
typical dimensions;
(4) The approximate and maximum height of all proposed
buildings;
(5) The location of parking areas and the number of parking
spaces;
(6) Typical distances between buildings, from tract boundary
lines and between adjacent land areas devoted to a
different type of land use; and
(7) General calculations of impervious surface coverage,
disaggregating building coverage from parking, driveway,
and street coverage.
(k) An Open Space And Recreation Plan indicating the general
location of the land areas to be devoted to open space,
conservation, and recreational purposes, including a general
description of the improvements proposed to be made thereon
and a plan for the operation and maintenance of said land
areas. Documentation should accompany the Open Space and
Recreational Plan showing that the requirements of this
ordinance regarding open space in the IPSP have been
satisfied.
(l) A Traffic Circulation Plan showing the general location and
types of transportation facilities, indicating all proposed
collector and local streets, and all proposed improvements to
existing roads.
(1) Moreover, the plan should indicate how the overall road
network relates to the terrain, to the overall design of the
"The Glassworks" development, to plans of the State of
New Jersey and of Monmouth County, if any, and to the
road networks of the Township and neighboring
municipalities.
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.11
1:680
(2) A general assessment of the traffic impact of the proposed
development shall be provided and shall include estimated
levels of service and projections of traffic to be generated
for peak hours.
(m) A Pedestrian Circulation Plan showing the general location and
types of facilities for pedestrian access within the "The
Glassworks" development.
(n) A Utility Plan indicating the general location of existing and
proposed sewer and water lines, pump stations, water supply
wells, sewage treatment plants and proposed methods for
handling solid waste disposal. Additionally, tract connections
to electric, gas, cable, and telephone facilities shall be
generally indicated and a plan for the operations and
maintenance of the proposed utilities shall be submitted.
(o) A Storm Water Management Plan indicating in general terms
the proposed method of controlling and draining water on and
from the site, and including sufficient supportive calculations
as required by the Township Engineer in order to ascertain the
adequacy of the plan. Additionally, a conceptual description of
the intended Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be
provided.
(p) A Community Facilities Plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities to be provided.
(q) A Housing Plan indicating the number of affordable housing
units to be provided within "The Glassworks" development and
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the
"Substantive Rules" of the New Jersey Council On Affordable
Housing (COAH).
(r) An Environmental Inventory including a general description of
the vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology,
climate and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made
structures or features and the probable impact of the
development on the environmental attributes of the site.
(s) A Proposed Timing Schedule where the "The Glassworks"
development is intended to be developed over a number of
years, indicating the areas to be developed in each stage and
the priority of each stage. The eventual development of each
stage should be related to the Land Use Plan, the Traffic
Circulation Plan, the Storm Water Management Plan and the
Utility Plan in order to ensure that the Proposed Timing
Schedule is a workable one and that the interests of the public
and the residents who occupy any section of the development
prior to the completion of the development in its entirety will
be protected.
§ 25-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.11
1:681
§ 25-6.12. "IH" Inclusionary Housing Overlay Zone. [Ord. No.
11-2010 § 3; Ord. No. 20-2010 § 3]
(t) A Local Service Plan indicating the public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which shall include, but not
be limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
(u) A Community Impact Fiscal Report describing the anticipated
demographic, school and fiscal costs and benefits of the "The
Glassworks" development, including a detailed projection of
property tax revenues which will accrue to the Township,
County and Board of Education.
(v) A Redevelopment Agreement, in writing, providing for the
effectuation of any agreements between the developer and the
Township, including a schedule of payments for off-tract
improvements and contributions relating to road
improvements, utility improvements and the affordable
housing obligations.
a. Purpose. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4 of COAH's "Third Round
Substantive Rules," the "IH" Inclusionary Housing Overlay Zone
provisions are created for the construction of affordable housing units
in accordance with the "Housing Plan Element & Fair Share Plan"
portion of the Aberdeen Township Master Plan, the rules of the New
Jersey Council On Affordable Housing (COAH) for site specific "Zoning
For Inclusionary Development," and other applicable COAH rules.
b. Property Description.
1. The subject overlay zones contains two (2) properties, including
approximately 17.52 acres of land situated along the north side of
County Road and approximately 7.8 acres of land situated on the
northeast side of Route 34, south of Wellington Drive.
2. The County Road property is identified as Block 196.04/Lot 27 and
Block 228/Lots 1 & 2 on the Aberdeen Township Tax Maps, and the
Route 34 property is identified as Block 114/Lot 4.
c. Conceptual Development Plans for the Subject Properties.
1. Regarding the County Road property, a concept plan for a
development known as "Renaissance At Aberdeen" appears on
Page 47 of the Township's November 25, 2008 "Housing Plan
Element And Fair Share Plan" document, which was adopted by the
Planning Board and then forwarded to COAH for "Substantive
Certification" by the Aberdeen Township Council on December 30,
2008.
(a) An updated concept plan, entitled "Feasibility Sketch-5" and
dated June 24, 2010, has been prepared by WJH Engineering,
§ 25-6.11 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.12
1:682
is included in the July 1, 2010 "Fair Share Plan Amendment,"
and is the concept plan referred to in this subsection.
(b) It is understood that the June 24, 2010 concept plan may be
changed/modified as a result of engineering details and site
plan review by the Aberdeen Township Planning Board.
2. Regarding the Route 34 property, a concept plan for a development
known as the "Villages At Aberdeen" was prepared by CMX and is
dated October 3, 2006.
(a) The concept plan was revised through February 13, 2009, and
it is the revised concept plan that is referred to in this
subsection.
(b) It is understood that the February 13, 2009 revised concept
plan will be changed/modified as a result of engineering details
and site plan review by the Aberdeen Township Planning
Board.
3. Regarding both of the concept plans, it is intended that the final
development of the subject properties within the "IH" Inclusionary
Housing Overlay Zone be generally in accordance with the above
noted concept plans.
d. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Townhouse units on the County Road property and on the Route 34
property, each not exceeding the following number of units and
densities on the subject properties:
(a) The development on the County Road property (previously
known as "Renaissance At Aberdeen") shall not contain more
than one hundred fifteen (115) family townhouse dwelling
units at a density not to exceed 6.6 dwelling units per gross
acre of land and with no unit containing more than three (3)
bedrooms. Market rate units shall be for sale.
(b) The "Villages At Aberdeen" development on the Route 34
property shall not contain more than sixty-two (62) family
townhouse dwelling units for sale and shall not exceed a gross
density of 8.2 dwelling units per acre.
2. Public parks, conservation areas, open space, common space and
public purpose uses.
e. Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Requirements.
1. The development on the County Road property shall provide a
thirty-two (32%) percent set-aside of affordable family townhouse
units for rent, or a minimum of thirty-seven (37) units.
§ 25-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.12
1:683
(a) The thirty-seven (37) affordable family townhouse units for
rent shall be located on the County Road property and shall not
be required to be interspersed among the market-rate units
throughout the development.
(b) Of the thirty-seven (37) affordable family units for rent,
eighteen (18) shall be occupied by moderate-income
households, and nineteen (19) shall be occupied by low-income
households.
(c) The restricted housing units shall be affordable units in
accordance with all applicable requirements of the "Third
Round Substantive Rules" of the New Jersey Council Of
Affordable Housing (COAH).
2. The "Villages At Aberdeen" development on the Route 34 property
shall provide a thirteen (13%) percent set-aside of affordable family
townhouse units for rent or sale, or a minimum of eight (8) units.
(a) The eight (8) affordable family townhouse units for rent or sale
shall be located on the Route 34 property and shall be
interspersed among the market-rate units throughout the
development, unless the applicant can prove that tax credit
funding will be obtained if the affordable units are not
interspersed.
(b) Of the eight (8) affordable family units for rent or sale, four (4)
shall be occupied by moderate-income households, and four (4)
shall be occupied by low-income households.
(c) The restricted housing units shall be affordable units in
accordance with all applicable requirements of the "Third
Round Substantive Rules" of the New Jersey Council Of
Affordable Housing (COAH).
f. Accessory Uses Permitted.
1. Common recreational facilities, recreation centers and/or
clubhouses as specifically approved by the Planning Board within
specified open space areas in order to satisfy the needs of the
residential population in the development.
2. Landscaping features including benches, trellises, gazebos and
other such features customarily associated with the permitted
principal uses, as the case may be.
3. Underground sprinkler systems, provided that the water spray
does not extend beyond the open space area or beyond the
property lines.
4. Fences and walls shall only be permitted if specifically proposed by
the developer and approved by the Planning Board as part of the
site plan approval and/or if a standard for the location and type of
§ 25-6.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.12
1:684
the fences and/or walls has been approved by the Planning Board
as part of the site plan approval and has been included in the
homeowners' association documents.
5. Patios and decks in the side or rear yard areas of a dwelling unit,
provided that no patio or deck shall be permitted unless a standard
for such patios and/or decks has been approved by the Planning
Board as part of the site plan approval and has been included in the
homeowners association documents.
6. Off-street parking and private garages in accordance with
subsection 25-6.12j hereinbelow and the design provisions
specified in subsection 25-5.12 of the "LDO" which are not in
conflict with the provisions of subsection 25-6.12j.
7. Signs in accordance with subsection 25-6.12l hereinbelow and the
design provisions specified in subsection 25-5.18 of the "LDO"
which are not in conflict with the provisions of subsection 25-6.12l.
g. Maximum Building Height.
1. No building containing townhouse dwelling units shall exceed
thirty-eight (38) feet in height and three (3) stories, except that
chimneys shall have no height restrictions. Moreover, where
applicable, the height of a building shall be measured on the side
facing an internal courtyard and/or on the front side of a townhouse
unit; walk-out basements at the rear of a building are not to be
calculated into the overall height of a building.
2. No recreation center building or clubhouse building shall exceed
thirty (30) feet in height and two and one-half (2 1/2) stories,
except that chimneys shall have no height restrictions, and no
other accessory building, as may be approved by the Planning
Board, shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and one and one-half
(1 1/2) stories.
h. Yard and Distance Requirements for Townhouse Buildings. Minimum
distances between townhouse buildings shall be measured horizontally
in feet and shall be measured away from the front, side and rear of each
building. The total minimum separation between the buildings shall be
the sum of the two (2) abutting distances, and each building shall have
one (1) front, one (1) rear and two (2) side yards:
1. The minimum distances shall be twenty-five (25) feet for the front
of a building; twenty (20) feet for the side of a building; and twenty
(20) feet for the rear of a building;
2. No portion of any building shall be closer to any portion of any
other building than the combined distances of the abutting
requirements for each building, providing that the corner of a
building off-set more than a fifteen (15) degree angle from a line
drawn parallel to another building shall be considered a side of the
§ 25-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.12
1:685
building and the building separation requirement, therefore, shall
be forty (40) feet for townhouses; and
3. In any case, and notwithstanding the distances specified
hereinabove, no building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet
to the right-of-way line of any existing public street, thirty (30) feet
to any tract boundary line, twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way line
of any private internal street, and ten (10) feet to any off-street
parking area.
i. Requirements for Buildings. All buildings shall have a dual pitched,
single ridge roof (such as gable, hip, gambrel or mansard roof) with a
minimum pitch of one (1) foot vertical to eight (8) feet horizontal, and
no flat roof shall be permitted; provided, however, that where roof
mounted equipment is necessary and/or preferable for the operation of
the building, a facade roof treatment exhibiting the appearance of such
a dual pitched, single ridge roof may be permitted if specifically
approved by the Planning Board as part of a submitted site plan
application for development.
j. Off-Street Parking, Private Garages and Driveways.
1. Notwithstanding any other ordinance provisions to the contrary,
each individual use shall be provided off-street parking spaces
according to the following minimum provisions, provided that, in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), the Planning Board can grant a deminimis exception and
design waiver for a lesser number of parking spaces if the applicant
can demonstrate that a lesser number of spaces is sufficient.
(a) Townhouses shall be provided 1.8 off-street spaces for each
1-bedroom unit, 2.3 spaces for each 2-bedroom unit, and 2.4
spaces for each 3-bedroom townhouse unit. Where the
bedroom count per dwelling unit is not specified, 2.3 spaces
per unit shall be provided.
(b) For townhouses, each garage space shall be counted as 1.0 offstreet
parking space, regardless of the length of the driveway.
(1) A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
two (2) off-street parking spaces for the subject unit,
provided that the driveway measures a minimum of
eighteen (18) feet in length between the face of the garage
door and the right-of-way or between the face of the
garage door and a sidewalk, whichever distance is less.
(2) A two-car garage and driveway combination shall count as
three and one-half (3 1/2) off-street parking spaces for the
subject unit, provided that the driveway measures a
minimum of twenty (20) feet in width for a minimum
eighteen (18) feet in length between the face of the garage
§ 25-6.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.12
1:686
door and the right-of-way or between the face of the
garage door and a sidewalk, whichever distance is less.
2. All off-street parking spaces shall be on the same site as the use
they are intended to serve and shall be located within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the nearest building entrance providing access to
the subject use.
3. No off-street parking area or internal roadway shall be located
within fifty (50) feet of any tract boundary.
k. Trash and Recycling Requirements. Unless the curb-side pickup of
trash and recyclable materials is proposed by the applicant and
approved by the Planning Board, an indoor or outdoor recycling area
for the collection and storage of residentially-generated trash and
recyclable materials shall be provided as follows:
1. The trash and recyclable material collection and pickup location
shall be provided either within the building being served or in a
location outside the building.
2. If located outside the building, the trash and recyclable materials
area shall include a steel-like, totally enclosed trash and garbage
container, finished with materials used to construct the building(s)
being served, and located in a manner to be obscured from view
from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning
districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination of all three (3).
3. The dimension of the recycling area shall be consistent with the
district recycling plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c.
102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), as amended, and shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate
size and number, and which are consistent with anticipated usage
and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located.
4. The separation, storage, collection and recovery of recyclable
materials shall be in accordance with Sections 16-4 and 16-5 of
Chapter XVI, Public Works, of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Aberdeen.
5. The area provided for the collection and pickup of recyclable
materials shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible
by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be
able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to
protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed
therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
6. The area provided for the collection and pickup of recyclable
materials, and the bins or containers placed therein, shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
§ 25-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.12
1:687
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which are located
in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
7. Signs clearly identifying the area provided for the collection and
pickup of recyclable materials shall be posted adjacent to all points
of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed
therein.
8. Landscaping, at least six (6) feet in height, shall be provided
around any outdoor recycling area.
l. Permitted Signage.
1. One (1) ground mounted freestanding sign identifying the name of
the development no larger than forty (40) square feet shall be
permitted at the entrance to the development from an existing
public street.
(a) The sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and shall be set
back at least twenty (20) feet from all street and property lines.
(b) Any sign illumination shall be external to the sign and shall be
designed and oriented to prevent any sight of the lamp from
any street or neighboring properties.
2. Additional signage within the interior of the site may be approved
by the Planning Board for directional purposes or for other good
cause shown by the applicant as part of the site plan approval.
m. Required Recreational Facilities. An "IH" development shall provide onsite
recreational amenities within the specified open space in order to
satisfy the needs of the anticipated residential population of the
development as may be approved by the Planning Board.
1. A minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size, at
least seventy-five (75) feet in width with a grade less than five (5%)
percent, is required to be developed for active recreation in any
"IH" development.
2. All recreational facilities shall adhere to the standards set forth in
the Barrier Free Subcode of the Uniform Construction Code of the
State of New Jersey.
n. General Requirements and Exceptions.
1. Any "IH" development shall be planned and developed with a
common architectural theme which shall be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Board; the architectural theme shall
§ 25-6.12 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.12
1:688
§ 25-6.13. Mixed Use Inclusionary Redevelopment in Section II of
the Train Station Redevelopment Area. [Ord. No. 16-2012 § 7; Ord.
No. 12-2015]
include the appearance of buildings, signing, fencing, lighting,
paving, curbing, and landscaping.
2. No development or improvements shall be placed on naturally
occurring slopes of twenty (20%) percent or greater unless the
developer can establish relief in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 25-6.8l, "Steep Slopes," and submits a geotechnical
report. Development also shall not occur on wetlands and
floodways except as specified in subsections 25-4.8 and 25-6.8.
3. Any "IH" development shall require that adequate public sewerage
and potable water be provided.
4. No construction permit shall be issued for any dwelling unit, an
addition thereto, or for an accessory structure unless the proposed
construction is in accordance with the site plan as approved by the
Planning Board. After the initial approval of the site plan, no
application for a construction permit will be accepted by Aberdeen
Township for processing unless the application is accompanied by a
statement from the homeowners association that the proposed
construction has been approved by the homeowners association.
5. For any "IH" development, the required setback for any residential
unit or building from any proposed detention or retention basin,
pond, lake or other water body or course as set forth in subsection
25-4.1g1 shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
6. The required buffer area width between any "IH" development and
any existing single-family residential development or zoning
district shall be fifty (50) feet and shall be in accordance with the
requirements of subsection 25-5.5.
7. The landscaping requirements of subsection 25-5.10 shall
reasonably be applied to any "IH" development, except that the
requirements of subsection 25-5.10o of the "LDO" for a Tree
Removal and Replacement Plan shall not apply, provided that the
removal of existing trees in the "IH" development is the minimum
necessary.
a. Purposes. The purposes of the "Mixed Use Inclusionary Redevelopment
In Section II Of The Train Station Redevelopment Area" include the
following:
1. To eliminate the currently existing, vacant, obsolete and
deteriorated manufacturing facilities that substantially impair the
sound growth, planning and functioning of the subject area of
Aberdeen Township.
§ 25-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.13
1:689
2. To remediate any and all environmental problems associated with
the "Brownfield" site to restore its environmental integrity.
3. To diversify the housing stock within Aberdeen Township.
4. To create a site plan design generally in accordance with the June
7, 2012 "Conceptual Site Plan" for "Chase Signature At Aberdeen
Station" prepared by Hammer Land Engineering.
5. To provide standards and guidelines in order to assure that the
appearance and design of buildings, parking areas, streetscapes,
landscaping and open spaces support a positive pedestrian
experience.
b. The Permitted Maximum Number of Residential Units. The mixed-use
inclusionary development in Section II of the Train Station
Redevelopment Area shall include up to one hundred twenty-three
(123) total residential apartment units including twenty-three (23) units
to be affordable family rental units set aside for occupancy by eligible
COAH households in accordance with all applicable COAH rules, with
seven (7) affordable units included in Phase 1 and sixteen (16)
affordable units included in Phase 2.
c. The Required Minimum Area of Retail and Other Nonresidential Space.
The mixed-use inclusionary development in Section II of the Train
Station Redevelopment Area shall include no less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet of retail and other permitted nonresidential space.
d. Principal Permitted Uses on the Land and in Buildings.
1. Apartment dwelling units, including units within freestanding
buildings and units above the first floor of buildings with
nonresidential uses on the first floor, provided that:
(a) No more than seven (7%) percent of the market-rate apartment
units shall have three (3) bedrooms; and
(b) The affordable apartment units shall meet COAH's bedroom
distribution requirements.
2. Retail sales of goods and services.
3. Offices.
4. Restaurants, excluding drive-through windows.
5. Public parks, conservation areas, open spaces, common spaces and
public purpose uses.
6. Public utility uses in accordance with the specifications and
standards for "Public Utilities" noted in subsection 25-5.15 of the
Land Development Ordinance.
e. Accessory Uses Permitted.
§ 25-6.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.13
1:690
1. Common recreational facilities as specifically approved by the
Planning Board within specified open space areas in order to satisfy
the needs of the residential population within the development,
including a clubhouse area and swimming pool.
2. Landscaping features, including benches, trellises, gazebos and
other such features customarily associated with the permitted
principal uses, as the case may be.
3. Outdoor amenity and seating areas associated with the retail,
restaurant and office uses.
4. Underground sprinkler systems within specified open space areas,
provided that the water spray does not extend beyond the open
space area.
5. Fences and walls only if specifically approved by the Planning
Board as part of the site plan approval.
6. Off-street parking and private garages in accordance with
subsection 25-6.13h hereinbelow and the design provisions
specified in subsection 25-5.12 of the Land Development Ordinance
which are not in conflict with the provisions of Subsection
25-6.13h.
7. Signs in accordance with subsection 25-6.13m hereinbelow and the
design provisions specified in subsection 25-5.18 of the Land
Development Ordinance which are not in conflict with the
provisions of subsection 25-6.13m.
f. Maximum Building Height.
1. No building shall exceed four (4) stories and sixty-five (65) feet in
height.
2. Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways,
ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment and similar equipment
required for the operation of the building, skylights, spires,
cupolas, chimneys or similar structures may be erected above the
height requirements, but in no case shall more than eighteen (18)
feet be added in height.
g. Building Setback and Separation Requirements.
1. No front yard setback is required.
2. All buildings shall be separated by a minimum distance of thirtyfive
(35) feet.
h. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Permitted nonresidential uses shall provide three (3.0) parking
spaces per one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area.
§ 25-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.13
1:691
2. Apartment dwelling units shall be provided parking in accordance
with the applicable requirements of the State of New Jersey's
"Residential Site Improvement Standards" (RSIS), which are 1.8
off-street spaces for each 1-bedroom unit, 2.0 spaces for each
2-bedroom unit, and 2.1 spaces for each 3-bedroom apartment unit,
provided that the following exceptions permitted by the RSIS shall
apply:
(a) "Alternative parking standard to those shown in Table 4.4 [of
the RSIS] shall be accepted if the applicant demonstrates these
standards better reflect local conditions" [see N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14 (c)]; and/or
(b) "When, in the judgment of the local approving authority, onstreet
parking is available, then only that proportion of the
parking requirement which is not available on the street shall
be provided in off-street parking facilities. A length of 23 feet
per on-street parking space shall be used in calculating the
number of available on-street parking spaces" [see N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.14 (f)].
3. In addition to the above requirements and the RSIS permitted
exceptions, a shared parking arrangement may be approved by the
Planning Board where it can be shown to the Board's satisfaction
that the peak parking requirements of the residential and
nonresidential uses occur at different times of the day or week in
the specific area(s) of the development where the parking spaces
are located.
i. Open Space Requirements.
1. Land area equal to a minimum of ten (10%) percent of the overall
redevelopment plan area shall be specifically set aside for usable
open space and shall be indicated on the submitted site plan
drawings, provided that the Planning Board may approve a lesser
percentage of usable open space if, in the opinion of the Board,
sufficient areas and active and passive recreation facilities are
provided and are appropriately distributed throughout the
development.
(a) Land utilized for vehicular rights-of-way and surface water
management facilities shall not be considered usable open
space.
(b) Outdoor amenity and seating areas associated with the retail,
restaurant and office uses shall be considered open space if
they include landscaping features, furniture, sculptures,
artwork, etc.
(c) The open space may be arranged in any manner that facilitates
public access and use.
§ 25-6.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.13
1:692
2. The open space may include areas and facilities restricted for use
only by the residents of the development. This may include
enclosed areas to meet the open space requirement. [Ord. No.
12-2015]
j. Architectural Design Requirements.
1. The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including any
accessory buildings, shall be architecturally compatible and shall
be constructed of complementary materials.
2. Architectural details, style, color, proportion and massing shall
create a pedestrian scale development.
3. Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks along each façade to avoid the appearance of
long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls.
4. The architectural treatment of the front façade(s) shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a
building.
5. All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent regarding style, materials, colors and details.
6. All entrances to a building shall be articulated utilizing
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, or overhangs.
7. The mechanical equipment serving the buildings shall be screened
from public view by the design of the buildings.
8. All lighting, benches, trash receptacles and signage shall be
designed to be compatible with the architecture of the buildings.
9. The materials used for all internal sidewalks and pathways
connecting buildings, parking areas and public areas to sidewalks
along the streets shall include decorative brick or paving materials
chosen to enhance the architecture of the buildings and the
attractiveness of the site development.
k. Lighting Requirements.
1. Lighting shall be minimal for security, safety and operational
purposes, and a lighting plan shall be submitted indicating the
location of the lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the
wattage and isolux curves for each fixture, and the details of the
lighting poles and the luminaries. A point-by-point lighting plan
also shall be submitted as part of the lighting plan.
2. The lighting is to be provided by decorative fixtures with a
mounting height not higher than twenty (20) feet. The lighting
fixtures are to include non-glare lights with recessed lenses
§ 25-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.13
1:693
focused downward and with "cut-off" shields as appropriate in
order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon adjacent and
nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent streets and
overhead skyglow.
3. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated in
footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not less than
five-tenths (0.5) footcandle at intersections and shall average not
more than two (2.0) footcandle throughout any area to be
illuminated. Lighting levels for pathways shall maintain an average
of approximately 0.25 footcandle along the pathways to be lighted.
l. Landscaping Requirements.
1. The landscaping within the development shall be prepared by a
licensed landscape architect and shall be conceived as a total
pattern throughout the development, integrating the various
elements of the architectural design of the buildings and creating
an aesthetically pleasing environment.
2. The landscaping shall be in accordance with subsection 25-5.10 of
this ordinance and shall include shade trees, decorative flowering
trees, evergreen trees, shrubs and hedges, ground cover,
perennials and annuals, and may include other materials such as
rocks, sculpture, art, walls, fences and decorative brick or paving
materials.
m. Signage Requirements. All signage shall be as specifically approved by
the Planning Board as part of its site plan review and approval of the
development.
1. Directional and Postal Number Signs.
(a) A building may have a postal number applied against the
building anywhere at the entrance area; the numbers shall not
be more than six (6) inches in height.
(b) Directional signs shall be permitted where specifically
approved by the Planning Board; no directional sign shall
exceed three (3) square feet in area or thirty (30) inches in
height.
2. Wall-Mounted Signs for Nonresidential Uses.
(a) Wall-mounted signs shall be permitted on the front façade of
the ground floor of buildings which front upon a street and
contain nonresidential uses.
(b) No more than one (1) wall-mounted sign shall be permitted for
each tenant.
§ 25-6.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.13
1:694
(c) A wall-mounted sign shall not exceed an area equivalent to ten
(10%) percent of the area of the ground floor façade of the
building occupied by the subject tenant.
(d) Each building shall have a sign band along the ground floor
façade for the location of the wall-mounted signs.
3. Window Signs for Nonresidential Uses.
(a) Tenant name and hours of operation may be etched or painted
on the glass portion of a door or window of an establishment,
provided that the letters shall not exceed four (4) inches in
height.
(b) Temporary unattached signs may be displayed in a window
provided that all such signs in aggregate occupy no more than
ten (10%) percent of the window area.
4. Awning and Canopy Signs for Nonresidential Uses.
(a) Signage in addition to the wall-mounted signage may be
permitted on an awning, canopy or on a hanging sign over a
covered walkway if such signage is secondary to the wallmounted
signage and is specifically approved by the Planning
Board.
(b) The material of the awning or canopy shall be canvas cloth or
equivalent and, at its lowest point, shall be at least eight (8)
feet above the finished grade below.
(c) The lettering of any signage on an awning, canopy or hanging
over a covered walkway shall not exceed six (6) inches in
height.
5. Portable Signs.
(a) Portable signs advertising daily specials, such as sandwich
boards, shall be permitted only during normal business hours
or special extended business hours.
(b) Only one (1) portable sign shall be permitted per tenant.
(c) Portable signs shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area and
shall be placed directly in front of the business upon the
sidewalk in a location not obstructing the pedestrian walk
area.
6. Prohibited signs.
(a) Roof signs.
(b) Billboards.
(c) LED or similar message boards.
§ 25-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6.13
1:695
(d) Animated, flashing or revolving signs.
n. Trash and Recycling Requirements.
1. An indoor or outdoor trash and recycling area for the collection and
storage of trash and recyclable materials shall be provided as
follows:
(a) The trash and recyclable material collection and pickup
location shall be provided either within the building being
served or in a location outside the building.
(b) If located outside the building, the trash and recyclable
enclosure shall be at least eight (8) feet high and shall be
finished with materials used to match the building(s) being
served.
(c) The dimension of the recycling area shall be consistent with
the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.
1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), as amended, and shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which
are of adequate size and number, and which are consistent
with anticipated usage and with current methods of collection
in the area in which the project is located.
(d) The separation, storage, collection and recovery of recyclable
materials shall be in accordance with Sections 16-4 and 16-5 of
Chapter XVI, Public Works, of the Revised General Ordinances
of the Township of Aberdeen.
(e) The area provided for the collection and pickup of trash and
recyclable materials shall be well lit and shall be safely and
easily accessible by trash and recycling personnel and
vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the trash/
recycling area without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles.
(f) The area provided for the collection and pickup of recyclable
materials, and the bins or containers placed therein, shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse
environmental conditions which might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used
for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard, and which
are located in an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped
with a lid, or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
(g) Signs clearly identifying the area provided for the collection
and pickup of recyclable materials shall be posted adjacent to
all points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or
containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the
materials to be placed therein.
§ 25-6.13 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-6.13
1:696
§ 25-7. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND PLANNING
BOARD.43
§ 25-7.1. Establishment of the Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No.
10-1987]
(h) To the extent possible, landscaping, at least six (6) feet in
height, shall be provided around any outdoor trash and
recycling area.
o. Maintenance of Common Elements. A single controlling entity, such as
an owners' association or a single owner of the entire development,
shall be established for the maintenance of the landscaping, signs, open
space areas and facilities, lighting and any other common elements or
shared structures and facilities.
a. A Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created is continued pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven (7) regular members
and two (2) alternate members, each of whom shall be residents of
Aberdeen Township and be appointed by the governing body. The
members of the heretofore created Zoning Board of Adjustment are
hereby reappointed to serve their respective terms. The term of each
regular member shall be four (4) years and the term of each alternate
member shall be two (2) years.
b. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their appointment
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate members may
participate in the discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate is to vote, "Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
c. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold an elective
office or position under the municipality.
d. Any vacancy on said Board occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the governing body of the municipality
to serve for the unexpired term of the member whose term shall
become vacant. A member may be removed by the governing body for
cause, but only after public hearing, if requested, and other requested
procedural due process protections.
e. Yearly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from
among its regular members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman. The
Board shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Board or a municipal employee.
43.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 33-1981,
14-1983, 3-1984 and 6-1984.
§ 25-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.1
1:697
§ 25-7.2. Powers and Jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
f. The governing body, after giving due consideration to budget requests
that may be submitted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall make
provisions in its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
g. The Office of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created.
The Board of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office and fix the
compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney at law of New
Jersey other than the municipal attorney.
h. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures
which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
a. Error or Refusal. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
applicant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by a Township official based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning provisions of this chapter.
b. Exceptions or Interpretations. Hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map or the zoning provisions of this
chapter or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
Board is authorized to pass by any zoning provisions of this chapter or
by any duly adopted Official Map.
c. General Bulk Variances.
1. Where (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or (b) by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, or (c) by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any regulation of this chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship;
2. Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a
deviation from the zoning requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from such zoning requirements;
§ 25-7.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.2
1:698
provided, however, that no variance from those departures
enumerated in subsection 25-7.2d hereinbelow (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70[d]) shall be granted under this subsection; and provided
further, that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to
review a request for a variance pursuant to subsection 25-7.5h of
this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60[a]).
d. Use Variance, Variances from Conditional Use Standards, and Major
Specific Bulk Variances. In particular cases and for special reasons,
grant a variance to allow departure from the zoning provisions of this
chapter to permit: (1) a use or principal structure in a district restricted
against such use or principal structure; (2) an expansion of a
nonconforming use; (3) deviation from a particular specification or
standard set forth in this chapter as pertaining solely to a conditional
use; (4) an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
Section 25-2 of this chapter and in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; (5) an increase in
the permitted density as defined in Section 25-4 or Section 25-6 of this
chapter, as the case may be, and in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied
to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one (1) or two (2)
dwelling unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision, in which event
applications would be made pursuant to subsection 25-7.2c
hereinabove. A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the Board.
e. General Provisions. No variance or other relief may be granted under
the terms of this section unless such variance or other relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and the
zoning provisions of this chapter. An application under this section may
be referred to any appropriate person or agency, for its report; provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Board, a variance granted
by the Zoning Board shall expire and become null and void two (2)
years from the grant by the Zoning Board, unless within said period the
applicant obtains a construction permit or otherwise avails himself of
said grant or approval. The Zoning Board, upon application and within
said period, may extend said period for one (1) year, but not to exceed
three (3) extensions.
f. Other Powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such other
powers as prescribed by law, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Direct issuance of a construction permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 for the construction of a building or structure within the
bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin
or public area as shown on a duly adopted Official Map of the
§ 25-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.2
1:699
municipality whenever one (1) or more parcels of land within said
bed cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless a
construction permit is granted. The Board may grant such relief
only by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, ensuring that such
relief will tend to cause a minimum change of the Official Map and
will not significantly add to the cost of opening any proposed street.
The Board shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition
of granting the construction permit so as to promote the health,
morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
2. Direct issuance of a construction permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36 for the construction of a building or structure on a lot
not abutting a street which is shown on a duly adopted Official Map
of the municipality or which is (a) an existing State, County or
municipal street or highway; or (b) a street shown upon a plat
approved by the Municipal Planning Board; or (c) a street on a plat
duly filed in the office of the County Recording Officer. The Board
may grant such relief only when the enforcement of the statute
requirement that a building lot abut a street would entail practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances of
the case do not require the building or structure to abut a street.
The Board shall impose requirements or conditions that will
provide adequate access for fire fighting equipment, ambulances
and other necessary emergency vehicles for the protection of the
health and safety and that will protect any future street layout on
the Official Map or on the general circulation plan element of the
municipal Master Plan.
3. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to subsection
25-7.2d of this chapter. The developer may elect to submit a
separate application requesting approval of the variance and a
subsequent application for any required approval of a subdivision,
site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance
shall be conditioned upon a grant of all required subsequent
approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan
and the zoning provisions of this chapter. The number of votes of
Board members required to grant such subsequent approval shall
be as otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval in
question, and the special vote pursuant to subsection 25-7.2d of
this chapter shall not be required.
§ 25-7.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.2
1:700
§ 25-7.3. Appeals and Applications to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
4. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer any application before it
to the Planning Board for its report before it takes final action
thereon. Such referral shall not extend the time of action by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, whether or not the Planning Board
has submitted its report. Whenever the Planning Board shall have
made a recommendation regarding a matter requested by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, such recommendation shall not be
binding on the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
a. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of a municipal official of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
provisions of this chapter or a duly adopted Official Map. Such appeal
shall be taken within twenty (20) days by filing a notice of appeal with
the official from whom the appeal is taken, with three (3) copies of the
notice given to the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
notice shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The official from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
b. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end have all
powers of the municipal official from whom the appeal is taken.
c. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the municipal official from whose action the
appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the
municipal official from whom the appeal is taken and due cause shown.
d. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to a municipal official.
e. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act upon any appeal or any
application for development within one hundred twenty (120) days
either from the date the appeal is taken from the decision of the
municipal official or from the date the application is certified as a
complete application, as the case may be, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant, except that when an applicant
elects to submit separate consecutive applications for use variance
approval and site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval, the one
§ 25-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.3
1:701
§ 25-7.4. Establishment of a Planning Board. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
hundred twenty (120) day time period for action shall apply to the
application for approval of the use variance, and the time period for
granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
a. The Planning Board heretofore created is continued consisting of nine
(9) regular and two (2) alternate members of the following four (4)
classes:
Class I The Mayor.
Class II One (1) of the officials of the Township other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the
Mayor.
Class III A member of the Township Council to be appointed by
it.
Class IV
Regular
Members
Six (6) other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV
shall hold no other municipal office, except that one
(1) member may be a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and one (1) may be a member of the
Board of Education. A member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member unless there be
among the Class IV regular or alternate members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education, in which case the member of the
Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the
Class II member of the Planning Board.
Class IV
Alternate
Members
Two (2) other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members shall
meet the qualifications of Class IV regular members
and shall be designated by the Mayor at the time of
their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
b. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one (1) year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II (or Class IV) member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three (3) years or terminate at
the completion of his term as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
§ 25-7.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.4
1:702
c. All present Class IV members of the Planning Board shall continue in
office until the completion of the terms for which they were appointed.
The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate
whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of his or her Class IV term, whichever comes first.
d. The terms of Class IV regular members first appointed pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the
first four (4) years after their appointment; provided that the initial
term shall not exceed four (4) years. Thereafter the term of each Class
IV regular member shall be four (4) years. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
e. The terms of the Class IV alternate members shall be two (2) years,
except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the
term of not more than one (1) alternate member shall expire any one (1)
year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two (2) years. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
f. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
"Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
g. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the
unexpired term. Any member other than a Class I member may be
removed by the governing body for cause but only after public hearing,
if requested, and other requested procedural due process protection.
h. Yearly, the Planning Board shall organize by selecting from among its
Class IV regular members a Chairman and a Vice Chairman. The Board
shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the
Board or an employee of the Township.
i. The governing body, after giving due consideration to budget requests
that may be submitted by the Planning Board, shall make provisions in
its budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning
Board.
j. The office of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The Planning
Board may appoint to such office and fix compensation or rate of
compensation of an attorney at law of New Jersey other than the
Township Attorney.
k. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
§ 25-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.4
1:703
§ 25-7.5. Powers and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board. [Ord. No.
10-1987]
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to other
powers established by law:
deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures
which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
a. Make, adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relationship
to the planning of the Township.
b. Administer the Subdivision and Site Plan Review provisions of the Land
Development chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of
said chapter.
c. Hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
d. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by State or Federal law or regulation.
e. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
f. Annually, at the request of the Township Council, prepare a program of
municipal capital improvements projects projected over a term of six (6)
years and recommend same to the Township Council.
g. Consider and report to the Township Council within thirty-five (35) days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning
Board by the Township Council.
h. Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to
subsection 25-7.2d of this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70[d]), to grant to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to subsection 25-7.2c of this chapter (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70[c]).
2. Direction pursuant to subsection 25-7.2f1 of this chapter (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34) for issuance of a permit for a building or structure in
the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control
basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
§ 25-7.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.5
1:704
§ 25-7.6. Provisions Applicable to Both the Planning Board and the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
3. Direction pursuant to subsection 25-7.2f2 of this chapter (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36) for issuance of a permit for a building or structure not
related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference
to the request for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit,
as the case may be.
The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit, and a subsequent application for any required approval for
a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The separate approval
of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit, shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by
the Planning Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless the approval can be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent
and purpose of the zone plan and the zoning provisions of this
chapter.
a. Conflicts of Interest. No regular or alternate member of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a
particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the
hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
b. Meetings.
1. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less than once a month and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled
for lack of applications for development to process.
2. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two (2) Board members, which meetings shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
all applicable legal requirements.
3. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, said quorum to be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
4. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
Board present at the meeting except as otherwise required by a
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. A member of the Board who
was absent for one (1) or more of the meetings at which a hearing
§ 25-7.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.6
1:705
was held shall be eligible to vote on a matter upon which the
hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one (1)
or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board
member has available to him the transcript or recording of all of
the hearing from which he was absent, and certifies in writing
to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
5. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public, except as provided in the Open Public Meeting Law C. 231,
Laws of New Jersey, 1975. Notice of all such meetings shall be
given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meeting Law C. 231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975.
c. Public Hearings.
1. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
Each Board shall make rules governing such hearings.
2. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least ten (10)
days before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in
the office of the Administrative Officer. The applicant may produce
any documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate
or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
3. The officer presiding at the hearings, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.L. 1953, C. 38 (C.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
4. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, or such other person as he may designate, and the
right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested
parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not
represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
5. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
d. Public Notice of a Hearing.
1. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following
applications for development:
§ 25-7.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.6
1:706
(a) Any request for a variance;
(b) Any request for conditional use approval;
(c) Any request for issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not abutting a
street (see subsections 25-7.2f1 and 25-7.2f2);
(d) Any request for site plan and/or subdivision approval involving
one (1) or more of the aforesaid elements;
(e) Any request for preliminary approval of a major subdivision
and/or preliminary major site plan; and,
(f) Any request for approval of a planned development.
2. The Secretary of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least
two (2) weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application
will be discussed. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall
be given by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
the hearing in the following manner:
(a) By publication in an official newspaper of the Township, if
there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township in the absence of an official newspaper.
(b) By notification by personal service or certified mail to the
following. An affidavit of proof of the giving of the required
notice shall be filed by the applicant with the municipal agency
at least one (1) day prior to the hearing. It is not required that a
return receipt is obtained; notice is deemed complete upon
mailing (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14).
(1) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located in the State and within two hundred
(200) feet in all directions of the property which is the
subject of the hearing; provided that this requirement
shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the (1) condominium
association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a
unit above or below it, or (2) horizontal property regime, in
the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an
apartment above or below it.
[a] Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service
upon any partner.
[b] Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service
upon its president, a vice-president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation.
§ 25-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.6
1:707
[c] Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners'
association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within two hundred (200)
feet of the property which is the subject of the
hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners,
or homeowners on account of such common
elements or areas.
(2) To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within two hundred
(200) feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities.
(3) To the Monmouth County Planning Board when the
application for development involves property adjacent to
an existing county road or proposed road as shown on the
County Official Map or County Master Plan, adjoining
other county land or situated within two hundred (200)
feet of a municipality boundary.
(4) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a State highway.
(5) To the Director of the Division of State and Regional
Planning in the Department of Community Affairs when
the hearing involves an application for the development of
property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or
five hundred (500) dwelling units, in which case the notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to
be filed with the Township.
3. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Township Tax
Assessor shall, within seven (7) days, make and certify a list from
current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the
Township to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The
applicant shall be charged twenty-five ($0.25) cents per name or
ten ($10) dollars, whichever is greater, for said list and shall be
entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and
failure to give notice to any lot owner not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding. Additionally, the applicant
shall be responsible for giving proper notice to all property owners
pursuant to subsection 25-7.6d2(b) above who do not reside within
the Township.
4. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be discussed, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any,
and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current
tax duplicate in the Township Tax Assessor's office, and the location
§ 25-7.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.6
1:708
and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is
sought are available for inspection.
e. Records.
1. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names and addresses of the persons appearing and
addressing the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
and of any persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Planning or Zoning Board, the findings, if any, made by it and the
reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available,
after approval by the Board, for public inspection during the
normal business hours at the office of the Administrative Officer.
Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of
the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party shall be charged a reasonable fee for the reproduction of the
minutes, as indicated in subsection 25-9.1 of this chapter.
2. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made either by stenographer,
mechanical or electrical means. The municipality shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at his expense, provided that the charge for a
transcript shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted in
N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15, and as indicated in subsection 25-9.1 of this
chapter. Each transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
f. Decisions.
1. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced
to writing by the Board and shall include findings of facts and
conclusions based thereon.
2. The Board shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in this chapter for action by the Board on the
application for development; or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held no later
than forty-five (45) days after the date of the meeting at which
the Board voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members
of the Board who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the
resolution. An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 (resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application) shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those
§ 25-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.6
1:709
§ 25-7.7. Appeal of Decisions. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution.
3. The vote on any memorializing resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Board and not to be an action
of the Board; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required in subsection 25-7.8 of
this chapter.
4. If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution
as hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
Board to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a
stated time and the cost of the application, including attorneys
fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
a. Any interested party may appeal to the Township Council any final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application
for a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and subsection
25-7.2d of this chapter. Notwithstanding the aforesaid right of appeal to
the Township Council, any party has the right to obtain a review of such
Zoning Board of Adjustment decision by any court of competent
jurisdiction according to law.
b. Any appeal to the Township Council shall be made within ten (10) days
of the date of publication of such final decision pursuant to subsection
25-7.8 of this chapter. The appeal to the Township Council shall be
made by serving the Township Clerk in person or by certified mail with
a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the name and
address of the appellant and the name and address of his attorney, if
represented.
c. The appellant shall either: 1) Within five (5) days of serving notice of the
appeal, arrange for a transcript and six (6) copies thereof for use by the
Township Council and pay a deposit of fifty ($50) dollars or the
estimated cost for such transcription, whichever is less; provided that
the charge by the Township to the applicant for the transcript shall not
exceed the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15; or 2) Within thirtyfive
(35) days of serving notice of the appeal, submit a transcript to the
Township Clerk for use by the Township Council. Should the appellant
neither arrange for or submit a transcript as provided hereinabove, the
Township Council may dismiss the appeal for failure to prosecute. All
transcripts shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be
accurate.
d. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Township Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant,
to those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to subsection 25-7.8 of
§ 25-7.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-7.7
1:710
§ 25-7.8. Notice of Decisions. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 3-1995]
Any decision of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
when acting upon an application for development and any decision of the
Township Council when acting upon an appeal shall be given notice in the
following manner:
this chapter, and to the Zoning Board of Adjustment at least ten (10)
days prior to the date of the meeting. The appeal shall be decided by the
Township Council only upon the record established by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. The parties may submit oral and written arguments on
the record at the Township Council meeting, and the Township Council
shall provide and pay for verbatim recording and transcripts of such
meeting.
e. The Township Council shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than ninety-five (95) days from the publication of the notice of the
subject decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless the
appellant consents in writing to an extension of such time period.
Failure of the Township Council to hold a hearing and conclude a review
of the record below and to render a decision within such specified
period without such written consent of the appellant shall constitute a
decision affirming the action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
f. The Township Council may reverse, remand or affirm, with or without
conditions, the final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment being
appealed. The affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Township
Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand or impose or remove
conditions upon the aforesaid final decision. In the event that an
affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Township Council is not
obtained, the aforesaid final decision shall be deemed affirmed without
change.
g. An appeal to the Township Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment certifies to the
Township Council, after the notice of appeal has been filed with the
Board, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior
Court on application upon notice to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
on good cause shown.
a. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the appropriate Township
authority within ten (10) days of the date of decision to the applicant or
appellant, or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed within ten (10) days
to any interested party who has requested it and who has paid the fee
prescribed by the Township authority for such service. (See subsection
25-9.1.)
§ 25-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-7.8
1:711
§ 25-8. DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.44
§ 25-8.1. Jurisdiction of Responsibility During Development
Application Review. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment have certain
overlapping powers to expedite the review process. Their respective
responsibilities are outlined below:
b. Applicant shall cause a brief notice of every decision of the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, or Township Council, as the case
may be, to be published in the official newspaper of Aberdeen
Township, and the cost of such publication to be the sole responsibility
of the applicant. Such notice shall be sent to the official newspaper
within ten (10) days of the date of adoption of the resolution
memorializing the decision.
c. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the
Administrative Officer, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the
same manner as those established for copies of other public documents
in the Township, as indicated in subsection 25-9.1 of this Ordinance.
a. Powers of the Planning Board.
1. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or
conditional use approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
2. The Planning Board shall have the power to act in lieu of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and subject to the same extent and
restrictions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment on the following
matters when the Planning Board is reviewing applications for
approval of subdivision plans, site plans or conditional uses.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, public
notice shall be given and shall include reference to the request for
a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
(a) Grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-32.
(c) Direct, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
b. Zoning Board of Adjustment Action in Lieu of Planning Board. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board, site
44.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 6-1984.
§ 25-7.8 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.1
1:712
§ 25-8.2. Application of Requirements. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No.
10-1989]
plan, subdivision or conditional use approval whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may refer to all such applications for development to the
Planning Board and its professionals for review and comment.
a. Subdivision Review. All subdivisions, as defined under Section 25-2, are
subject to the review procedures specified herein.
b. Site Plan Review. No construction permit shall be issued for any new
structure or for an addition to an existing structure and no Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued for any change of use of an existing structure
until the site plan has been reviewed and approved by the municipality
except that:
1. A construction permit for a single-family detached dwelling unit or
a two-family dwelling unit and/or their accessory building(s) on a
lot shall not require site plan approval, except that the use of any
existing or proposed principal or accessory building for a home
occupation as defined and permitted by this chapter shall require
minor site plan approval prior to the issuance of a construction
permit or certificate of occupancy. The foregoing shall in no way
affect the responsibility of an applicant to submit the necessary
information and receive the necessary approvals as may be
required pursuant to other Ordinances.
2. Any change of use from one permitted nonresidential use to
another permitted nonresidential use shall not require site plan
approval if both the construction official and zoning officer
stipulate to the Board that the existing site development meets the
requirements of this chapter for the new use.
c. Variance Relief. All applications for variance relief to the Board of
Adjustment not involving any related site plan, subdivision or
conditional use approval shall be filed at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the second Wednesday of the month. The filing shall include nineteen
(19) copies of any maps and related material; nineteen (19) completed
copies of the appropriate application form(s), which includes the
checklist for variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 attached to this
chapter; and the fee in accordance with Section 25-9 of this chapter.
The Board shall act upon the application as stipulated by law.
d. General Adjustments. In the event that an application for development
requires an approval by a governmental agency other than the Board,
the Board shall, in appropriate circumstances, condition its approval
upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency, provided
that the municipality shall make a decision on any application for
development within the time period provided in this chapter, or within
§ 25-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.2
1:713
§ 25-8.3. Submission of Minor Subdivision Plats and Minor Site
Plans. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 20-1990; Ord. No. 5-2007 § 8]
an extension of such period as has been agreed to by the applicant,
unless the municipal agency is prevented or relieved from so acting by
operation of law.
e. Informal Review by the Planning Board.
1. At the request of a developer, the Planning Board shall grant one
(1) informal review of a concept plan for a development for which
the developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development.
2. The developer shall be required to submit fees for such an informal
review in accordance with Section 25-9 of this chapter. Fees
submitted for the informal review shall be credited towards fees for
review of subsequent development application. No professional
review(s) will be undertaken unless the developer agrees to pay for
said review(s) in accordance with Section 25-9 of this chapter.
3. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by
any such review.
4. A developer desiring to have a concept plan informally reviewed by
the Planning Board shall so notify the Administrative Officer at
least fourteen (14) days prior to the second Wednesday of the
month. The Administrative Officer shall thereafter notify the
developer of the time and place which has been scheduled by the
Planning Board for the informal review.
a. Procedure for Submitting Minor Subdivision Plats and Minor Site Plans.
The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the second Wednesday of the month:
nineteen (19) copies of the minor plat or plan; nineteen (19) copies of
the appropriate application(s), which includes the checklist(s) pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 attached to this chapter;45 and a fee in
accordance with Section 25-9 of this chapter. The application shall
contain an acknowledgement signed by the applicant stating that the
applicant is familiar with the procedure set forth herein for submitting
and acting upon minor subdivision plats and minor site plans, and
agrees to be bound by it. The Administrative Officer shall process the
application and shall issue an application number. Once an application
has been assigned a number, such number shall appear on all papers,
maps, plats or plans and other documents for processing in conjunction
with the application.
45.Editor's Note: The checklist referred to herein is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 25-8.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.3
1:714
b. Details Required for Minor Subdivision Plats and Minor Site Plans.
Each minor plat or minor plan shall be drawn by a professional engineer
and/or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey and
shall bear the signature, seal, license number and telephone number of
the said professional engineer and/or land surveyor; provided, however,
that all engineering data shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer and all surveying data shall be signed and sealed by a
professional land surveyor.
Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less than
1" equals 100' and shall be submitted on one of four of the following
standard sheet sizes (8 1/2" x 13"; 15" x 21"; 24" x 36"; or 30" x 42").
If one (1) sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire tract, the map may
be divided into two (2) sections to be shown on separate sheets of equal
sizes, with reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheet. Each minor
plat or plan shall show the following information, as such information is
applicable to the minor subdivision or minor site plan submission:
1. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding area, at a scale of one (1) inch equals not more than
two thousand (2,000) feet;
2. Title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks for
professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
(a) Name of subdivision or development, Aberdeen Township and
Monmouth County;
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider or
developer;
(c) Name, title, address and license number of the professional or
professionals who prepared the plat or plan;
(d) Name, title and address of the owner or owners of record;
(e) Scale; and
(f) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof and a list of the specific revisions entered on each
sheet.
3. Acreage figures (both with and without areas within public rightsof-
way) and north arrow;
4. Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman;
(b) Secretary; and
(c) Township Engineer.
§ 25-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.3
1:715
5. Existing block and lot number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided or
developed as they appear on the Township Tax Map;
6. Subdivision or development boundary line (heavy solid line);
7. The location of existing and proposed property lines (with bearings
and distances), streets, structures (with their numerical
dimensions and an indication as to whether existing structures will
be retained or removed), parking spaces, loading areas, driveways,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, any natural
features such as treed areas, and any historic features such as
family burial grounds and buildings more than fifty (50) years old,
both within the tract and within two hundred (200) feet of its
boundary;
8. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements, the use(s) for which they are intended to be limited,
and the manner in which the easements will be controlled;
9. Zoning districts affecting the tract, including district names and
requirements, and a comparison to the application;
10. Proposed buffer and landscaped areas;
11. Delineation of flood plains, including both floodway and flood fringe
areas, wetlands, and lands with a topographic slope fifteen (15%)
percent or greater.
12. Existing and proposed contours with intervals of one (1) foot where
slopes are less than two (2%) percent; with intervals of two (2) feet
where slopes are between two (2%) percent and fifteen (15%)
percent; and with intervals of five (5) feet where slopes exceed
fifteen (15%) percent. All contour information shall refer to a
known datum. Existing contours shall be shown as a dashed line,
and finished grades shall be shown as a solid line. Lands with a
topographic slope fifteen (15%) percent or greater shall be shaded.
13. Marshes, ponds and hydric soil lands within the tract and within
one hundred (100) feet thereof;
14. The name of all adjacent property owners as they appear on the
most recent tax list prepared by the Township Tax Assessor;
15. Certificate from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and
assessments are paid to date;
16. Concerning minor subdivisions only, existing and proposed
monuments;
17. Concerning minor subdivision applications only and if the proposed
lot(s) is (are) not served by a sanitary sewer, approval by the
Township Department of Health of percolation tests, certified by a
licensed professional engineer, indicating that the proposed lot(s)
§ 25-8.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.3
1:716
can adequately accommodate a septic system. The location(s) of
the test hole(s), test results and compliance with the "Individual
Sewage Disposal Code of New Jersey" or applicable Township
Department of Health Ordinances, whichever may be more
restrictive, shall be shown on the plat and certified by a licensed
professional engineer;
18. No minor subdivision or minor site plan involving any street(s)
requiring additional right-of-way width as specified in the Master
Plan or Official Map and the street requirements of this chapter
shall be approved unless such additional right-of-way, either along
one (1) or both sides of said streets, as applicable, shall be granted
to the Township or other appropriate governmental agency;
19. Provisions for the separation and storage of recyclable materials;
20. No minor subdivision or minor site plan involving any corner lot
shall be provided unless a sight triangle easement shall be granted
as specified in this Ordinance; and
21. Deed restrictions including metes and bounds, easements,
covenants, restrictions and roadway and sight triangle dedications
shall be submitted for approval and required signatures prior to
filing with the County Recording Officer.
c. Action by the Township.
1. The Application Review Committee shall review the aforesaid
application for the purpose of determining, within forty-five (45)
days of its submission, whether said application is complete.
Thereafter:
(a) If said application is found to contain all of the information
required by subsection 25-8.3b of this chapter, the Application
Review Committee shall recommend to the Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, that said application is
complete. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee, or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall review
said application at its next regularly scheduled meeting and
shall certify the application complete within forty-five (45) days
of its submission, upon concurrence with the Application
Review Committee's recommendation for completeness. If the
application is found not to be complete, then the Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant
according to the procedure in subsection 25-8.3c1(b).
(b) If said application is found to lack some of the information
required by subsection 25-8.3b of this chapter, said Application
Review Committee shall either:
§ 25-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.3
1:717
(1) Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that said
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies in the
application; or
(2) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are necessary to
make an informed decision on the application, but are not
of such significance to cause the application to be deemed
incomplete, said Application Review Committee may
recommend to the Subdivision Committee, Site Plan
Committee or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, the application complete, conditioned upon the
submission of the missing items of information to the
Administrative Officer within ten (10) days; or
(3) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are not necessary for
it to make an informed decision on the application, said
Application Review Committee may recommend to the
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, waiving the
requirement that said items be supplied as a prerequisite
for completeness and certifying that the application is
complete notwithstanding the missing items.
(c) An applicant who has been notified that his application is
incomplete may request waiver of one (1) or more of the
submission requirements set forth in subsection 25-8.3b and
said request shall be granted or denied by the Board within
forty-five (45) days.
(d) In the event the Application Review Committee, Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to act pursuant to
subsections 25-8.3c1(b)(1), 25-8.3c1(b)(2) or 25-8.3c1(b)(3)
hereinabove within forty-five (45) days of the date of
submission of the application, said application shall be deemed
complete as of the forty-sixth (46th) day following its
submission.
2. On the date the aforesaid application is certified complete, or on
the forty-sixth (46th) day following the submission of the
application, in the event the Application Review Committee,
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to make a determination of
completeness, the applicable time period within which the Board
must act upon the application shall commence. In any case, the
applicant is obliged to prove that he or she is entitled to approval of
the application. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee
or either Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error, may require submission of
§ 25-8.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.3
1:718
additional information not specified in this chapter, and/or may
require revisions in the application documents as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements for approval of the application have been met,
provided that the application shall not be deemed incomplete for
lack of any such additional information or revisions. Such revisions
or information shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer ten
(10) days prior to the next meeting for which the application is
scheduled.
3. Promptly after recommendation of completeness by the Application
Review Committee, the application documents shall be distributed
by the Administrative Officer to the following:
(a) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, (nine (9) copies of the minor plat or plan and nine
(9) copies of the application);
(b) Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or plan and one (1)
copy of the application);
(c) Township Fire Subcode Official, (one (1) copy each of the minor
plat or plan and the application);
(d) Township Manager (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or plan
and the application);
(e) Township Engineer (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or plan
and the application);
(f) Township Planner (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or plan
and the application);
(g) Township Safety Officer, (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or
plan);
(h) Zoning Officer (one (1) copy each of the minor plat or plan and
the application);
(i) Township Department of Health (one (1) copy each of the
minor plat or plan and the application);
(j) Township Environmental Commission (one (1) copy each of the
minor plat or plan and the application);
(k) At the direction of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, additional copies of the minor
plat or plan shall be sent to other Township, County or State
agencies as may be designated by the Board.
4. The Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, shall read any written report submitted concerning the
§ 25-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.3
1:719
application and shall itself review the submission to ascertain its
conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. The
Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case may be,
shall offer its recommendations to the Board.
5. The Board shall take action on minor subdivision and minor site
plan applications within forty-five (45) days after the application
has been certified complete by the Subdivision Committee, Site
Plan Committee or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time
period shall constitute approval of the application.
6. Any proposed application for development determined by the
Board to be creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to the
possibility of an adverse effect upon either the property in question
or upon any adjacent properties, may be required to be revised to
remove any adverse effect(s) prior to further review or approval by
the Board, or, where the remaining portion of the original tract is
sufficient to be subdivided or developed further, the applicant may
be required to submit a sketch of the entire remaining portion of
the tract to indicate a feasible plan whereby the applied for
subdivision or development, together with subsequent
subdivision(s) or development(s), may be submitted that will not
create, impose, aggravate or lead to any adverse effect.
7. When a minor subdivision or minor site plan is approved by the
Board, a notation to that effect, including the date of approval, shall
be made on a master copy. At least ten (10) prints of the plat or plan
and any related deed descriptions to be filed with the County
Recording Officer shall be signed by the Township Engineer and
the Chairman and Secretary of the Board (or the Acting Chairman
or Secretary where either or both may be absent). No further
approval of the application shall be required and the Secretary of
the Board, within ten (10) days of the date of approval, shall notify
the applicant of the Board's action. Additionally, the Secretary of
the Board shall forward the applicant a copy of the approval
resolution, adopted in accordance with subsection 25-7.6f of this
chapter, within ten (10) days of its adoption by the Board.
8. When a minor subdivision or minor site plan is disapproved by the
Board, the Secretary of the Board, within ten (10) days of such
action, shall notify the applicant of such disapproval. Additionally,
the Secretary of the Board shall forward the applicant a copy of the
disapproval resolution, adopted in accordance with subsection
25-7.6f of this chapter, within ten (10) days of its adoption by the
Board, setting forth the reasons for the disapproval.
9. Within one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of approval by
the Board of a minor subdivision, a plat map drawn in compliance
with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 190 c. 141 (C. 46:29-9.9 et seq.) or
§ 25-8.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.3
1:720
§ 25-8.4. Submission of Preliminary Major Subdivision Plats and
Preliminary Major Site Plans. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 20-1990;
Ord. No. 11-2002 §§ 6-11]
deed description, properly drafted and signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Board (or the Acting Chairman or Secretary where
either or both may be absent), shall be filed by the subdivider
with the County Recording Officer after the posting of any required
performance guarantee(s). Unless filed within one hundred ninety
(190) days, the approval shall expire and will require Board
approval as in the first instance. The zoning requirements and
general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise,
upon which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be
changed for a period of two (2) years after the date of minor
subdivision approval by the Board, provided that the approved
minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded.
10. Before the Secretary of the Board returns any approved minor
subdivision or minor site plan to the applicant, the applicant shall
provide additional copies of the plat or plan as may be necessary in
order to furnish copies to each of the following:
(a) Administrative Officer;
(b) Township Engineer (in the case of subdivisions only, a map of
the plat drawn to the Tax Map scale as directed by the
Township Engineer);
(c) Zoning Officer;
(d) Township Tax Assessor;
(e) Township Department of Health;
(f) Such other Township, County or State agencies and officials as
directed by the Board.
a. Procedure for Submitting Preliminary Major Subdivision Plats and
Preliminary Major Site Plans. The applicant shall submit to the
Administrative Officer at least fourteen (14) days prior to the second
Wednesday of the month: twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plat or
preliminary plan; twenty (20) completed copies of the appropriate
applications which includes the checklist(s)46 pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3 attached to this chapter; twenty (20) copies of any
protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided or developed; and a fee in accordance with Section 25-9 of
this chapter. The application shall contain an acknowledgment signed
by the applicant, stating that the applicant is familiar with the
procedure set forth herein for submitting and acting upon preliminary
46.Editor's Note: The checklist referred to herein is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 25-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:721
major subdivision plats and preliminary major site plans, and agrees to
be bound by it. The Administrative Officer shall process the application
and shall issue an application number. Once an application has been
assigned a number, such number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats
or plans and other documents submitted for processing in conjunction
with the application.
b. Details Required for Preliminary Major Subdivision Plats and
Preliminary Major Site Plans. Each preliminary plat or preliminary plan
shall be drawn by a professional engineer and/or land surveyor licensed
to practice in the State of New Jersey and shall bear the signature, seal,
license number and telephone number of the said professional engineer
and/or land surveyor; provided, however, that all engineering data shall
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer and all surveying data
shall be signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor.
Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less than
1" equals 100' and shall be submitted on one of four of the following
standard sheet sizes (8 1/2" x 13"; 15" x 21"; 24" x 36"; 30" x 42"). If
one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire tract, the map may be
divided into sections to be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes, with
reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
Each preliminary plat or plan shall show the following information,
as appropriate to a subdivision plat or site plan, unless the municipal
agency determines and so notifies the applicant that such information
either is unnecessary or inapplicable to the particular subdivision or
development plan:
1. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas, at a scale of one (1) inch equals not more than
two thousand (2,000) feet;
2. Title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks for
professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
(a) Name of subdivision or development, Aberdeen Township,
Monmouth County;
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider or
developer;
(c) Name, title, address and license number of the professional or
professionals who prepared the plat or plan;
(d) Name, title and address of the owner or owners of record;
(e) Scale (written and graphic); and
(f) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof and a list of the specific revisions entered on each
sheet.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:722
3. North arrow;
4. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his consent
under an option agreement;
5. Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman;
(b) Secretary; and
(c) Township Engineer.
6. Acreage to the nearest tenth of an acre and a computation of the
area of the tract to be disturbed;
7. The names and lot and block numbers of all property owners within
two hundred (200) feet of the extreme limits of the tract as shown
on the most recent tax list prepared by the Township Tax Assessor;
8. Existing tax sheet number(s) and existing block and lot number(s)
of the lot(s) to be subdivided or developed as they appear on the
Township Tax Map, and proposed block and lot numbers as
provided by the Township Tax Assessor upon written request;
9. Tract boundary line (heavy solid line);
10. Zoning districts, including district names and requirements, and a
comparison to the application;
11. The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed bridges and
the location of natural features such as wooded areas, and any
extensive rock formations, both within the tract and within two
hundred (200) feet of its boundaries;
12. The location and species associations of all existing individual trees
or groups of trees having a caliper of eight (8) inches or more
measured three (3) feet above the ground level shall be shown
within the portion(s) of the tract to be disturbed as a result of the
proposed development. The proposed location of all proposed
plantings also shall be indicated and a legend provided listing the
botanical and common names, the sizes at time of planting, the
total quantity of each plant, and the location of each plant keyed to
the plan or plat.
13. Delineation of flood plains, including both floodway and flood fringe
areas, wetlands and hydric soil lands; within the tract and within
one hundred (100) feet thereof.
14. All existing and proposed water courses (including lakes and
ponds) shall be shown and accompanied by the following
information:
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:723
(a) When a stream is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation or where a drainage structure or fill is proposed
over, under, in or along a running stream, a report on the status
of review by the State Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Water Resources, shall accompany the
submission;
(b) Cross-sections of water courses and/or drainage swales at an
approximate scale showing the extent of the flood plain, top of
bank, normal water levels and bottom elevations at the
following locations, where appropriate:
(1) At any point where a water course crosses a boundary of
the tract.
(2) At one hundred (100) foot intervals up to five hundred
(500) feet upstream and downstream of any point of
juncture of two (2) or more water courses within the tract.
(3) At one hundred (100) foot intervals for a distance of five
hundred (500) feet upstream and downstream of any
proposed and/or existing culvert or bridge within the tract.
(4) At a maximum of one hundred (100) foot intervals, but not
less than two (2) locations, along each water course which
runs through or within a distance prescribed by the
Township Engineer.
(5) When ditches, swales, streams or water courses are to be
altered, and measures to control erosion and siltation, as
well as typical ditch sections and profiles, shall be shown.
(6) The delineation of the floodways and flood fringe areas of
all water courses within or adjacent to the tract.
(c) The total acreage of the drainage basin of any water course
running through the tract;
(d) The location and extent of drainage and conservation
easements and stream encroachment lines;
(e) The location, extent and water level evaluation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within the tract and within two
hundred (200) feet of the tract.
15. Existing and proposed contours with intervals of one (1) foot where
slopes are less than two (2%) percent with intervals of two (2) feet
where slopes are between two (2%) percent and fifteen (15%)
percent; and with intervals of five (5) feet where slopes exceed
fifteen (15%) percent. All contour information shall refer to a
known datum. Existing contours shall be shown as a dashed line;
finished grades shall be shown as a solid line. Lands with a
topographic slope fifteen (15%) percent or greater shall be shaded.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:724
16. Proposals for soil erosion and sediment control as required by
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
17. Locations of all existing structures showing existing and proposed
front, rear and side yard setback distances, an indication of
whether the existing structures and uses will be retained or
removed, and a specific identification of any family burial grounds
and buildings more than fifty (50) years old, both within the tract
and within two hundred (200) feet of its boundary.
18. Size, height and location of all proposed buildings, structures, signs
and lighting facilities.
19. All dimensions necessary to confirm conformity to the chapter such
as the size of the tract and any proposed lot(s), structure setbacks,
structure heights, yards and floor area ratios. All tract and lot sizes
shall be expressed in acres and square feet and shall include
bearings and distances.
20. The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and type of
proposed outdoor lighting including details of lighting poles and
luminaries.
21. The proposed screening, buffering and landscaping, including a
landscaping plan:
(a) Buffer zones are required along lot and street lines of all
nonresidential lots where said property lines or the centerline
of adjacent streets abut residential uses or residential zoning
district lines. Each permitted use shall provide landscaped
grounds and suitable screening in order to safeguard the
character of adjacent districts. The width of the buffer area for
each particular district shall be as prescribed in Section 25-4.
Buffer areas shall be measured horizontally and at right angles
to either a straight lot line or street line or the tangent lines of
curved lots or street lines.
Buffer areas may be existing vegetation or newly planted
material and shall be maintained and kept clear of all debris
and rubbish. No above surface structure or activity or the
storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in
the buffer area. Newly proposed buffer areas shall be planted
and maintained with grass or ground cover together with a
dense screen of trees, shrubs or other plant materials meeting
the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in screen plantings shall be at least
six (6) feet in height when planted and shall be of such
density as determined appropriate for the activities
involved. The plant materials shall be of a species common
to the area, be of nursery stock and shall be free of insect
and disease.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:725
(2) Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained and plant
material which does not live shall be replaced by the
owner within two (2) years or two (2) growing seasons.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity the
plant material will be no closer than three (3) feet from any
street or property line.
(4) The buffer area shall not be broken unless specifically
approved by the Board.
(b) Landscaping in parking areas shall be specified in accordance
with the provisions of subsection 25-5.12g of this chapter.
(c) The Board, at its discretion, may consult with a landscape
architect regarding the appropriateness of the landscaping
plan as it relates to the physical characteristics of the site.
22. The location and design of any off-street parking area, showing size
and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
23. All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto
public streets, showing the site and the location of driveways and
curb cuts, including the possible utilization of traffic signals,
channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, sight triangle
easements, additional width and other proposed devices necessary
to prevent a difficult traffic situation.
24. The application shall include plans and computations for any storm
drainage system including the following:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the tract showing size and slope of the lines, direction of flow
and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert
and headwall.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed ground water
recharge basins, detention basins or other water or soil
conservation or drainage devices, with cross sections every
fifty (50) feet at right angles to the long access of the basin,
each extending seventy-five (75) feet beyond the top of the rim
of the basin on each side.
(c) A map drawn to scale (minimum scale 1" = 100') showing the
contributing area to each inlet or cross drain.
(d) A weighted run-off coefficient for each drainage area shall be
determined for use in the computations.
25. The location of existing structures such as water and sewer mains,
utility structures, gas transmission lines and high tension power
lines on the tract and within two hundred (200) feet of its
boundaries.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:726
26. Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts including
sewers, storm drains and water lines and feasible connections to
gas, telephone and electrical utility systems. If private utilities are
proposed, they shall comply fully with all Township, County, State
and Federal regulations. If service will be provided by an existing
utility company, in lieu of detailed plans, a letter from that company
stating that service will be available before occupancy will be
sufficient. When individual on-lot water or sewage disposal is
proposed, the plan for such systems shall be approved for each lot
by the appropriate Township and State agencies and the result of
percolation tests and soil log data, completed in accordance with
the requirements and conditions prescribed by the Township
Department of Health, shall be indicated on the plat or plan or
submitted in an accompanying report.
27. Plans, typical cross sections and construction details, horizontal
and vertical alignments of the centerline of all proposed streets and
of all existing streets abutting the tract. The vertical alignments
shall be based on U.S.G.S. vertical datum or a more specified datum
supplied by the Township Engineer, including curbing, sidewalks,
storm drains, drainage structures and cross sections every half and
full station of all proposed streets and of all existing streets
abutting the tract. Sight triangles, the radius of curblines and
street sign locations shall be clearly indicated at the intersections.
28. Any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land
being developed shall be submitted with the application and/or
indicated on the submitted plat or plan.
29. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements, the use(s) for which they are intended to be limited,
and the manner in which the easements will be controlled.
30. The proposed permanent monuments shall be shown, in
accordance with the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9.
31. Certificate from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and
assessments are paid to date.
32. In the case of any subdivision or site plan submission of a planned
development, the applicant shall be required to submit all of the
required information for all of the properties comprising the
planned development, regardless of whether the applicant is
seeking approval of the whole or a section of the planned
development; specifically, the applicant shall be required to show
the interrelationship of each portion of the project with the whole
of the project considering land use, traffic, open space, buffering,
drainage and surface water management, sewerage, potable water
supply and any other specific planning considerations as may be of
particular relevance to a particular planned development.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:727
33. The Board reserves the right to require additional information
before granting preliminary approval when unique circumstances
affect the tract and/or when the application for development poses
special problems for the tract and the surrounding area. Such
information shall include, but not be limited to, drainage
calculations and traffic analyses, provided however, that no
application shall be declared incomplete for the lack of such
additional information.
34. Provisions for the separation and storage of recyclable materials.
c. Environmental Impact Statement.
1. General Provisions. The impact on the environment generated by
land development projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis
of the variety of problems that may result and the actions that can
be taken to minimize the problems. It is further recognized that the
level of detail required for various types of applications will vary
depending on the size of the proposal, the nature of the site, the
location of the project and the information already in the
possession of the Township. Therefore, having determined that
some flexibility is needed in preparing the Environmental Impact
Statement, the requirements for such a document pertaining to
different types of development applications are listed below:
(a) All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District and all
silviculture operations conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester are specifically exempt
from the Environmental Impact Statement requirements.
(b) Any variance applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
not involving a site plan or subdivision application shall not
require an Environmental Impact Statement unless specifically
requested by the Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
inform the applicant regarding any information that may be
required.
(c) Any application for subdivision approval where ten (10) lots or
less are involved and all applications for minor site plan
approval, either to the Planning Board or to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall not require an
Environmental Impact Statement unless specifically requested
by the Board.
(d) All preliminary major subdivision applications where more
than ten (10) lots are involved and/or all preliminary major site
plan applications shall be accompanied by an Environmental
Impact Statement.
(e) Any application requiring an Environmental Impact Statement
shall also require the submission of a Phase I Environmental
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:728
Assessment (ASTM 1527)/Preliminary Assessment (N.J.A.C.
7:26E).
2. Submission Format. When an Environmental Impact Statement is
required, the applicant shall retain one (1) or more competent
professionals to perform the necessary work. The qualifications
and background of the professionals shall be provided, and the
method of investigation shall be described. All applicable material
on file in the Township pertinent to evaluation of regional impacts
shall also be considered including the Township Master Plan.
Furthermore, as much original research as necessary shall be
conducted to develop the Environmental Impact Statement. All
Environmental Impact Statements shall consist of written and
graphic materials which clearly present the required information
utilizing the following format:
(a) Project description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which
will result from the proposed project and describe the
suitability of the site for the intended use. A description of the
proposed project shall be presented to indicate the extent to
which the site must be altered, the kinds of facilities to be
constructed and the uses intended. The resident population,
working population and visitor population shall be estimated.
The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed project
shall be described in relation to the following:
(1) Township Master Plan.
(2) Master Plan of Adjacent Municipalities.
(3) Monmouth County Master Plan.
(4) Regional and State Planning Guides.
(5) Other Pertinent Planning Documents.
(b) Site description and inventory. Provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site which shall include the
following items:
(1) Types of soils. List and describe each soil type on the site.
If applicable, provide percolation data. Where the
proposed area of land disturbance will involve soils with
moderate or severe limitations relative to the type of
project proposed, a complete mapping of all soil types
where the moderate and severe limitations exist. Delineate
on preliminary/final construction plans where acid
producing deposits, as defined within the document
entitled "Technical Manual for Land Use Regulation
Program, Bureaus of Inland and Coastal Regulations,
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:729
Stream Encroachment Permits, Section 2.5, will be
exposed during construction.
(2) Topography. Describe the topographic conditions on the
site.
(3) Geology. Describe the geologic formation and features
associated with the site as well as depth to bedrock
conditions. Delineate those areas where bedrock is within
two (2) feet of the surface as well as major rock
outcroppings.
(4) Vegetation. Describe the existing vegetation on the site. A
map shall be prepared showing the location of major
vegetative groupings such as woodlands, open fields and
wetlands. Where woodlands are delineated, the forest
types shall be indicated. In addition to the requirements in
subsection 25-5.10 of the chapter, identify the location of
specimen trees within the site. Specimen trees are defined
as those trees that have a diameter or circumference of
eighty (80%) percent of the State record for the individual
species.
(5) Wildlife. Identify and describe any unique habitats of
endangered or protected species. Conduct a New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Natural Heritage
Program Data Base search as to the possible presence of
threatened or endangered species on site.
(6) Subsurface water. Describe the subsurface water
conditions on the site both in terms of depth to ground
water and water supply capabilities. The location, depth,
capacity and water quality of all existing water wells on
the site and within five hundred (500) feet of the site shall
be indicated. Applicants shall evaluate soil profile pits
under the witness of a representative of the Township
Engineer's Office to determine soil condition and depth to
the seasonal high water table. At a minimum, the number
of profile pit evaluations shall be determined by the
following:
(i) One (1) soil profile pit per three (3) acres of area
proposed for development for site plans or
subdivisions that propose up to twenty (20) acres of
land disturbance, and add one (1) profile pit per five
(5) acres of developed area for site plans or
subdivisions proposing in excess of twenty (20) acres
of land disturbance.
(ii) In addition to the frequency of soil profile pit
evaluations required above, two (2) soil profile pits
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:730
shall be evaluated in each stormwater detention or
retention basin.
The depth to the seasonal high water table shall be
based upon mottling. The profile pits shall be
excavated to a depth of three (3) feet beyond the
lowest floor elevation of any proposed building,
dwelling, and to six (6) feet below the bottom of a
stormwater management facility. A minimum
separation of twenty-four (24) inches shall be
maintained between the lowest floor elevation of any
building, dwelling and from detention/retention basin
bottoms.
(7) Distinctive scenic and/or historic features. Describe and
map those portions of the site that can be considered to
have distinctive scenic and/or historic qualities. Conduct a
data base search from the State Historic Preservation
Office as to the presence/absence of historic or
archeologic sites on or adjacent to the site.
(8) Existing development features. Describe any existing
features on the site that are not considered to be part of
the natural environment. This may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, roads, driveway accesses,
housing units, accessory structures, utility lines, etc.
(9) Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis should be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as
prescribed by the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(c) Impact. Discuss both the adverse and positive impacts during
and after construction. Indicate those adverse impacts that are
unavoidable. The specific concerns that shall be considered
include the following and shall be accompanied by specific
quantitative measurements where possible and necessary:
(1) Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface runoff.
(2) Flooding and flood plain disruption.
(3) Degradation of surface water quality.
(4) Ground water pollution.
(5) Reduction of ground water capabilities.
(6) Sewage disposal.
(7) Solid waste disposal.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:731
(8) Vegetation destruction.
(9) Disruption of wildlife habitats of endangered and
protected species.
(10) Destruction or degradation of scenic and historic features.
(11) Air quality degradation.
(12) Noise levels.
(13) Energy utilization.
(d) Environmental performance controls. Describe what measures
will be employed during the planning, construction and
operation phases which will minimize or eliminate adverse
impacts that could result from the proposed project. Of specific
interest are:
(1) Drainage plans which shall include soil erosion and
sedimentation controls.
(2) Sewage disposal techniques.
(3) Water supply and water conservation proposals.
(4) Energy conservation measures.
(5) Noise reduction techniques.
(e) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms
of approval required by law for the development and operation
of the proposed project. The list shall include approvals
required by the Township, as well as agencies of the County,
State and Federal governments. Where approvals have been
granted, copies of said approvals shall be attached. Where
approvals are pending, a note shall be made to that effect.
(f) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or
other written sources of information which were first consulted
and employed in compilation of the Environmental Impact
Statement shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals
from whom all pertinent information was obtained orally or by
letter shall be listed separately. Dates and locations of all
meetings shall be specified.
3. Disposition by the Board. The Board shall review the information
furnished in the Environmental Impact Statement in the context of
the overall design of the proposed development and the
relationship of the proposed development to the environment. The
information is to be used solely to help insure that the proposed
development will cause no reasonably avoidable damage to any
environmental resource.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:732
d. Traffic Impact Statement.
1. General Provisions. The impact on the existing road systems
generated by land development necessitates a comprehensive
analysis of the variety of problems that may result and the actions
that can be taken to minimize the problems. Therefore, all
preliminary major subdivision applications involving more than ten
(10) lots and/or all preliminary major site plan applications shall be
accompanied by a Traffic Impact Statement unless specifically
waived by the Board. Any application for subdivision approval
where less than ten (10) lots are involved and all applications for
minor site plan approval, either before the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall not require a Traffic
Impact Statement unless specifically requested by the Board.
The Board may waive the requirement for a Traffic Impact
Statement totally or partially only if sufficient evidence is
submitted to the Board indicating that the proposed project will
have a negligible traffic impact, or, alternatively, that a complete
report need not be prepared and submitted in order to evaluate
adequately the specific traffic impact to be generated by the
proposed development. The burden of demonstrating the
exceptions hereinabove shall at all times rest with the applicant,
who must affirmatively demonstrate to the Board the basis for the
waiver request.
2. Contents of Report. The Traffic Impact Statement shall contain the
following information:
(a) Projections of traffic to be generated by the proposed
development for average daily, morning peak hour(s),
afternoon peak hour(s), and any other peak traffic condition
deemed applicable as a result of the type and/or location of the
proposed generator. Traffic generation rates should be based
upon local indices, where available, or rates promulgated by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers, where local indices
are not available. All rates should be documented in the report.
Also, the method and data base upon which traffic approach
route distributions are based shall be fully documented. Any
assumptions regarding the diversion of existing traffic to
alternative routes should be clearly specified in the report.
(b) The report shall contain documentation of existing conditions
on adjacent streets serving immediate site access/egress,
including roadway pavement width, rights-of-way, curb parking
conditions, sight visibility, grade and curvatures of roadway
and traffic control devices. Existing traffic volumes or average
daily and peak hour conditions shall be presented with the
source of data denoted.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:733
(c) Assessment of the traffic impact of the proposed development
shall be provided, including estimates of levels of services. In
preparing these estimates, assumptions regarding the annual
growth rate of existing traffic should be fully documented.
Capacity determination should be based upon normally
accepted standards, with the basis of these estimates clearly
indicated. All substantial applications for development, both
within Aberdeen Township and neighboring municipalities,
which recently have been built, are under construction, have
been approved for construction, or are being considered for
approval shall be factored in the analysis. In the event the
project is staged over a period of time, independent estimates
for each stage shall be provided.
(d) In the event that roadway deficiencies are identified for
existing and/or future conditions, specific recommendations
for the resolution of these problems shall be addressed in the
report. The report shall contain a listing of any and all actions
to be undertaken by the applicant to resolve or minimize traffic
problems and, as such, shall be considered a firm offer by the
applicant to undertake such actions, subject to approval by the
Board.
(e) Any alteration or amendment to the development application
which would substantially alter specific land uses, site acreage,
building floor area, highway access design or other feature
which could cause a significant change in traffic generation
rates shall require the submission of a revised Traffic Impact
Statement.
(f) In situations where State or County highways are adjacent to
and/or potentially impacted by the proposed project, a copy of
the report shall be provided to the Commissioner of
Transportation, New Jersey Department of Transportation for
State highways, and/or to the Monmouth County Department
of Transportation for County highways for their review and
comment.
3. Disposition by the Board. The Board shall review the information
furnished in the Traffic Impact Statement in the context of the
overall design of the proposed development and the traffic impact
of the proposed development on the affected road system. The
information is to be used solely to determine whether or not the
proposed development will create any negative impact(s) upon the
roadway system, adjacent properties, or the zone plan of the
municipality. The Traffic Impact Statement may be forwarded to a
Township Traffic Consultant for review and comment.
e. Action by the Township.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:734
1. The Application Review Committee shall review the major
subdivision or major site plan application for the purpose of
determining, within forty-five (45) days of its submission, whether
said application is complete. Thereafter:
(a) If said application is found to contain all of the information
required by subsections 25-8.4b, 25-8.4c and 25-8.4d of this
chapter, the Application Review Committee shall recommend
to the Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, that said application
is complete. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall
review said application at its next regularly scheduled meeting
and shall certify the application complete within forty-five (45)
days of its submission, upon concurrence with the Application
Review Committee's recommendation for completeness. If the
application is found not to be complete, then the Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant
according to the procedure in subsection 25-8.4e1(b).
(b) If said application is found to lack some of the information
required by subsections 25-8.4b, 25-8.4c or 25-8.4d of this
chapter, said Application Review Committee shall either:
(1) Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that said
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies in the
application; or
(2) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are necessary to
make an informed decision on the application, but are not
of such significance to cause the application to be deemed
incomplete, said Application Review Committee may
recommend to the Subdivision Committee, Site Plan
Committee or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, the application complete, conditioned upon the
submission of the missing items of information to the
Administrative Officer within ten (10) days; or
(3) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are not necessary for
it to make an informed decision on the application, said
Application Review Committee may recommend to the
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, waiving the
requirement that said items be supplied as a prerequisite
for completeness and certifying that the application is
complete notwithstanding the missing items.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:735
(c) An applicant who has been notified that his application is
incomplete may request waiver of one (1) or more of the
submission requirements set forth in subsections 25-8.4b,
25-8.4c and/or 25-8.4d and said request shall be granted or
denied by the Board within forty-five (45) days.
(d) In the event the Application Review Committee, Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to act pursuant to
subsections 25-8.4e1(b)(1), 25-8.4e1(b)(2) or 25-8.4e1(b)(3),
hereinabove within forty-five (45) days of the date of
submission of the application, said application shall be deemed
complete as of the forty-sixth (46th) day following its
submission.
2. On the date the aforesaid application is certified complete, or on
the forty-sixth (46th) day following the submission of the
application, in the event the Application Review Committee,
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to make a determination of
completeness, the applicable time period within which the Board
must act upon the application shall commence. In any case, the
applicant is obliged to prove that he or she is entitled to approval of
the application. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee
or either Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error, may require submission of
additional information not specified in this Ordinance, and/or may
require revisions in the application documents; as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements for approval of the application have been met,
provided that the application shall not be deemed incomplete for
lack of any such additional information or revisions. Such revisions
or information shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer ten
(10) days prior to the next meeting for which the application is
scheduled.
3. Promptly after recommendation of completeness by the Application
Review Committee, the application documents shall be distributed
by the Administrative Officer to the following:
(a) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, (nine (9) copies of the preliminary plat or plan
and nine (9) copies of the application and any protective
covenants or deed restrictions);
(b) Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, (one (1) copy each of the preliminary plat or plan, the
application and any protective covenants or deed restrictions);
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:736
(c) Township Fire Subcode Official (one (1) copy each of the
preliminary plat or plan, the application and any protective
covenants or deed restrictions);
(d) Township Manager (one (1) copy each of the preliminary plat
or plan, the application and any protective covenants or deed
restrictions);
(e) Township Engineer (one (1) copy each of the preliminary plat
or plan, the application and any protective covenants or deed
restrictions);
(f) Township Planner (one (1) copy each of the preliminary plat or
plan, the application and any protective covenants or deed
restrictions);
(g) Township Safety Officer (one (1) copy of the preliminary plat or
plan);
(h) Zoning Officer (one (1) copy of the preliminary plat or plan);
(i) Township Department of Health (one (1) copy of the
preliminary plat or plan);
(j) Township Environmental Commission (one (1) copy of the
preliminary plat or plan);
(k) Township Tax Assessor (one (1) copy of the preliminary plat or
plan);
(l) At the direction of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, additional copies of the
preliminary plat or plan shall be sent to other Township,
County or State agencies as may be designated by the Board.
4. The Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, shall read any written report submitted concerning the
application and shall itself review the submission to ascertain its
conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. The
Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case may be,
shall offer its recommendations to the Board.
5. The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site
plan application involving ten (10) acres of land or less and ten (10)
dwelling units or less and/or a preliminary major subdivision
application involving ten (10) lots or less within forty-five (45) days
after the application has been certified complete or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute
approval of the application; provided that any preliminary major
site plan or preliminary major subdivision application which
includes any requested variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60 and subsection 25-8.1a2 of this section shall be acted
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:737
upon within one hundred twenty (120) days or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
6. The Planning Board shall take action on a preliminary major site
plan application involving more than ten (10) acres of land or more
than ten (10) dwellings and/or a preliminary major subdivision
application involving more than ten (10) lots within ninety-five (95)
days after the application has been certified complete or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the Board to act within the prescribed time period shall
constitute approval of the application; provided that any
preliminary major site plan or preliminary major subdivision
application which includes any requested variance relief pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and subsection 25-8.1a2 of this section shall
be acted upon within one hundred twenty (120) days or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
7. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take action on a preliminary
major site plan application and/or preliminary major subdivision
application under its jurisdiction as prescribed in subsections
25-8.4e4 and 25-8.4e5 hereinabove in cases where the applicant
has requested a "use" variance in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d and subsection 25-7.2d of this section. All aspects of
the application shall be acted upon within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the application has been certified complete by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
8. Any proposed application for development determined by the
Board to be creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to the
possibility of an adverse effect upon either the property in question
or upon any adjacent properties, may be required to be revised to
mitigate any adverse effect(s) prior to further review or approval by
the Board, or, where the remaining portion of the original tract is
sufficient to be subdivided or further developed, the applicant may
be required to submit a sketch of the entire portion of the tract to
indicate a feasible plan whereby the applied for subdivision or
development, together with subsequent subdivision(s) or
development(s), may be submitted that will not create, impose,
aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect and will comply with
the chapter.
9. In the case of planned developments only, the Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions prior to granting approval:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning provisions specified in Section 25-6 of
this section pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:738
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
10. All hearings held on applications for preliminary major subdivision
approval and preliminary major site plan approval shall require
public notice of the hearing. The Board shall set the date, time and
place for the public hearing and shall inform the applicant of this at
least fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing date. Notice of the
hearing shall be given by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of the hearing. (See subsection 25-7.6d.)
11. The recommendation of those agencies and officials to whom the
preliminary plat or plan was forwarded shall be given careful
consideration in the final decision on the development application.
If the County Planning Board or the Township Engineer approve
the preliminary submission, such approval shall be noted on the
plat or plan. If the Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat or
plan, the Township Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of
the Board (or the acting Chairman or Secretary, where either or
both may be absent) shall affix their signatures to at least ten (10)
copies of the plat or plan with the notification that it has been
approved. The applicant shall furnish such copies to the Board.
12. Should minor revisions or additions to the plat or plan be deemed
necessary, the Board may grant preliminary approval subject to
specified conditions and receipt of revised plans within thirty (30)
days from the date of said approval. Should substantial revisions be
deemed necessary, the Board shall require that an amended plat or
plan be submitted and acted upon as in the case of the original
application.
13. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary
plat or plan, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat or plan
and a resolution adopted in accordance with subsection 25-7.6f of
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.4
1:739
this Ordinance setting forth the reasons for such rejection. One (1)
copy of the plat or plan and said resolution shall be returned to the
applicant within ten (10) days of the adoption of said resolution.
f. Effect of Preliminary Approval.
1. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three (3) year period from the date of preliminary
approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to: use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and offtract
improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval; except that
nothing therein shall be construed to prevent the municipality
from modifying by Ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health
and safety;
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary plat or plan; and
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods
of at least one (1) year, but not to exceed a total extension of
two (2) years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by Ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
2. In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area fifty (50)
acres or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to
in subsection 25-8.4f1 hereinabove for such period of time, longer
than three (3) years, as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
3. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Board may
thereafter grant, an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
§ 25-8.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.4
1:740
§ 25-8.5. Submission of Final Major Subdivision Plats and Final
Major Site Plans. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 6-1988]
(b) The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development;
(e) Provided that if the design standards have been revised by
Ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
a. Procedure for Submitting Final Plats and Final Plans. A final plat or
final plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer within three
(3) years after the date of preliminary approval or any authorized
extension thereof. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative
Officer at least fourteen (14) days prior to the second Wednesday of the
month: nineteen (19) copies of the final major subdivision plat or final
major site plan; nineteen (19) copies of the appropriate application(s),
which includes the checklist(s) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3
attached to this chapter;47 and a fee in accordance with Section 25-9 of
this chapter. The application shall contain an acknowledgment signed
by the applicant stating that the applicant is familiar with the procedure
set forth herein for submitting and acting upon final major subdivision
plats and final major site plans, and agrees to be bound by it.
b. Details Required for Final Major Subdivision Plats and Final Major Site
Plans. The following information shall be submitted:
1. All details stipulated in subsections 25-8.4b and 25-8.4c of this
chapter.
2. All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
3. A section or staging plan, if proposed, indicating the portion of the
tract to be considered for final approval as part of the current
application and the relationship of the portion of the tract to the
remaining land area, including all applicable comparisons such as
parking spaces, building coverage, lot coverage, open space areas
and number of lots.
4. Detailed architectural and engineering data including:
(a) An architect's design drawing of each building and sign or a
typical building and sign showing front, side and rear
elevations.
47.Editor's Note: The checklist referred to herein is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 25-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.5
1:741
(b) Cross sections, plans, profiles and established grades of all
streets, aisles, lanes and driveways, including centerline
geometry and horizontal alignments with bearings, radii and
tangents.
(c) Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water
mains.
(d) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision
shall be balanced and closed to a precision of one (1) to five
thousand (5,000) and the dimensions of all lot lines to within
one (1) to ten thousand (10,000). All dimensions, angles and
bearings must be tied to at least two (2) permanent
monuments not less than three hundred (300) feet apart and
all information shall be indicated on the plat. At least one (1)
corner of the subdivision shall be tied horizontally to the New
Jersey State Grid Coordinate System and vertically to the U.S.
Geodetic Survey System, with the data on the plat as to how
the bearings were determined.
5. The final submission shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
(a) Certification from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and
assessments are paid to date;
(b) Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and signed by a
responsible official of the lighting agency, water company,
sewer utility and of any other company or governmental
authority or district which provides accessory utility service
and has jurisdiction in the area, approving each proposed
utility installation design and stating who will construct the
facility so that service will be available prior to occupancy. The
designing engineer(s) shall certify to the Board that the
existing cross-section(s) and profile(s) have been run in the
field and the field notes shall be forwarded to the Township
Engineer;
(c) The applicant shall certify in writing to the Board that he has:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; and/or,
(2) Posted a performance guarantee in accordance with
subsection 25-9.2 of this chapter.
(d) A statement from the Township Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been
inspected as provided in subsection 25-9.2 of this Ordinance,
and that such improvements installed prior to application for
final approval that do not meet or exceed Township standards
shall be factored into the required performance guarantee.
§ 25-8.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.5
1:742
c. Action by the Township.
1. The Application Review Committee shall review the aforesaid
application for the purpose of determining, within forty-five (45)
days of its submission, whether said application is complete.
Thereafter:
(a) If said application is found to contain all of the information
required by subsection 25-8.5b of this chapter, said Application
Review Committee shall recommend to the Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, that said application is
complete. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee, or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall review
said application at its next regularly scheduled meeting and
shall certify the application complete, within forty-five (45)
days after its submission, upon concurrence with the
Application Review Committee's recommendation for
completeness. If the application is found to be complete, then
the Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant according to the procedure in subsection
25-8.5c1(b).
(b) If said application is found to lack some of the information
required by subsection 25-8.5b of this chapter, said Application
Review Committee shall either:
(1) Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that said
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies in the
application; or
(2) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are necessary to
make an informed decision on the application, but are not
of such significance to cause the application to be deemed
incomplete, said Application Review Committee may
recommend to the Subdivision Committee, Site Plan
Committee, or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, the application complete, conditioned upon the
submission of the missing items of information to the
Administrative Officer within ten (10) days; or
(3) If the Application Review Committee reasonably concludes
that the missing items of information are not necessary for
it to make an informed decision on the application, said
Application Review Committee may recommend to the
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, waiving the
requirement that said items be supplied as a prerequisite
§ 25-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.5
1:743
for completeness and certifying that the application is
complete notwithstanding the missing items.
(c) An applicant who has been notified that his application is
incomplete may request waiver of one (1) or more of the
submission requirements set forth in subsection 25-8.5b and
said request shall be granted or denied by the Board within
forty- five (45) days.
(d) In the event the Application Review Committee, Subdivision
Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to act pursuant to
subsections 25-8.5c1(b)(1), 25-8.5c1(b)(2) or 25-8.5c1(b)(3)
hereinabove within forty-five (45) days of the date of
submission of the application, said application shall be deemed
complete as of the forty-sixth (46th) day following its
submission.
2. On the date the aforesaid application is certified complete, or on
the forty-sixth (46th) day following the submission of the
application, in the event the Application Review Committee,
Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, fails to make a determination of
completeness, the applicable time period within which the Board
must act upon the application shall commence. In any case, the
applicant is obliged to prove that he or she is entitled to approval of
the application. The Subdivision Committee, Site Plan Committee
or either Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error, may require submission of
additional information not specified in this Ordinance, and/or may
require revisions in the application documents as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements for approval of the application have been met,
provided that the application shall not be deemed incomplete for
lack of any such additional information or revisions. Such revisions
or information shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer ten
(10) days prior to the next meeting for which the application is
scheduled.
3. Promptly after recommendation of completeness by the Application
Review Committee, the application documents shall be distributed
by the Administrative Officer to the following:
(a) The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, (nine (9) copies of the final plat or plan and nine
(9) copies of the application);
(b) Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, (one (1) copy each of the final plat or plan and the
application);
§ 25-8.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.5
1:744
(c) Township Fire Subcode Official (one (1) copy each of the final
plat or plan and the application);
(d) Township Manager (one (1) copy each of the final plat or plan
and the application);
(e) Township Engineer (one (1) copy each of the final plat or plan
and the application);
(f) Township Planner (one (1) copy each of the final plat or plan
and the application);
(g) Township Safety Officer (one (1) copy each of the final plat or
plan);
(h) Zoning Officer (one (1) copy each of the final plat or plan and
the application);
(i) Township Department of Health (one (1) copy each of the final
plat or plan and the application);
(j) Township Environmental Commission (one (1) copy each of the
final plat or plan and the application);
(k) At the direction of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, additional copies of the final
plat or plan shall be sent to other Township, County or State
agencies as may be designated by the Board.
4. The Subdivision Committee or Site Plan Committee, as the case
may be, shall read any written report submitted concerning the
application and shall itself review the submission to ascertain its
conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. The
Subdivision Committee or the Site Plan Committee, as the case may
be, shall offer its recommendation to the Board.
5. The Board shall take action of final site plan and final subdivision
applications within forty-five (45) days after the application has
been certified complete or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application.
6. The recommendations of those agencies and officials to whom the
final plat or plan was submitted shall be given careful consideration
in the final decision on the development application If the County
Planning Board or the Township Engineer approve the final
submission, such approval shall be noted on the plat or plan. If the
Board acts favorably on the final plat or plan, the Township
Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board (or the
acting Chairman or Secretary, where either or both may be absent)
shall affix their signatures to at least ten (10) paper copies of the
plat or plan with the notification that it has been approved. The
applicant shall furnish such copies to the Board for signing.
§ 25-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-8.5
1:745
Moreover, in the case of final subdivisions only, the applicant shall
include for signing one (1) cloth copy and at least two (2) mylar
copies of the approved plat in addition to the ten (10) paper copies.
7. After approval of the final plat or plan by the Board, the Secretary
of the Board shall retain one (1) paper copy of the signed plat or
plan and shall furnish other copies to each of the following within
ten (10) days from the date of the adoption of a resolution in
accordance with subsection 25-7.6f of this chapter:
(a) Administrative Officer (one (1) paper copy);
(b) Township Engineer (one (1) paper copy and, in the case of
subdivisions only, one (1) mylar copy drawn to the tax map
scale as directed by the Township Engineer);
(c) Zoning Officer (one (1) paper copy);
(d) Township Tax Assessor (one (1) paper copy),
(e) The Applicant (one (1) paper copy and, in the case of
subdivisions only, one (1) mylar copy); and
(f) Such other Township, County or State agencies and officials as
directed by the Board.
8. Within ninety-five (95) days of the date of approval by the Board of
a final subdivision plat, the subdivider shall file a copy of same with
the Monmouth County Clerk. In the event of failure to file within
said ninety-five (95) days, the approval of the major subdivision
shall expire and any further proceedings shall require the filing of a
new application as in the first instance. The Board, for good cause
shown, may extend the filing for an additional ninety-five (95) days.
9. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the final plat or
plan, disapproves the submission, a notation to that effect shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board on the plat or plan. The
Secretary of the Board, within ten (10) days of such adoption, shall
notify the applicant of such disapproval and forward the applicant a
copy of the adopted resolution setting forth the reasons for the
disapproval.
10. (Reserved)
d. Effect of Final Approval.
1. Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a period of two (2) years from the
date of final approval:
(a) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
§ 25-8.5 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-8.5
1:746
§ 25-9. FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS AND OFF-TRACT
IMPROVEMENTS.48
§ 25-9.1. Fees. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 10-1989; Ord. No.
14-1989; Ord. No. 22-1994; Ord. No. 35-2005 § 2; Ord. No. 21-2007
§ II; Ord. No. 8-2009 § II; Ord. No. 9-2014]
developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be
changed.
(b) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend the period of protection for
extensions of one (1) year each, not exceeding three (3) and
extensions.
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development
or residential cluster of fifty (50) acres or more, or in the case of a
conventional subdivision or site plan of one hundred fifty (150)
acres or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to in
subsection 25-8.5d1 hereinabove for such period of time, longer
than two (2) years, as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
(b) Economic conditions; and
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
3. The developer may apply thereafter and the Board may thereafter
grant an extension to final approval for such additional period of
time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking
into consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval;
(b) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed;
(c) Economic conditions; and
(d) The comprehensiveness of the development.
a. Every application for development shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the Township of Aberdeen in accordance with the following
schedule:
48.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 1-1986.
§ 25-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.1
1:747
Application
Charge
Plus
Escrow
Account
1. Subdivisions
(a) Informal Presentation
Without Professional Review
(one (1) appearance only)
$100 $250
(b) Informal Plat with
Professional Review
(1) Minor Plat $100 $600
(2) Major Plat $100 $800
(c) Minor Plat $400 $1,000
(d) Preliminary Plat $500 plus
$10
per lot
$1,000 plus
$200/ lot
(e) Final Plat $100 $750 plus $200/
lot
2. Site Plans
(a) Informal Presentation
Without Professional Review
(one (1) appearance only)
$100 $250
(b) Informal Plan With
Professional Review
(1) Minor Plan $100 $700
(2) Major Plan $100 $950 per acre,
or part thereof,
for the first ten
(10) acres;
$750 per acre,
or part thereof,
for the next ten
(10) acres;
$550 for each
additional acre,
or part thereof,
thereafter
(c) Minor Plan $400 $1,000
§ 25-9.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.1
1:748
Application
Charge
Plus
Escrow
Account
(d) Preliminary Plan $400 $2,000 per
acre, or part
thereof, for first
ten (10) acres;
$1,500 per
acre, or part
thereof, for
next (10) acres;
$700 for each
additional acre,
or part thereof,
thereafter
(e) Final Plan $150 $1,000/acre or
part thereof
plus $50/
dwelling unit
3. Variances
(a) Appeals (40:55D-70a) $150 $600
(b) Interpretation (40:55D-70b) $150 $600
(c) Bulk (40:55D-70c) $100/lot
variance
$50/
additional
variance
$500
(d) Use (40:55D-70d)
(1) Existing Structure $225 $1,000
(2) On vacant lot $150 $1,000
(e) Permit (40:55D-34 and 35) $150 $500
4. Appeals to Township Committee
See subsection 25-7.7 of this
chapter
$200 Escrow for
transcript and
legal costs to
be set by
Township Clerk
5. Certified List of Property Owners
See subsection 25-7.6d3 of this
chapter
$0.25/name
or $10,
whichever is
greater
(N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12)
None required
§ 25-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.1
1:749
Application
Charge
Plus
Escrow
Account
6. Copy of Minutes, Transcripts or
Decisions
See subsection 25-7.6e2 and
25-7.8c of this chapter
$1/page for
first copy of
said page
plus $0.25/
copy for
each
additional
copy of said
page
None required
7. Subdivision Approval Certificate
See subsection 25-10.4 of this
chapter
$100 per
Certificate
None required
8. Zoning Application [Ord. No.
9-2014]
$65 None required
Zoning Sign Application $50 per sign None required
b. The application charge is a flat fee to cover administrative expenses.
The escrow account is established to cover the cost of professional
services including but not limited to engineering, planning, and other
related expenses associated with the review of the submitted materials;
it shall also cover the cost of legal expenses incurred by the Township,
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment which are in any way
associated with the application. Sums not utilized in the review process
shall be returned to the applicant. If additional sums are deemed
necessary, the applicant shall be notified of the required additional
amount and shall add such sum to the escrow within fifteen (15) days;
c. Where one (1) application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
d. Approval of Performance Guarantees.
1. Duties of Township Engineer, Township Attorney and Township
Clerk. No performance guarantees shall be presented for approval
of the Township Council until the municipal officials listed below
have performed the following and make certification of their
performance, in writing to the Township Council.
(a) Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall:
(1) Where applicable, examine the plat map of a subdivision to
make certain that it complies with all State laws and this
chapter relative to the preparation and filing of maps or
plans for the subdivision of land.
§ 25-9.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.1
1:750
(2) Ascertain that the plat of a site plan or subdivision has
been approved by the Monmouth County and Aberdeen
Township Planning Boards.
(3) Determine those acts or things the applicant is to do to
protect the Township, such as to provide proper drainage,
streets, curbs, signs, monuments or any other item or
thing and the cost of each, as well as the maximum time
the Engineer recommends granting the applicant to
provide each item or all items.
(4) Determine if the landowner is an individual, corporation or
partnership; if an individual, his full name and address; if a
corporation, its correct name, date and State of
incorporation, the name of its president and secretary and
location of its principal office in this State; if a partnership,
the names and address of all partners.
(5) Give the applicant a form of the surety company bond
required by the Township, and all figures, dates and details
required by paragraph d1(a)(3) above so that same may be
included in the bond to be furnished to the Township; also,
advise the applicant of the amount required to pay the
Township as a proper inspection, testing and
administration fee.
(6) Deliver to the Township Attorney:
[a] A copy of the letter advising the applicant of amount
required to pay the Township as proper inspection,
testing and administration fee so that a developer's
agreement can be prepared; and
[b] The original copy of the surety company bond of the
applicant; and
[c] The Township Engineer's written certificate addressed
to the Township Council, which certificate and bond
shall be delivered at one (1) and the same time.
(7) The Township Engineer's certificate shall also state and
give the nature of cash, or its equivalent, deposited as a
portion or all of the performance guarantee (i.e., cash,
certified checks, cash escrow deposit, or other security).
(8) If there is nothing the applicant needs to do under
paragraph d1(a)(3) above the certificate shall so state and
give the reason therefor.
(b) Township Attorney. The Township Attorney shall:
(1) Upon receipt from the Township's Engineer of the surety
bond, Engineer's certificate, and the copy of the
§ 25-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.1
1:751
Engineer's letter advising the applicant of the amount
required to pay the Township as a proper inspection,
testing and administration fee, the Township Attorney
shall promptly examine said bond and determine whether
or not it is in correct form, content and execution.
(2) If the bond is not correct, the Township Attorney shall
notify the applicant of its shortcomings. When the bond is
or has been made correct, the Township Attorney shall
make a written certification to that effect to the Township
Council. Thereupon the attorney shall deliver the bond,
along with the Engineer's and attorney's certifications to
the Township Clerk.
(3) If necessary, the Township Attorney shall prepare a
developer's agreement and forward same to developer for
execution, and thereafter upon receipt of executed
agreement cause same to be executed by the Mayor and
witnessed by the Clerk following the passage of a
resolution authorizing Township entry into this agreement.
The applicant shall post an initial escrow fee as set forth in
said developer's agreement to reimburse the Township for
legal fees incurred in the review and preparation of the
documents and the administration and enforcement of the
terms set forth in said developer's agreement as well as
inspection, testing and administration fees provided in the
Township's Engineer's estimate.
(c) Township Clerk. Upon the receipt from the Township Attorney
of the bond and certificates of the Engineer and attorney, and
the developer's agreement, the Township Clerk shall:
(1) Cause the developer's agreement to be executed by the
Mayor and witnessed by the Clerk following a resolution of
approval as adopted by the Township Council; and
thereafter
(2) Collect from the applicant the proper fee or fees, if any,
payable to the Township in accordance with the Engineer's
certificate and the developer's agreement.
(3) Place the matter of approval of bonds on the agenda of the
next regular meeting of the Township Council for its
consideration;
(4) Submit the bond, certifications, and copies of receipt of
payment to the Township Council at the next regular
meeting of the council.
2. Certificates - Forms, Dating. Each of the certificates shall be dated
and written in letter form upon the stationery of the maker or of the
§ 25-9.1 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.1
1:752
§ 25-9.2. Guarantees and Inspections. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No.
10-1989; Ord. No. 35-2005 § II]
Township, and signed by him or his authorized agent or
representative.
3. Bond Requirements. There must be attached to the bond an
authority of the surety company empowering the person or persons
who executed the bond for the surety company to do so. If the
bonding company is not a New Jersey corporation, there should
also be attached to the bond proof of its authority to do business in
New Jersey and a copy of its last financial statement, made not
more than one (1) year before, showing its financial conditions. If
the principal on the bond is a corporation, there must be attached
to the bond a certified copy of a resolution adopted by its board of
directors authorizing the execution and delivery of the bond. The
bond must also bear the corporate seal of surety company and the
seal, corporate or otherwise, of the principal.
4. Copies. The Township Clerk shall keep copies of these bond
requirements for the use of applicants and the general public.
e. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost for taking testimony
and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the
Township shall be at the expense of the applicant who shall arrange for
the reporter's attendance.
f. Tax Maps. All subdivision or site plan survey data, as required by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as a condition of
approval, shall be submitted to the Township Engineer in AutoCAD or
DXF file format and the following fees shall apply:
1. $250 for all Minor Subdivisions or Minor Site Plans;
2. $125 for Major Subdivision per lot;
3. $750 minimum for Major Site Plan, however, said fee may be
increased at the discretion of the Township Engineer. [Ord. No.
10-1987; Ord. No. 10-1989; Ord. No. 14-1989; Ord. No.
22-1994; Ord. No. 35-2005 § 2; Ord. No. 21-2007 § II; Ord.
No. 8-2009 § II; Ord. No. 9-2014]
a. Requirements Specific to Subdivisions.
1. No final major subdivision application (whether for an entire tract
or a section thereof) shall be approved by the Board until the
satisfactory completion and performance of all required public
improvements has been certified to the Board by the Township
Engineer unless the owner shall have performed the following:
(a) Satisfactorily completed all required utility installations and
their appurtenances, including water mains, drainage and
§ 25-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.2
1:753
detention facilities, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or
dry sewers and public improvements of open space;
(b) Satisfactorily completed all required grading and the
"macadam base course" surfacing of all streets;
(c) Satisfactorily completed the construction of all required curbs;
and,
(d) Filed with the Township a performance guarantee in
accordance with subsection 25-9.2c of this chapter, sufficient
in amount to cover the cost of all remaining required
improvements, as estimated by the Township Engineer, and
assuring the installation of said improvements on or before an
agreed date and as hereinafter provided.
2. Except as hereafter provided, the remaining required
improvements shall be at least fifty (50%) percent completed as to
each category set forth in the performance guarantee within one
(1) year from the date of final approval or by such time as fifty
(50%) percent of the lots in the section in question have been
conveyed, in any manner, by the applicant; whichever shall first
occur. At least seventy-five (75%) percent of the remaining required
improvements shall be completed as to each category as set forth
in the performance guarantee within eighteen (18) months from
the date of final approval, or at such time as seventy-five (75%)
percent of the lots in the section in question have been conveyed, in
any manner, by the applicant; whichever shall first occur. Such
improvements shall be one hundred (100%) percent completed and
accepted by the Township within two (2) years from the date of final
approval or at such time as all of the lots in the section in question
have been conveyed in any manner by the applicant, whichever
shall first occur. It is the intention of the Township Council that this
requirement will provide to those living in each new section of a
subdivision a lot that is as complete as possible with respect to
tract and individual lot improvements.
b. Requirements Specific to Site Plans. No final major site plan application
(whether for an entire tract or a section thereof) shall be approved by
the Board unless: 1) the Township Engineer has certified to the Board
that all required public improvements by the preliminary site plan
approval have been satisfactorily completed or, 2) the applicant has
entered into a developer's agreement with the Township in a form
satisfactory to the Township Attorney and authorized by the governing
body requiring the installation and maintenance by the applicant (and
the applicant's successors in interest) of the public improvements,
imposing such limitations upon, and/or staging of, the development of
the site as are necessary to ensure orderly construction of the public
improvements, and assuring the installation of the public improvements
on or before an agreed date by the filing of a performance guarantee in
accordance with subsection 25-9.2c of this chapter.
§ 25-9.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.2
1:754
For purposes of this chapter section, the term "public improvements"
shall mean streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street
lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, water mains, culverts,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation devices, open
space and landscaping.
c. Performance Guarantee.
1. A performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the
applicant's engineer according to the following schedule and
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval,
setting forth all requirements for improvements, as fixed by the
Board, and their estimated cost. The Township Council shall pass a
resolution either approving or adjusting this performance
guarantee.
(a) Schedule A. Ninety (90%) percent of the total estimated cost of
the following items shall be posted with the Township in the
form of cash, certified check, negotiable security or bond
issued by a bonding or security company. In addition ten (10%)
percent of the total estimated cost shall be in the form of cash
or certified check or cash escrow deposit.
(1) Drainage facilities necessary to protect off-tract areas
from flooding.
(2) Erosion control facilities, required screening and fencing.
(3) All improvements within public rights-of-way and
easements.
(4) The cost of grading and seeding, or otherwise stabilizing
the site.
(b) Schedule B. Fifteen (15%) percent of the total estimated cost of
the following on-site improvement items shall be posted by the
Township in the form of cash, certified check, negotiable
securities or bonds issued by a bonding or security company.
Where the guarantee is in the form of a certified check, the
required amount shall be reduced to ten (10%) percent of the
total estimated amount.
(1) Sewer and water facilities (if not provided for separately).
(2) Drainage facilities.
(3) Streets.
(4) Traffic control signs and signals.
(5) Sidewalks.
(6) Curbing.
§ 25-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.2
1:755
(7) Landscaping.
(8) Screening.
(9) Recreational facilities.
(10)Off-street parking areas.
(11)Off-street loading and loading area.
(12) Outdoor lighting.
(13) Retaining walls and fences.
If at this time the performance guarantee is filed with the
Township, the developer has not filed with the Township
proof that other necessary performance guarantees,
(particularly private utility services) have been filed, the
amount of this performance guarantee shall be increased
to reflect the cost of such utility improvements.
2. The owner shall present two (2) copies of the performance
guarantee, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty (120%)
percent of the approved performance guarantee estimate when
secured by a bond or in an amount equal to one hundred (100%)
percent of the approved performance guarantee when secured by
cash or irrevocable letter of credit, for approval as to form and
execution by the Township Attorney.
3. The Township Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Board prior
to the meeting that the performance guarantee is properly
executed and can be added to the Agenda.
4. The performance guarantee shall be made payable and deposited
to Aberdeen Township and shall be in the form of cash, or certified
check, or a performance bond in which the owner shall be
principal, the bond to be provided by an acceptable surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey. The Township
shall issue its receipt for such deposits and shall cause the same to
be deposited in the name of the Township to be retained as security
for completion of all requirements and to be returned to the owner
on completion of all required work or, in the event of default on part
of the owner, to be used by the Township to pay the cost and
expense of obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond,
whether cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that a
determination by the Township Engineer that the principal has
defaulted in the performance of his obligation shall be binding upon
the surety and the principal.
5. Ten (10%) percent of the amount of the approved performance
guarantee shall be deposited by the owner in cash with the
Township. The remaining ninety (90%) percent may be in cash or
surety bond. In the event of default, the ten (10%) percent fund
§ 25-9.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.2
1:756
herein mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of the
requirements and the cash or surety bond shall thereafter be
resorted to, if necessary, for the completion of the requirements.
The cash or surety bond shall recite the foregoing provisions.
d. Inspection and Tests.
1. All site improvements and utility installations for both site plans
and subdivisions shall be inspected during the time of their
installation under the supervision of the Township Engineer to
insure satisfactory completion. The cost of said inspection shall be
the responsibility of the owner who shall pay to the Township
Treasurer a sum in cash equal to the following:
Total Cost of Improvements Escrow Deposit
$0—$200,000 10% of amount—minimum fee
$1,000
$200,000—$1,000,000 $20,000 plus 7% of amount in
excess of $200,000
$1,000,000—$5,000,000 $76,000 plus 5% of amount in
excess of $1,000,000
More than $5,000,000 $276,000 plus 4% of amount in
excess of $5,000,000
If the Municipal Agency determines that a proposed development
involves unusual or complicated aspects which could result in
expenses to the Township in excess of the inspection fees set
forth above, the Municipal Agency may, as a condition of, or of
any extension of or amendment to, final approval, require the
developer to provide an additional escrow deposit. Expenses in
excess of the normal inspection fees may be deducted from the
escrow deposit. Any balance shall be returned to the applicant
upon release of performance guarantees and/or issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy. In determining the amount of any escrow
required, the Municipal Agency may consider: the duration and
size of the project; unusual design aspects; the degree and extent
of municipal inspection required and the extent of conformity to
normal municipal design standards.
2. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission from
the Township Engineer. At least two (2) working days notice shall
be given to the Township Engineer prior to any construction so that
he or a qualified representative may be present at the time the
work is to be done.
3. Streets shall not be paved with a wearing course until all heavy
construction is completed. Shade trees shall not be planted until all
grading and earth moving is completed. The seeding of grass and
§ 25-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.2
1:757
the placing of surveyor's monuments shall be among the last
operations.
4. The Township Engineer's office shall be notified at least two (2)
days prior to each of the following phases of work so that he or a
qualified representative may inspect the work:
(a) Road subgrade.
(b) Curb and gutter forms.
(c) Curbs and gutters.
(d) Road and parking lot paving.
(e) Sidewalk forms.
(f) Sidewalks.
(g) Drainage pipes and other drainage or flood control
construction.
(h) Street name signs.
(i) Monuments.
(j) Sanitary sewers and septic system.
(k) Detention and/or retention basins.
(l) Topsoil, seeding and plantings, including buffer areas.
(m) Underground utilities.
5. Any improvement installed contrary to the plan or plat approval by
the Township shall constitute just cause to void the municipal
approval.
6. Any improvement installed without notice for inspection pursuant
to subsection 25-9.2d4 hereinabove shall constitute just cause for:
(a) Removal of the uninspected improvement;
(b) The payment by the developer of any costs for material testing;
(c) The restoration by the developer of any improvements
disturbed during any material testing; and/or
(d) The issuance of a "stop work" order by the Township Engineer
pending the resolution of any dispute.
7. Prior to notifying the governing body of the completion or
substantial completion of any improvements covered by the
performance guarantee, the subdivider or developer shall prepare
and submit to the Township Engineer a set of the approved Public
§ 25-9.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.2
1:758
Improvements and Public Sewer and Water Plans and Profiles
amended to read "as constructed."
8. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not operate to subject the Township of Aberdeen to
liability for claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time
arise because of defects or negligence during construction or at
any time thereafter; it being recognized that the responsibility to
maintain safe conditions at all times during construction and to
provide proper utilities and improvements is upon the owner and
his contractor, if any.
9. Upon the completion or substantial completion of all required
appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to
the public system, the obligor may notify the Township Council in
writing, by certified mail in care of the Township Clerk, of the
completion or substantial completion of the improvements and
shall simultaneously send a certified copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of the notice, the
Township Engineer shall inspect all the improvements of which
such notice has been given and file a detailed report, in writing,
with the Township Council, indicating either approval, partial
approval or rejection of such improvements with a statement of the
reasons for any rejection. The costs of the improvements as
approved or rejected shall be set forth.
10. In the event that final approval of a development has been granted
in stages or sections, and hence, the construction of the required
improvements is to be undertaken in stages or sections, bonding
and inspection of improvements shall also be in stages or sections.
e. Release. The Township Council shall approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements, on the basis of the report from the Township
Engineer, and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the
Engineer's report and the action of the Township Council, not later than
sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of the notice of the obligor of the
completion or substantial completion of the improvements. Failure of
the Township Council to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within the sixty-five (65) days shall be deemed to constitute approval of
the improvements and the obligor and the surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to the performance guarantee for
such improvements.
1. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released
from all liability pursuant to the performance guarantee for such
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure provision of the improvements not yet approved; provided
that thirty (30%) percent of the performance guarantee posted may
be retained to ensure the completion of all improvements and that
said thirty (30%) percent may be applied against all improvements,
regardless of when completed.
§ 25-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.2
1:759
2. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the obligor
shall complete such improvements and, upon completion, shall
notify the Township Council as specified in subsection 25-9.2d9 of
this chapter and the same procedures shall be followed as in the
first instance.
3. If any improvements have not been installed in accordance with the
performance guarantee, the subdivider or developer and surety
shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost over
and above the ten (10%) percent cash deposit on the improvements
not installed and, upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the
Township shall install such improvements. The Township shall also
have all other remedies as may be lawfully available.
4. Bonds, if any, shall be released first; cash shall be released last.
f. Conditions and Acceptance of Improvements. The approval of any
application for development by the Township shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system, or other
improvement, nor shall approval obligate the Township in any way to
exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or other
improvement. No improvements shall be accepted by the Township
Council unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
1. The Township Engineer shall have certified in writing that the
improvements are completed and that they comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance;
2. The final application for development shall have been approved by
the Board;
3. The owner shall have filed with the Township Council a
maintenance guarantee in an amount equal to and not more than
fifteen (15%) percent of the cost of installing the improvements.
The maintenance guarantee shall run for a period of two (2) years.
The procedures and requirements governing such maintenance
guarantee shall be identical with the procedures and requirements
for a performance guarantee set forth in this chapter. The
requirements for a maintenance guarantee may be waived by the
Township Council only if the Township Engineer has certified that
the improvements have been in continuous use for not less than
two (2) years from the date the Township Engineer certified
completion of such improvements and that during this period the
owner has maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner;
and,
4. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution, provided, however, that it is the
policy of the Township that no such extension shall be approved
unless circumstances have prevented the developer from
completing the improvements within the time allowed. As a
§ 25-9.2 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.2
1:760
§ 25-9.3. Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of the
original performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as
the case may be, to one hundred twenty (120%) percent of the
estimated cost of the installation as certified by the Township
Engineer at the time of passage of the resolution extending the
time.
a. Required Improvements. Applicants shall be required, as a condition for
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, to pay their pro
rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street
improvements, transportation facilities, and/or water, sewerage and
drainage facility improvements, any necessary easements therefor, and
any public facility improvements (i.e., public recreation, public
buildings, public equipment) and all items necessary to carry out and
maintain the Township's public functions located outside the property
limits of the subject premises, but indicated in the Township
Infrastructure Improvement Plan and necessitated or required by
construction or improvements within such subdivision or development.
The following criteria shall be utilized in determining the developer's
proportionate pro rata monetary share for the necessary off-tract
developments.
b. Improvements to be Constructed at the Expense of the Developer. In
cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is created by the
proposed subdivision or development and where no other property
owners receive a special benefit thereby (as opposed to a mere
incidental benefit), the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval and at the applicant's sole expense, to acquire and/or improve
lands outside the tract or improve public facilities and dedicate such
lands or facilities to Aberdeen Township or Monmouth County or, in lieu
thereof, require the subdivider or developer to deposit with the
Township a sum of money sufficient to allow the Township to acquire
and/or improve such lands or make public facility improvements on
conditions it may deem appropriate under the circumstances.
c. General Standards for Other Improvements. In cases where the need
for any off-tract improvements to be implemented now or in the future
is necessitated by the proposed development application, and where it
is determined that properties outside the development will also be
benefited by the improvement, the following criteria, together with the
provisions or rules and regulations of Aberdeen Township, the
Township Utility Authority or any department thereof, may be utilized in
determining the applicant's proportionate share of such improvements:
1. Sanitary Sewers. For distribution facilities, including the
installation, relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and
interceptor sewers, pump stations, and the installation, relocation
or replacement of other appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
§ 25-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.3
1:761
(a) The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall
be based on the Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Sewerage Systems, New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection, and all Aberdeen
Township Utility Authority design standards, including
infiltration standards.
(b) Developer's pro rata share.
(1) The capacity of the existing system to serve the entire
improved drainage area shall be computed. If the system is
able to carry the total development drainage basin, no
improvement or enlargement cost will be assigned to the
applicant although some charges including, but not limited
to, capacity charges may be imposed. If the existing
system does not have adequate capacity for the total
development drainage basin, the prorated enlargement or
improvement share shall be computed as follows:
Applicant's Cost
Total Enlargement or
Improvement Cost
=
Development gpd
Total Projected Tributary
gpd
(2) If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to
develop the subdivision or development, the prorated
enlargement share to the applicant shall be computed as
follows:
Applicant's Cost
Total Project Cost
=
Development Tributary
Total Tributary gpd to New
System
(3) The plans for the improved system or the extended system
shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer. All work
shall be calculated by the applicant and approved by the
Township Engineer.
2. Water Distribution Systems. For distribution facilities including the
installation, relocation or replacement of water distribution pipe
systems and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
associated appurtenances; the applicant's proportionate share
shall be computed as follows:
(a) The distribution pipe sizes of the system as well as the capacity
of the system shall be determined from the requirements of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters and all Township design
standards.
§ 25-9.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.3
1:762
(b) The applicant's pro rata share shall be:
Applicant's Cost
Total Enlargement or
Improvement Cost
=
Development Demand gpm
Total Service Area Demand gpm
(c) The plans for the improved system or the extended system
shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer and reviewed by
the Township Engineer.
3. Transportation Facilities. For street widening, alignment,
channelization of intersections, construction of barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility
improvement uncovered elsewhere, the construction or
reconstruction of new or existing streets and other associated
streets or transportation improvements, the applicant's
proportionate cost shall be determined as follows:
(a) The applicant's engineer shall provide the Township Engineer
with the existing and anticipated peak-hour volumes which
impact the off-tract areas in question, which volumes shall
analyze pedestrian, bicycle and motor vehicle traffic.
(b) The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvements, which shall include the estimated peak-hour
traffic generated by the proposed development.
The ratio of the peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed
development to the future peak-hour traffic shall form the
basis of the proportionate share. The prorated share shall be
computed as follows:
Applicant's Cost
Total Cost of Roadway
Improvement and/or
Extension
=
Additional Peak Hour Traffic
Generated by the
Development
Future Total Peak Hour
Traffic
4. Drainage Improvements. For the storm water and drainage
improvements including the installation, relocation, or replacement
of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, or
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances thereto and the
relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or
appurtenances associated therewith, the applicant's proportionate
share shall be determined as follows:
§ 25-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.3
1:763
(a) The capacity and design of the drainage system to
accommodate storm water runoff shall be based on a method
described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; Technical
Release 55, Soil Conservation Service USDA; January 1975; as
amended, and shall be computed by the applicant's engineer
and approved by the Township Engineer.
(b) The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision or development, and areas outside
of the subdivision or development shall be computed by the
applicant's engineer and be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the
applicant's engineer, and the estimated cost of the enlarged
system shall be calculated by the Township Engineer. The
prorated share for the proposed improvements shall be
computed as follows:
Applicant's Cost
Total Enlargement or
Improvement Cost of
Drainage Facilities
=
Development cfs
Total Tributary cfs
5. Public Facility Improvements. For all public facilities, but not
limited to public recreation, public parking areas, public buildings,
municipal equipment, materials and all else necessary to carry out
and maintain the municipal public functions, the applicant's
proportionate cost shall be determined as follows:
(a) The applicant, through their professional, shall provide the
Township with the existing and projected population statistics
which impact the off-tract areas in question. Existing
population statistics shall be obtained from Township or
County agencies while the projected population of the
development shall be based upon the demographic report by
the applicant of the anticipated population. The off-tract area
limits, in determining the existing population, shall be provided
by the Township to the applicant.
(b) The applicant's pro rata share shall be computed as follows:
Applicant's Cost
Total Cost of Public
Facility Improvements
=
Additional Population
Projected for the
Development
Total Population Within Off-
Tract Area
§ 25-9.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.3
1:764
d. Escrow Accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at a future date, funds required for the improvement shall
be deposited to the credit of the Township in a separate account until
such time as the improvement is constructed.
In lieu of a cash escrow account, developers may present irrevocable
letters of credit for the term required in a form acceptable to the
Township Attorney. If the off-tract improvement has not begun within
ten (10) years of the deposit, all monies and interest shall be returned
to the applicant, or the letter of credit, as the case may be, surrendered.
An off-tract improvement shall be considered "begun" if the Township
has taken legal steps to provide for the design and financing of such
improvements.
e. Referral to Governing Body.
1. Where applications for developments suggest the need for off-tract
improvements, whether to be installed in conjunction with
developments in question or otherwise, the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall forthwith
forward to the Council a list and description of all such
improvements together with a request that the governing body
determine and advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in
construction or installation thereof including timing. The Board
shall defer final action upon the subdivision or site plan until
receipt of the governing body's determination of the expiration of
ninety (90) days after the forwarding of such a list and description
to the Township Council without determinations having been made,
whichever comes first.
2. The governing body, within ninety (90) days after receipt of said list
and description, shall determine and advise the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, concerning the
procedure to be followed and advise the Board with regard to
suggested conditions of approval, if any, to adequately protect the
municipality.
3. In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, is required by statute to act upon
the application prior to receipt of the governing body's
determination as to construction of off-tract improvements, it shall
request the applicant to consent to an extension of time, within
which to act, of sufficient duration to enable the governing body to
make the aforesaid determination. In the event that the applicant is
unwilling to consent to the requested extension of time, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall in its discretion, either itself determine the procedure to be
followed in constructing the aforesaid improvements or shall
condition its approval upon the subsequent determination of the
governing body.
§ 25-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.3
1:765
f. Implementation of Off-Tract Improvements.
1. In all cases, applicants shall be required to enter into an agreement
or agreements with the Township in regard to off-tract
improvements, in accordance with this chapter and any other
ordinances, policies, rules, and regulations of the Township,
County, and State of New Jersey, and any departments, authorities,
or agencies thereof.
2. Where properties outside the subject tract will be benefited by the
improvements, the governing body may require the applicant to
escrow sufficient funds in accordance with subsection 25-9.3d
(Escrow Accounts), hereinabove, to secure the applicant's pro rata
share of the eventual cost of providing future structural
improvements based upon the standards expressed herein.
3. Where properties outside the subject tract will benefit by the
improvements, the governing body may determine that the
improvement or improvements are to be installed by the
municipality as a general improvement—the cost of which is to be
borne as a general expense.
If the governing body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed as a general
improvement, the governing body may direct the Planning Board
to estimate, with the aid of the Township Engineer or such other
persons who have pertinent information or expertise, the amount
(if any) by which the total cost thereof will exceed the total amount
by which all properties including the subject tract will be
specifically benefited thereby, and the subdivider or developer shall
be liable to the municipality for such expense.
4. If the governing body shall determine that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed as a local
improvement, all or a part of the cost is to be assessed against
properties benefited thereby in proportion to the benefits conferred
by the improvements in accordance with Chapter 56 or Title 40 of
the Statutes of the State of New Jersey; the applicant may be
required to sign an agreement acknowledging and agreeing to this
procedure.
In addition, the governing body may require that the applicant shall
be liable to the municipality in addition to the amount of any special
assessments against the subject property for benefits conferred
by the improvement or improvements; the difference between the
total cost actually incurred and the total amount by which all
properties including the subject tract are specially benefited by
the improvement as the same may be determined by the municipal
assessing authority.
5. If the governing body shall determine that the improvements are to
be constructed or installed by the applicant, such agreement may
§ 25-9.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.3
1:766
contain provisions consistent with the standards in this Ordinance
and any other rules, regulations, or policies of the Township of
Aberdeen, County of Monmouth, and State of New Jersey; and
any departments, authorities, or agencies thereof with jurisdiction
therein; whereby the applicant shall be reimbursed by the
municipality or otherwise, as a result of any participation fees,
connection charges, charges paid in regard to developer's
agreements with other applicant's, and the like; all in accordance
with an agreement between the governing body and the applicant.
6. In determining the procedures to be followed in the event of the
submission of a list and request from the Planning Board, the
governing body shall be guided by the following standards and
considerations:
(a) The local trends in regard to the probability of development
within the drainage or circulation area in question and the
intensity of such a development;
(b) The risk and exposure that neighboring areas are subject to in
the event that the improvements to be required are delayed;
(c) The extent to which temporary measures may sufficiently
alleviate the condition or conditions requiring the off-tract
improvements and the likelihood that larger, regional or
subregional facilities will be required in the future to serve the
development tract and the general area of the municipality in
which the same is located; and
(d) The extent to which the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents, both current and future, depend upon the immediate
implementation of the off-tract improvement.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PLAN
Road and Drainage Improvements
1. County Road (Cliffwood Avenue to Route
35)—Widening, curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
2. Biondi Street—Reconstruction and drainage.
3. County Road at Cliffwood Avenue—New signalization.
4. County Road at Railroad—Rail crossing
improvements.
5. Cliffwood Avenue at Railroad—Rail crossing
improvements.
6. County Road Vicinity—Local park.
7. County Road Route 35—Signal improvements.
8. Lenox Avenue, Lakeshore Drive—Road
improvements, curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
§ 25-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.3
1:767
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PLAN
9. Seawood, North Concourse, Wayside Drive, South
Concourse, Prospect Avenue, Shadynook Avenue,
Sherwood Drive—Road improvements, curbs,
sidewalks, and drainage.
10. Oakshades Avenue, Cross Avenue, Washington
Avenue—Road improvements, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage, and water mains.
11. Atlantic Avenue (Little Street to Rail Station)—Road
improvements, curbs, sidewalks, and drainage
improvements.
12. Line Road and Lloyd Road—New signalization.
13. Line Road—Curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
14. Lloyd Road Improvements (Northland to Railroad
Bridge)—Road widening and sidewalks.
15. Blair Road Improvements—Sidewalks.
16. Cambridge Drive at Lloyd Road—Signalization
upgrading.
17. Cambridge Drive, Courtland Lane, Carol Lane,
Chilton Lane, Cypress Lane—Road Improvements,
curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
18. Reids Hill Road—Road reconstruction, widening,
curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
19. Wilson Avenue—Reconstruction, curbs, sidewalks,
improvements to drainage, water and sanitary
systems.
20. Greenwood Avenue—Road reconstruction, curbs,
sidewalks, and drainage.
21. Freneau Park—Regional recreational facility.
22. Grand Avenue, Willow Avenue, Euclide Avenue, Anna
Street, Springlaw Avenue, Charles Street—Road
reconstruction, curbs, sidewalks, improvements to
drainage, water and sanitary systems.
23. Route 516 (County Line to Borough Boundary)—Road
widening, curbs, sidewalks, drainage, water and
sanitary systems, signalization upgrading.
24. Route 516 at Route 79, Matawan
Borough—Signalization improvements, road
improvements, curbs, sidewalks, and drainage.
25. Texas Road at Route 79, Matawan Borough—New
signalization, road improvements, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage, water mains, and sanitary system.
§ 25-9.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.3
1:768
§ 25-9.4. Development Fees for Affordable Housing. [Ord. No.
12-1999 § 1; Ord. No. 13-2008; 6-21-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT PLAN
26. Texas Road at Rail Crossing—Improve grade
crossing, elevations, and road improvements.
27. Wilson Avenue at Birch Swamp Creek—Reconstruct
bridge over Birch Swamp Creek.
28. Texas Road—Road reconstruction, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage, water and sanitary sewer.
a. Development Fees.
1. Purpose.
(a) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township. 121 N.J.
550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair
Housing Act of 1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and
the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable
Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
(b) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2)
and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring, and enforcement of
municipal affordable housing trust funds and corresponding
spending plans. Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction
of a court of competent jurisdiction and have an approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
(c) Pursuant to the March 10, 2015, Supreme Court Order, the
Court transferred all functions, powers, and duties to the
Courts. Any and all reference to COAH shall mean the Courts.
(d) This section establishes standards for the collection,
maintenance, and expenditure of development fees pursuant to
COAH's and the Court's regulations and in accordance P.L.
2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38. Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall
be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on
development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.49
2. Basic Requirements.
49.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 25-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.4
1:769
(a) This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.50
(b) Aberdeen Township shall not spend development fees until the
Court has approved a plan for spading such fees in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.1051 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.52
3. Imposition of Affordable Housing Development Fees.
(a) Residential Development.
(1) Within the all zoning districts in Aberdeen Township,
residential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided that no increased density is
permitted.
(2) Where an increase in density is permitted through a
variance granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5) or a
rezoning, redevelopment plan, or redevelopment plan
amendment that is adopted after the effective date of this
ordinance, developers shall be required to pay a
development fee of 6.0% of the equalized assessed value
for each additional unit that may be realized, except that
this provision shall not be applicable to a development that
will include a set-aside of affordable housing units.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
(b) Nonresidential Development.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers,
except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5%
of the equalized assessed value of the land and
improvements for all new nonresidential construction on
an unimproved lot or lots, provided that no increase in
floor area is permitted.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the
types of development specifically exempted below, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in total equalized
50.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 is reserved.
51.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
52.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 is reserved.
§ 25-9.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.4
1:770
assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the
difference between the equalized assessed value of the
preexisting land and improvements and the equalized
assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvements, at the time the final certificate of
occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this
section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
(4) Developers that convert any portion of an existing
residential structure to a nonresidential use shall pay a
development fee of 2.5%. The development fee shall be
calculated based on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the converted structure.
4. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions, and Exemptions.
(a) Residential Development.
(1) Developers of low- and moderate-income housing shall be
exempt from paying development fees, provided that the
minimum number of affordable units required for the
development is completed in accordance with this chapter.
A payment-in-lieu-of-construction or development fee
payment shall only be used to fund affordable housing
activities within the Township in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:9753 or as approved by COAH or the Court.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site
plan approval prior to the adoption of a municipal
development fee ordinance shall be exempt from
development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial
change in the approval. Where a site plan approval does
not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be
synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for
this purpose. The applicable development fee percentage
shall be vested on the date that the building permit is
issued.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and
replaced because of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall
be exempt from paying a development fee.
(4) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
53.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 25-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.4
1:771
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(5) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense
use, which requires the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy (for example, when a single-family home is
converted to a two-family home or a single-family home is
converted to an apartment building). The development fee
shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized
assessed value of the improved structure.
(6) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when a
certificate of occupancy is issued for a new residential unit
on a newly created lot that is the result of a subdivision.
The development fee shall be calculated on the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements.
(7) Additions to existing homes and improvements such as
decks, patios and like shall be exempt from the payment of
a development fee.
(b) Nonresidential Development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the 2.5%
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations,
change in use within the existing building footprint,
reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46,
as specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption"
Form. Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be
substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted
from the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L.
2008, c. 46, shall be subject to the development fee at such
time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and
shall make the payment of the nonresidential development
fee, in that event, within three years after that event or
after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for
the nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property that was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be
§ 25-9.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.4
1:772
exempt from property taxation, the owner of the property
shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section
within 45 days of the termination of the property tax
exemption. Unpaid nonresidential development fees under
these circumstances may be enforceable by Aberdeen
Township as a lien against the real property of the owner.
(6) Developers that have received final approval prior to the
adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance shall
be exempt from paying a development fee, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval.
(7) Exempted from these provisions shall be approvals for the
following classes of development:
(i) Utility facilities.
(ii) Educational, cultural and outdoor recreational
facilities.
(iii) Quasi-public uses, including clubs, lodges and similar
uses.
(iv) Public uses.
(v) Hospital uses.
5. Collection of fees.
(a) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval, for a development, the applicable approving
authority shall direct its staff to notify the construction official
responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
(b) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also
be provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per
the instructions provided. The construction official shall verify
the information submitted by the nonresidential developer as
per the instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax
assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form NRDF.
(c) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the
issuance of the first building permit for a development that is
subject to a development fee.
§ 25-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.4
1:773
(d) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax
assessor, based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of
the equalized assessed value of the development.
(e) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the local assessor of any
and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on
property that is subject to a development fee.
(f) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a
final inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify
the previously estimated equalized assessed value of the
improvements associated with the development; calculate the
development fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the
amount of the fee.
(g) Should Aberdeen Township fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10
business days of the request for final inspection, the developer
may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount
consistent with the dispute process set forth in Subsection b. of
Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(h) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion
shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the
difference between the fee calculated at building permit and
that determined at issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(i) Appeal of development fees:
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Board, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by Aberdeen Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq. within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development
fees imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the
Division of Taxation. Pending a review and determination
by the Director, which shall be made within 45 days of
receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in
an interest-bearing escrow account by Aberdeen
Township. Appeals from a determination of the Director
may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
§ 25-9.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.4
1:774
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law,
N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq. within 90 days after the date of
such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
6. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(a) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing
trust fund to be maintained by the chief financial officer of the
Township for depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from
the sale of units with extinguished controls.
(b) The following additional funds, if collected by the Township,
shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of construction of affordable units shall
be separately identifiable from other payments in lieu of
construction as a sub-account within the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Aberdeen
Township's affordable housing program.
(c) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used
to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
7. Use of Funds.
(a) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust
fund may be used for any activity approved by the Court to
address the Aberdeen Township's fair share obligation and may
be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities
include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls; rehabilitation; new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs; accessory
apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
§ 25-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.4
1:775
partnership programs; conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units; green building
strategies designed to be cost-saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards; purchase of land for
affordable housing; improvement of land to be used for
affordable housing; extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial assistance
designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan; or, any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-8.7 through 8.954 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
(b) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Aberdeen Township
for past affordable housing activities.
(c) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest
earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to lowand
moderate-income households in affordable units included
in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used
to provide affordability assistance to those households earning
30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down
payment assistance, security deposit assistance, lowinterest
loans, rental assistance, assistance with
homeowners' association or condominium fees and special
assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less
of median income may include buying down the cost of
low- or moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share
Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30%
or less of median income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site
and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls
shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
(d) Aberdeen Township may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan, including the requirement for affordability
assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.55
(e) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development
fees, may be expended on administration, including, but not
limited to, salaries and benefits for municipal employees or
54.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
55.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 is reserved.
§ 25-9.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-9.4
1:776
consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new
construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a
rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover
of sale and rental units, and compliance with the Court's
monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to
litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
affordable housing trust fund.
8. Monitoring.
(a) Aberdeen Township shall complete and return to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Local
Government Services, all monitoring forms required in
connection with the collection of development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program
loans, and any other funds collected in connection with its
housing program, as well as in connection with the expenditure
of revenues and implementation of the plan approved by the
Court.
(b) All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed
by the NJDCA or successor entity for that purpose.
9. Ongoing Collection of Fees.
(a) The ability for Aberdeen Township to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with the end of the
repose period covered by its judgment of compliance unless
the Township has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan with the Court or with a designated administrative
entity of the State of New Jersey, has petitioned for a judgment
of compliance or substantive certification, and has received
approval of its development fee ordinance by the entity that
will be reviewing the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
(b) If Aberdeen Township fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment
of compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds
remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L.
1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Aberdeen Township shall
not impose a development fee on a development that receives
§ 25-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-9.4
1:777
§ 25-10. ADMINISTRATION, WAIVERS, ENFORCEMENT,
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No.
18-1982.
§ 25-10.1. Administration. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township. Any action taken by the Township under
the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the above
mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
§ 25-10.2. Waivers. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision approval or upon applications for preliminary site plan approval,
shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for
such subdivision or site plan approval as specified in Sections 25-5 and
25-8 of this chapter if an applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate
that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one (1) or more of said requirements is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship; however, any exception granted by the Planning
Board must be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant such exceptions when
acting upon applications for preliminary or minor subdivision approval or
for preliminary site plan approval in connection with applications for a
use or "d" variance. Waivers should be formally requested at the time of
application.
§ 25-10.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 10-1987; Ord. No. 5-2007 § 9;
Ord. No. 9-2014]
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
judgment of compliance, nor shall the Township retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Aberdeen
Township shall not expend any development fees after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance.
a. The Construction Official and the Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of
the Construction Official and the Zoning Officer of the Township to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure or
lot shall be used in violation of this chapter.
1. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a record of
all applications and all construction permits which are either
issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved, which
data shall form a part of the Township public records. A monthly
report of construction permits shall be filed with the Tax Assessor
§ 25-9.4 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-10.3
1:778
and the Township Council. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer
to keep a record of all zoning permits, copies of which shall be
available at charge to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the structure or land affected.
2. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to inspect the structures
and land in the Township and order the owner in writing to remedy
any condition found to exist in violation of the provision(s) of this
chapter. For purposes of this inspection, the Zoning Officer shall
have the right to enter any building or premises during reasonable
hours, subject to due process of law. Said order shall specify that
the owner must contact the Zoning Officer within ten (10) days
after service of the order to propose a plan to remedy the violations
cited.
3. In the event that an owner cited for violations of this chapter fails
to propose a remedial plan within ten (10) days, or in the event that
such plan is deemed unacceptable to the Zoning Officer, said
Zoning Officer shall so inform the Township Manager and Township
Attorney. The Township Attorney shall advise the Township
Manager and Zoning Officer of the legal options available to
facilitate remedial action in each individual case.
4. Upon notice being served of any land use existing in violation of any
provision(s) of this chapter, the Certificate of Occupancy for such
shall thereupon, without further notice, be null and void and a new
Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any further use of the
structure or land.
b. Construction and Zoning Permits.
1. Construction permits shall be required as provided by the State
Uniform Construction Code, its subcodes, and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. Fees for construction permits shall
be in accordance with the applicable Ordinances of the Township.
2. A zoning permit shall be required, and issued by the Zoning Officer
as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building.
3. The zoning permit shall acknowledge that such use, structure or
building complies with the provisions of this chapter or variance
therefrom duly authorized pursuant to subsection 25-7.5h and
25-7.2a, 25-7.2b, 25-7.2c and 25-7.2d of this chapter.
4. The zoning permit shall state the location of the property, its block
and lot, name and address of owner, description of the permitted
use and whether or not the use is permitted by Ordinance, a
variance, established nonconforming use, and/or existence of
nonconforming structure.
§ 25-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10.3
1:779
5. Should the Zoning Officer decline to issue a zoning permit, the
reason for doing so shall be so stated on two (2) copies of the
application and one (1) copy shall be returned to the applicant.
6. (Reserved) [Reserved by Ord. No. 9-2014]
c. Certificate of Occupancy.
1. Upon the completion of any building, structure or alteration in
compliance with this chapter and any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, the owner or his agent shall apply to the Construction
Official, in writing, for the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
for said structure, building or alteration pursuant to the provisions
of this section, but only when:
(a) The structure or part(s) thereof and the proposed use conform
to this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances of
the Township;
(b) Prior site plan, subdivision and variance approvals, as may be
necessary, have been granted by the appropriate municipal
agency or municipal agencies in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
(c) All local taxes and assessments on the property have been
paid; and
(d) A letter from each utility company has been received by the
Township stating that the utility has been inspected in
accordance with the approved plan and is ready for use.
2. Every application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be
accompanied by payment of the fee in accordance with the
applicable Ordinances of the Township.
3. The Construction Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy to
the owner of every structure, building or alteration entitled to
same, within the time and according to the procedures set forth in
the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code, and in this
chapter.
4. With respect to any finally approved subdivision and/or site plan or
subsection thereof, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only
upon the completion of the following improvements as such
improvements may be required as part of subdivision and/or site
plan approval:
(a) Curbs.
(b) All utilities.
(c) Water supply and sewerage treatment facilities, which shall be
functioning and servicing the property in question.
§ 25-10.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-10.3
1:780
(d) Storm drainage facilities.
(e) Rough grading of the property.
(f) Base course of the street or streets serving the property.
(g) Base course of driveways and parking areas.
5. With respect to any individual residential lot within a subdivision, a
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only upon the completion
of the following improvements, in addition to those listed in
subsection 25-10.3c4 hereinabove, to the extent the same are
required as part of the subdivision approval:
(a) Sidewalks.
(b) Driveway aprons.
(c) Street names and regulatory signs.
6. A copy of any issued Certificate of Occupancy shall be kept on file
at the premises affected and shall be shown to the Construction
Official upon request.
7. Should the Construction Official decline to issue a Certificate of
Occupancy, his reason for doing so shall be stated on two (2) copies
of the application and one (1) copy shall be returned to the
applicant.
8. A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for a new
structure or use for which site approval has been granted although
not all conditions of said approval have been complied with. Such
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only in
extenuating circumstances and only with the approval of the
Construction Official who shall establish specific terms and
conditions, including, but not limited to, a time limit for the
installation of the incompleted improvements and the receipt of an
appropriate performance guarantee assuring the installation of the
improvements as indicated on the approved plat or plan.
9. A monthly report of the Certificates of Occupancy issued shall be
filed with the Tax Assessor. A record of all Certificates of
Occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Construction Official
and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the structure or land affected.
The charge for each copy shall be established by resolution of the
Township Committee except that there shall be no charge to a
municipal agency.
10. The following shall be unlawful until a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued by the Construction Official:
§ 25-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10.3
1:781
§ 25-10.4. Subdivision Approval Certificates. [Ord. No. 10-1987;
Ord. No. 10-1989]
(a) Occupancy and use of a building erected, constructed,
restored, altered, or moved, or any changes in use of an
existing building.
(b) Occupancy use or change in use of vacant land, other than for
agricultural purposes.
(c) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
(d) Occupancy and use of any enlargement to an existing
structure.
a. A prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land in the Township which has been part of a
subdivision in effect as of July 14, 1973 may apply in writing to the
Administrative Officer for the issuance of a certificate certifying
whether or not such subdivision has been duly approved by the
Planning Board.
b. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and
dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of
the owner thereof. A fifty ($50) dollar fee shall be paid to the
Administrative Officer, on behalf of the Township, for the requested
certificate.
c. The Administrative Officer shall make and issue such certificate within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the written application and
accompanying fee. The Administrative Officer shall keep a duplicate
copy of each certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement
of the fee received, in a binder as a permanent record in his or her
office.
d. Each certificate shall be designated a "Certificate as to Approval of
Subdivision of Land" and shall certify:
1. Whether there exists a duly established Planning Board and
whether there is a duly adopted Ordinance controlling the
subdivision of land;
2. Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in the
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval, any conditions attached to such approval
and any extensions and terms thereof showing that the subdivision,
of which the subject lands are a part, is a validly existing
subdivision; and
3. Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirements of approval as provided
in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and as defined in this chapter.
§ 25-10.3 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-10.5
1:782
§ 25-10.5. Violations. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, moved or converted; or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of this chapter, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of, or contrary to, any approved
site plan and/or subdivision plat, including any conditions made thereto,
the Township may institute an action to enjoin or any other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or use. However, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to restrict the right of any party to obtain a review by any court
of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 25-10.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 10-1987]
a. Fines. Any violation hereunder shall be considered an offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand ($1,000) dollars for
each offense or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days
or both. The following rules shall apply in determining responsibility for
violations and penalties:
1. The owner, general agent, contractor or occupant of a building,
premises or part thereof where such a violation has been
committed or does exist shall be guilty of such an offense.
2. Any agent, contractor, architect, engineer, builder, corporation or
other person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation
shall be guilty of such offense.
3. Each day that a violation continues after notification that it exists
shall constitute a separate offense.
4. The imposition of penalties herein shall not preclude the Township
or any other person from instituting an action to prevent an
unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, or use or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent the illegal occupancy of a building, land or premises.
b. Selling Land Before Final Subdivision Approval.
1. If, before final subdivision has been granted, any person, as owner
or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell any land
which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final
subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not
to exceed one thousand ($1,000) dollars, and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
2. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and
maintain a civil action:
§ 25-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10.6
1:783
§ 25-11. DISTRICT CHANGES AND CHAPTER AMENDMENTS.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the governing body after
the appropriate referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements of law.
§ 25-12. VALIDITY OF CHAPTER.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply
only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision so adjudged
and the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 25-13. REPEALER.
All sections of the Township Code which contain provisions contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby repealed.
§ 25-14. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication
according to law.
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract or sale, if a Certificate of Compliance has not
been issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 25-10.6 ABERDEEN CODE § 25-14
1:784