Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Authorization of Codification
[Adopted 3-23-1967]
§ 1-1. Authorization.
A revision and codification of the ordinances of the Borough of Allendale,
County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, pursuant to the statutes provided
therefor, be and the same is hereby authorized. Upon resolution of the
Borough Council approving same, the Mayor or other borough officials
designated therein are authorized to enter into a contract with any person,
firm or corporation for such revision and codification.
§ 1-2. Appropriation.
It is hereby determined that no appropriation has been made in any budget
or budgets of the Borough of Allendale heretofore adopted to provide
for the purposes authorized in § 1-1 hereof. There is hereby authorized,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-53 et seq., a special emergency
appropriation in the sum of $4,800 to be used in whole or in part to meet
the cost of the aforesaid purposes.
§ 1-3. Financing.
The special emergency appropriation made in § 1-2 hereof shall be financed
in accordance with a resolution or resolutions of the Borough Council
adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-55.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Code Adoption
[Adopted 12-28-1967]
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Allendale, in the
County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, has heretofore determined that
it is in the public interest to undertake the codification and revision of the
general ordinances of the Borough of Allendale; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to said determination, it has caused its ordinances of
a general and permanent nature to be compiled and revised and the same
embodied in a revision and codification known as the "Code of the Borough
of Allendale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey"; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the governing bodies of
municipalities may provide for the revision and codification of its
ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the enactment of this ordinance, providing for the codification
of the ordinances of a general and permanent nature, will promote the
general welfare of the Borough of Allendale and its citizens;
Now therefore, be it ordained by the Governing Body of the Borough of
Allendale, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, that:
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Allendale
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Allendale and accepted and adopted by the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough of Allendale, the Board of Health of the Borough
of Allendale, and the Board of Public Works of the Borough of Allendale,
as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corporation and consisting of Chapters 1 through
77, together with an Appendix and Index, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of
Bergen, State of New Jersey."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
passed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Allendale prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect as shall hereafter be set forth by
reference.
§ 1-6. When effective.
All provisions of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, shall be in full force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Repeal of ordinances not contained in or inconsistent with
provisions of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Allendale and in force on the date of the adoption
of this ordinance and not contained in the Code of the Borough of Allendale,
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, or which are inconsistent with any
provisions contained in such Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-8. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-7 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough of Allendale prior to the effective
date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough of
Allendale or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough of
Allendale.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Mayor and Council.
E. Any ordinance of the Borough of Allendale providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Borough of Allendale, or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the Borough of Allendale appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Borough of Allendale or other instruments or evidence of the borough's
indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 1-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough of Allendale for
adoption and revision as part of the Code of the Borough of Allendale,
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain
grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of
said ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Allendale that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code of the
Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
§ 1-10. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen, State of
New Jersey, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Borough
Clerk of the Borough of Allendale and shall remain there for the use and
examination of the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk
of the Borough of Allendale by impressing thereon the seal of the Borough
of Allendale, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Allendale to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-11. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code of the
Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, when passed
and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code, so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of
Bergen, State of New Jersey" shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and,
as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said
Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-12. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Borough Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the
book containing the Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, required to be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances
adopted by the Mayor and Council subsequent to the effective date of this
J. Any ordinance of the Mayor and Council adopted subsequent to
December 14, 1967, and prior to the date hereof.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
codification which the Mayor and Council shall adopt specifically as a part
of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference
until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-13. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the Borough of Allendale,
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, may be purchased from the Clerk of
the Borough of Allendale upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of
the Mayor and Council, who may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-14. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Allendale, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of Allendale. Sufficient
copies of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen, State
of New Jersey, shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this adopting ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-15. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-16. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or part thereof.
§ 1-17. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Allendale to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $200
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 1-18
1:8
§ 1-18. General penalty. [Amended 9-25-1986]
Unless another penalty is specifically provided elsewhere in the Code or in
a law of the state or federal government, any person, firm or corporation
who or which shall violate any provisions of this Code shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 1-19. Effective date of ordinance.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after final approval and
publication according to law.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code Renumbering
[Adopted 9-27-2001]
§ 1-20. Adoption of renumbering.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the 1967 Code of the Borough of Allendale, as
adopted by the Governing Body of the Borough of Allendale on December
28, 1967, and subsequent ordinances of the Borough of Allendale of a
general and permanent nature, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and as
renumbered to consist of Chapters 1 through 270, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Borough of Allendale," hereinafter known and referred to as
the "Code."
Borough of Allendale Distribution Table of 1967 Code to 2001 Code
Chapter/
Title from
1967 Code Location in 2001 Code
1. General Provisions Ch. 1, Arts. I and II
2. Administrator, Borough Ch. 53, Art. I
2A. Alarm Systems Ch. 82
3. Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 85
4. Amusements and Entertainments
Art. I, Demonstrations Ch. 112
Art. II, Automatic Amusement
Games
Ch. 89
4A. Animals Ch. 93, Art. IV
5. Attorney and Engineer, Municipal Ch. 53, Arts. II and III
8. Board of Health Ch. 6, Art. I
10. Bonds and Notes: Interest Rate Ch. 9
11. Building Construction Ch. 100, Art. I
12. Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 104
13. Cats Ch. 93, Art. II
15. Claims and Bills Ch. 14
16. Concessions in Public Places Ch. 203, Art. II
17. County Services, Contracts for Ch. 18
20. Dogs Ch. 93, Art. I
21. Fees Ch. 120
22. Firearms Ch. 125
23. Fire Department Ch. 26, Art. I
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Borough of Allendale Distribution Table of 1967 Code to 2001 Code
Chapter/
Title from
1967 Code Location in 2001 Code
24. Fire Prevention Ch. 128
25. Floodplain Management Ch. 132
26. Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Ch. 228
27. Hawking, Peddling and Vending Ch. 194, Art. I
29. Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems
Ch. 217
31. Landmark Preservation
Commission
Ch. 6, Art. IV
32. Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review
Ch. 147
33. Land Use Procedures Ch. 40
33A. Library Ch. 152
33B. Licenses and Permits Ch. 155, Art. I
34. Littering Ch. 158
36. Municipal Court Ch. 21, Art. I
37. Mutual Aid Ch. 46
37A. Newsracks Ch. 167
38. Nursing, Convalescent and Old-
Age Homes
Ch. 175
39. Officers and Employees Ch. 53, Arts. IV to VIII
39A. Outdoor Cafes Ch. 185
40. Peace and Good Order Ch. 191
42. Personnel Policies, Practices and
Regulations
Ch. 59
45. Police Department Ch. 26, Art. II
45A. Property Maintenance Ch. 199
46. Prosecutor, Borough Ch. 21, Art. III
47A. Public Defender Ch. 21, Art. II
48. Public Health Nuisances Ch. 172, Art. I
49. Public Places Ch. 203, Arts. I, IV, V and
VI
49A. Rabies Control Ch. 93, Art. III
50. Recreational Facilities Ch. 203, Art. III
51. Retail Food Establishment Code Ch. 210
52. Salaries and Compensation Ch. 67
§ 1-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 1-20
1:12
Borough of Allendale Distribution Table of 1967 Code to 2001 Code
Chapter/
Title from
1967 Code Location in 2001 Code
53A. Senior Citizens Committee Ch. 6, Art. III
54. Sewer Use Regulations Ch. 220
55. Shade Trees
Art. I, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 6, Art. II
Art. II, Care and Maintenance Ch. 244, Art. I
56. Sidewalk Area Maintenance Ch. 233, Art. II
57. Sidewalk Construction Ch. 233, Arts. I and IV
59. Soil Removal and Importation Ch. 225
60. Soliciting Ch. 194, Art. II
62. Storm Sewer System Ch. 262, Art. I
65. Street Openings and Excavations Ch. 233, Art. III
67. Structures and Equipment,
Unsafe; Occupancy Limitations
Ch. 180
69. Towing Ch. 240
70. Trees Ch. 244, Art. II
71. Visual Obstructions Ch. 256
72. Vehicle and Traffic Ch. 252
75. Water Supply Ch. 262, Art. II
77. Zoning Ch. 270
80. Act of Incorporation Ch. A275
81. Bylaws of Borough Council Ch. A276
82. Cable Television Ch. A277
§ 1-21. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the within ordinance has been filed in the office of the Municipal
Clerk, there to remain for the use and examination of the public until final
action is taken on this adopting ordinance and thereafter while the same
shall be in effect, and a copy of the reorganization and renumbering of the
Code shall be and remain on file accordingly.
§ 1-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-23
1:13
§ 1-23. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 1-23 ALLENDALE CODE § 1-23
1:14
Chapter 4
BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, Commissions and Committees — See
Ch. 6.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel Policies — See Ch. 59.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
§ 4-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, 18 years of age or older, who has formally made
application to the Borough for any advertised job position, or volunteer
position within any Borough department and/or certain Borough-sponsored
organizations or programs, as specified herein.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Allendale.
BOROUGH-SPONSORED ORGANIZATION — Organizations within the
Borough of Allendale listed and approved at the Mayor and Council's annual
reorganization meeting as Class I and Class IV organizations, or as
specifically noted in this chapter, or any other organization designated at
any time by the Mayor and Council to be subject to this chapter.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the State Bureau of
Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in the
computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal History
Information System, the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System or other states' computerized repositories containing criminal
history record information consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, indictments or other formal criminal charges and
any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions, dismissals,
correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Allendale Police Department.
EMPLOYEE — Any person hired by the Borough after the effective date of
this chapter, including members of the Allendale Volunteer Ambulance and
Allendale Fire Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1
1:15
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance or resolution or by this
chapter, to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of
criminal history record information.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c. 65 (N.J.S.A. 53:1-12 et seq.),
a bureau within the Division of State Police.
VOLUNTEER — Any person in a paid, volunteer, or combination of paid/
volunteer position within a Borough-sponsored program.
§ 4-2. Background check required; notification of results; consent;
costs.
A. The Borough requires that all applicants applying for a paid position
with the Borough or those applicants applying for a volunteer position
with a Borough-sponsored organization must undergo through the
State Bureau of Identification a criminal history record background
check. Each applicant shall be required to undergo the background
check prior to appointment and/or hiring.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in this chapter.
C. Prior to the conducting of a criminal history background check, the
applicant shall provide written consent in connection therewith.
D. With respect to a group, organization or program approved by the
Allendale Recreation Commission, either the applicant or the respective
recreation groups and/or organizations shall bear the costs associated
with conducting the criminal history record background checks.
E. If the applicant is applying for a position, either paid or volunteer, with
the Borough, or a Borough-sponsored governmental organization, other
than the Allendale Recreation Committee, the Borough shall bear the
costs associated with conducting the criminal history record
background checks.
F. With the submission of New Jersey and FBI fingerprint cards pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.4, the Allendale Police Department may obtain from
the SBI and FBI all criminal history record information retained on the
subject and accessed by the SBI, including all criminal history record
information from the central repository of the New Jersey State Police
SBI, the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) or computerized
repositories containing criminal history record information, unless such
records have been expunged by law.
§ 4-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 4-2
1:16
§ 4-3. Submission of information; collection and dissemination;
third-party agencies.
§ 4-4. Disqualification from service.
G. The Borough may, in its discretion, require follow-up criminal history
record background checks on a random or scheduled basis, the cost of
which shall be borne as set forth hereinabove.
A. Applicants shall submit their name, address, fingerprints, or other
required information and written consent to such person or entity
designated by the Borough or the Recreation Commission for the
criminal history record background check to be performed. Upon
receipt thereof, the person or entity designated by the Borough or the
Recreation Commission shall submit this documentation to the State
Bureau of Identification.
B. The Allendale Police Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the
collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
chapter.
C. The person designated by the Borough or the Recreation Commission
may, in his, her or its discretion, engage the services of a third-party
independent agency or a volunteer group authorized by the Chief of
Police to conduct the criminal history record background checks
authorized under this chapter.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as a Borough employee or
volunteer if that person's criminal history record background check
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons' offense or petty
disorderly persons' offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, including, but not limited to,
those crimes, disorderly offenses and petty disorderly persons'
offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et
seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.; and/or
N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, including, but not
limited to, those crimes, disorderly persons' offenses and petty
disorderly offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving arson, burglary or theft as set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:17-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:18-1 et seq., and/or N.J.S.A.
2C:20-1 et seq.;
(d) Involving offenses against public administration, perjury and
other falsification in official matters, obstructing governmental
operations, misconduct in office and/or abuse of office as set
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:17
§ 4-5. Access to and use of information restricted.
§ 4-6. Challenge of accuracy by applicant or volunteer.
If a criminal history record may disqualify an applicant for any purpose,
the disqualified person shall have an opportunity to complete and challenge
forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:27-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:28-1 et seq.;
N.J.S.A. 2C:29-1 et seq.; or N.J.S.A. 2C:30-1 et seq.;
(e) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes; or
(f) Involving operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated in
violation of Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes, disorderly persons'
or petty disorderly persons' offenses described herein.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the applicant, the
Borough shall presume that the applicant is innocent of any charges or
arrests for which there is no final disposition on the record.
C. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record is sufficient to disqualify an applicant shall be made by
the assigned detective from the Allendale Police Department. Any
applicant dissatisfied with the determination shall be entitled to file an
appeal with the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel created
pursuant to this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Police Department and Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, on a
need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history
record information obtained under this chapter.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
§ 4-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 4-6
1:18
the information contained in the criminal history record or request an
exception. The disqualified person shall be afforded a reasonable period of
time to correct and complete this record. A person is not presumed guilty
of any charges or arrests for which there is no final disposition indicated on
the record.
§ 4-7. Appeal process; appeal panel.
A. Criminal background check appeal process. If the criminal history
background check disqualifies an applicant, the applicant may appeal
that disqualification by filing a written notice of appeal with the Chief of
Police no later than 20 days after receiving notice of the
disqualification. Any appeal requested shall proceed before the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel.
B. Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. In order to monitor and
supervise the enforcement of this chapter, the Borough of Allendale
hereby creates a Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. The
composition of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall be as
follows:
(1) For applicants denied for a governmental-related position:
(a) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be the Police Chief or his/her designee.
(b) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be the Mayor of the Borough of Allendale or his/her
designee.
(c) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be a member of the Allendale Police Department selected
by the Chief of Police.
(2) For applicants denied for a position with the Allendale Recreation
Commission:
(a) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be the Police Chief or his/her designee.
(b) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be the President of the Allendale Recreation Commission
or his/her designee.
(c) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be a member of the Allendale Police Department selected
by the Chief of Police.
(d) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel
shall be the Mayor of the Borough of Allendale or his/her
designee.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7
1:19
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Background checks — See Ch. 4.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 67.
C. Powers. The Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel is granted and
shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all
the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by applicants dissatisfied
with the disqualification.
(2) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by applicants dissatisfied
with the determination concerning the accuracy of the criminal
history record.
(3) To grant exceptions where appropriate.
D. Findings. Not later than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall issue its findings of fact
and the panel's decision to the prospective employee/volunteer involved
in the appeal to the Allendale Borough Council and/or Recreation
Commission, which shall act in accordance with the panel's decision.
§ 4-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 4-7
1:20
ARTICLE I
Board of Health
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 8 of the 1967 Code]
§ 6-1. Membership; residency requirements. [Amended 4-8-1976]
The Board of Health of the Borough of Allendale shall consist of seven
members, who shall be residents of the Borough.
§ 6-2. Nomination and appointment.
The members of said Board shall be nominated by the Mayor and appointed
by him with the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 6-3. Terms of office. [Amended 4-8-1976]
The terms of office of the members of the Board of Health shall be for three
years, except that two of the members first appointed shall hold office for
one year, two for two years and three for three years.
§ 6-4. Vacancies.
If any vacancy occurs in the membership of said Board, such vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term only, by nomination and appointment in the
manner provided in § 6-2 hereof.1
1. Editor's Note: Former § 8-5, Meeting to organize and transact business, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-8-1976.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:21

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)2
§ 6-5. through § 6-12. (Reserved)
2. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Shade Tree Commission, was repealed 9-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-14.
§ 6-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:23

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens Committee
[Adopted 12-12-1974]
§ 6-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SENIOR CITIZENS — Residents of the Borough of Allendale 55 years of age
or older.
§ 6-14. Committee created.
A Senior Citizens Committee is hereby created in the Borough of Allendale,
in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey.
§ 6-15. Membership; terms; compensation; bylaws.
§ 6-16. Election of officers.
The Committee shall elect a Chairman from the members and create and fill
such other offices as it shall determine.
§ 6-17. Power and authority.
The Senior Citizens Committee shall have the power and authority to
employ experts and a staff and to pay for their services and such other
expenses as may be necessary and proper, not exceeding in all, exclusive
of gifts, the amount appropriated by the Governing Body for the use of said
Senior Citizens Committee.
§ 6-18. Duties and responsibilities.
The Senior Citizens Committee shall be concerned with matters affecting
the general welfare of the senior citizens (present and future) of Allendale.
The Committee shall:
A. The Committee shall consist of seven members, all of whom are
residents of the Borough of Allendale. Members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council for a
term of two years and until their successors are approved and qualified,
except that three of the initial appointments shall be for terms of one
year. At least four members, but not more than six, shall be senior
citizens.
B. All members shall serve without compensation.
C. The Committee shall adopt bylaws governing its operation which shall
be subject to approval by the Borough Council, and upon approval,
three copies shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 6-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-18
1:25
A. Determine requirements for senior citizens' programs such as, but not
limited to, recreation, education and housing.
B. Formulate plans for programs and activities to best meet the specific
needs of Allendale senior citizens and present such plans to the Mayor
and Council, the Recreation Committee, the Planning Board or other
appropriate body for consideration and disposition.
C. Report to the Mayor and Council, or any board or committee appointed
by the Mayor and Council, with recommendations on any pending
action, in the interest of the senior citizens of Allendale.
D. Administer such senior citizens' programs as assigned or requested by
the Mayor and Council.
§ 6-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-18
1:26
ARTICLE IV
Historic Preservation Commission
[Adopted 9-24-20093]
§ 6-19. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this article is to assist implementation of the historic
preservation element of the Master Plan, to provide guidance in achieving
preservation of historic resources and to advance the following public
purposes:
§ 6-20. Definitions.
A. To promote the use of the Historic District and any designated sites or
sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the Borough and its
visitors and to promote civic pride in the Borough's historic resources.
In keeping with this purpose, the interests of property owners shall be
balanced together with the interests of designating historic sites;
provided, however, that no site shall be so designated without the
consent of the property owner.
B. To foster private reinvestment in the Historic District and any
designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic
Places and balance the purposes of historic preservation with current
needs.
C. To encourage preservation of sites of historic, archaeological, cultural,
social and architectural significance.
D. To encourage the continued use of the Historic District and any
designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic
Places and to facilitate their appropriate reuse.
E. To maintain and promote an appropriate and harmonious setting for
existing historic resources within the Borough.
F. To recognize and preserve historic resources in the Borough as
essential elements of municipal character and identity which
contributes to the reputation of Allendale as a place of beauty and
architectural value.
G. To encourage appropriate alterations to historic sites and new
construction which is in keeping with the character of historic districts
and sites.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Historic Preservation
Commission, adopted 4-14-1988, as amended.
§ 6-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:27
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — An extension or increase in building size, floor area or
height.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — For purposes of this Historic
Preservation Article, the Construction Code Official shall be the
administrative officer.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height
or the moving from one location or position to another, or the change in
appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement.
CERTIFICATE OF HISTORIC REVIEW — A document issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission confirming its review of any
alteration or addition to a site or a property within an Historic District.
Such review is based upon plans presented for the preservation,
restoration, rehabilitation or alteration of an existing property, or the
demolition, addition, removal, repair or remodeling of any feature on an
existing building within an Historic District or for any new construction
within the Historic District.
DEMOLITION — The total razing, dismantling or more than partial
destruction of any historic site or any improvement within an Historic
District.
DESIGNATED SITE — A site that has been designated per § 6-28
herein.
GUIDELINES — For both the Historic Preservation Commission and
applicants for a certificate of historic review shall be the Secretary
of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, adopted by reference.
Design guidelines developed specifically for the Allendale Historic
Preservation Commission are set forth herein in § 6-32 and may take
precedence over the Secretary of the Interior's standards where more
specifically applicable to the buildings and sites within Allendale.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and certain
intervening or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected
by the quality and character of an historic site or sites, as specifically
designated herein.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural
object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which
has been identified in the Master Plan as being of historic,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance at the
national, state or local level, as specifically designated herein. The
designation of an historic site or landmark shall be deemed to include
the Tax Map lot on which it is located as well as the right-of-way
contiguous thereto. When used in this chapter, the word "landmark"
may be substituted for historic site.
§ 6-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-20
1:28
HPC — Historical Preservation Commission.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof installed upon
public or private property and intended to be kept at the location of
such construction or installation.
INTEGRITY — The authenticity of a property's historic identity,
evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during
the property's historic or prehistoric period.
INVENTORY — A list of historic sites and historic districts determined
to meet criteria of designation specified herein.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for
evaluating the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places.
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER — The official newspaper as designated by the
Borough Governing Body.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Repair of any
deterioration, wear or damage to a structure in order to return the
same as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the occurrence
of such deterioration, wear or damage with material and workmanship
of the same quality. Ordinary maintenance shall further include
replacement of exterior elements or accessory hardware, including
signs, using similar quality materials and workmanship and having the
same appearance.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures to sustain
the existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure and
the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial
stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of
the historic building's materials.
PROTECTION — The act or process of applying measures designed to
affect the physical condition of a property by defending or guarding it
from deterioration, loss or attack or to cover or shield the property from
danger or injury.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact form and detail of a vanished building, structure
or object, or any part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period of time.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a property to a
state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features
of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural and
cultural values.
REPAIR — Any work done on an improvement that is not an addition
and does not change the exterior appearance of any improvement;
provided, however, that any such repairs must be done with materials
and workmanship of the same quality.
§ 6-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:29
§ 6-21. Creation.
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Allendale an Historic
Preservation Commission.
§ 6-22. Membership and terms.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the
form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a
particular period of time by means of the removal of later work or by
the reconstruction of missing earlier work.
STREETSCAPE — The visual character of the street, including but
not limited to the architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
storefronts, signs, lighting, parking areas, materials, color, sidewalks,
curbing and landscaping.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land. The word "structure" shall also include
any building or improvement with a roof.
A. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five regular
members and may have not more than two alternate members. There
shall be one member each of Class A and B and three members of Class
C.
(1) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality.
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
(3) Class C: citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment, except for membership
on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(4) Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C
members.
B. The Mayor shall appoint all members of the Commission and shall
designate at the time of appointment the regular members by class and
the alternate members, if any, as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2."
C. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so determined that to
the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of the terms shall be
distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly over the first four
years after their appointment, and in the case of alternate members,
evenly over the first two years after their appointment, provided that
the initial term of no regular member shall exceed four years, and that
§ 6-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-22
1:30
§ 6-23. Officers.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and shall select a Secretary.
§ 6-24. Rules and procedures.
The Commission shall create rules and procedures for the transaction of its
business, subject to the following regulations.
the initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two years.
Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four years, and the
term of an alternate member shall be two years. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired
term only.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any member
common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning
Board shall be for the term of membership on the Planning Board, and
the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of
membership on the Board of Adjustment. NOTE: Notwithstanding the
fact that Planning or Zoning Board members may be eligible to serve on
the Historic Preservation Commission, it is the policy judgment of the
Mayor and Council not to have such Board members serve thereon.
A. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission's members, including the Chairman or, in his absence, the
Vice Chairman.
B. The Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and
proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions,
findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall be public
records.
C. All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:4-7 et seq.).
D. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
E. No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be permitted
to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
F. A member of the Historic Preservation Commission may, after public
hearing if he requests it, be removed by the Governing Body for cause.
§ 6-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-25
1:31
§ 6-25. Compensation.
The Commission members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of official business
subject to prior approval of the Governing Body.
§ 6-26. Employment of experts and staff; expenditures.
The Historic Preservation Commission may employ, contract for and fix
the compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary subject to the prior approval of the Governing Body. The
Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the Borough Attorney at
the rate of compensation determined by the Governing Body. Expenditures
pursuant to this section shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the Governing Body, in accordance to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-108.
§ 6-27. Responsibilities.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the responsibility to:
A. Prepare a survey of the Historic District and any designated sites or
sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places, pursuant to
criteria identified in the survey report. The criteria shall first be
submitted to the Planning Board for its review and approval prior to
conducting the survey report.
B. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the implications
for preservation of the Historic District and any designated sites or
sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places or any other
Master Plan elements.
C. Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
D. Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment on applications for
development, as follows:
(1) The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall submit to the
Historic Preservation Commission a copy of every application
submitted to either Board for development in the Historic District
or of any designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory
of Historic Places as designated on the Zoning or Official Map or in
any relevant element of the Master Plan. This referral shall be
made when the application for development is deemed complete or
is scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure to
refer the application as required shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission may provide its advice,
which shall be conveyed through the delegation of one of its
§ 6-25 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-27
1:32
§ 6-28. Designation of Historic Districts, designated sites, or sites
listed on Inventory of Historic Places.
members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application
and to explain any written reports which may have been submitted.
E. Provide written reports on the application of the Zoning Ordinance4 or
Master Plan provisions concerning historic preservation as follows:
(1) All applications for issuance of permits pertaining to the Historic
District and any designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale
Inventory of Historic Places shall be referred by the Construction
Code Official to the Historic Preservation Commission for a written
report on the application of the Zoning Ordinance or Master Plan
provisions concerning historic preservation to any of those aspects
of the proposed change, which aspects were not determined by
approval of an application for development by a municipal agency
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(2) Within 20 days of referral from the Construction Code Official, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall provide its report to the
Planning Board.
(3) The Planning Board shall report to the Construction Code Official
within 45 days of his referral of the application to the Historic
Preservation Commission. If within the forty-five-day period, the
Planning Board recommends to the Construction Code Official
against the issuance of a permit or recommends conditions to the
permit to be issued, the Construction Code Official shall deny
issuance of the permit or include the conditions in the permit, as
the case may be.
(4) Failure to report within the forty-five-day period shall be deemed to
constitute a report in favor of issuance of the permit and without
the recommendations of conditions to the permit.
F. Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions
as will promote historic preservation in the Borough.
A. Survey. The Commission shall perform a comprehensive survey of the
Borough of Allendale to identify the Historic District and any
designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic
Places and improvements which are worthy of protection and
preservation.
B. Criteria for designation. The survey shall be used as a basis for
identifying sites and districts worthy of designation. The criteria for
evaluating and designating the Historic District and any designated
sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places shall be
guided by the National Register criteria. The Commission or any
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 6-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-28
1:33
interested party may recommend designation of historic sites or
districts that have integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship and association and that meet one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the Borough, state or nation.
(2) Association with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history.
(3) Association with the lives of persons significant in our past.
(4) Embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or
method of construction, architecture or engineering.
(5) Identification with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the Borough, state or nation.
(6) Embodiment of elements of design, detail, material or
craftsmanship that render an improvement architecturally
significant or structurally innovative.
(7) Unique location or singular physical characteristics that make a
district or site an established or familiar visual feature.
(8) Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
C. Procedures for designation.
(1) Interested parties shall contact the HPC regarding consideration of
a proposed historic district and any designated sites or sites listed
on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places. The Commission may
also initiate the designation of an historic site or district.
Regardless of who initiates a request for site designation, no
proposed historical site or district shall be so designated without
the permission of the property owner(s).
(2) The formal historic district nomination shall include a building-bybuilding
inventory of all properties within the district; black-andwhite
photographs of all properties within the district; a property
map of the district showing boundaries; and a physical description
and statement of significance which address the criteria for
designation set forth herein. The formal historic site nomination
shall include a black-and-white photograph, a tax map of the
property and a physical description and statement of significance
which address the criteria for designation set forth herein.
(3) Upon review and approval of the proposed site or historic district
by the Historic Preservation Commission, the Commission shall
forward the proposed site or district nomination, together with the
§ 6-28 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-28
1:34
§ 6-29. Incentives for properties designated as historic sites.
The following are incentives for properties designated as historic sites.
site owner's written consent, to the Planning Board for
consideration. Notification shall be by public notice in the official
paper and by prominent posting in the Municipal Building at least
30 days prior to the Planning Board hearing. The interested parties
or the Commission shall submit to the Planning Board a complete
list of involved properties.
(4) Upon review and approval of the proposed site or district by the
Planning Board, the site or district nomination will be sent to the
Borough Council for adoption to amend and supplement the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.5
(5) The owner of the proposed site(s) or the owners within a proposed
historic district shall be contacted in person by members of the
HPC and receive notice, at least 30 days prior to the hearing, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the hearing by the
Borough Council on the adoption of an ordinance designating the
proposed historic site or district.
D. Designation deemed permanent; exception.
(1) Designation of an historic site with the consent of the property
owner shall be deemed a permanent covenant to run with the
property.
(2) The property owner shall cause the designation to be recorded with
the County Clerk (on a form to be supplied by the Borough)
indicating that the property has been designated as an historical
site pursuant to this article. Proof of such recording shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk.
(3) Upon application to the Mayor and Council, a property owner may
seek to rescind an historical designation upon a showing of good
cause. In considering the application, the Mayor and Council may
seek guidance from the Historical Preservation Commission,
Planning Board or such professional(s) as it deems appropriate.
The Mayor and Council may grant or deny the application and/or
impose conditions, requirements or stipulations as it deems
appropriate.
A. Up to a fifty-percent reduction in building permit fees at the discretion
of the Mayor and Town Council.
B. Special zoning variance considerations may be recommended by the
HPC, in special circumstances, subject to the Planning or Zoning
Board's specific findings, including when the owner agrees to write
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 6-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-29
1:35
§ 6-30. Referral from municipal agencies for development
applications.
§ 6-31. Certificate of historic review.
deed restrictions preventing future demolition and stating that all
alterations must be done preserving the historic integrity of the
building.
C. General guidance on acquiring low-interest loans will be provided by
the HPC.
D. General guidance for obtaining grants will be provided by the HPC.
A. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall refer to the
Commission every application for development or zone change request
submitted to either Board for development in the Historic District and
any designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of
Historic Places as designated on the Zoning or Official Map or in any
component elements of the Master Plan. This referral shall be made
when the application for development is deemed complete or scheduled
for hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure to refer the application as
required shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. The HPC may
provide its advice, which shall be conveyed through its delegation of
one of its members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the
application and to explain any written report which may have been
submitted.
B. On all matters referred to the Commission which require approval by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the decision of the
HPC shall be a recommendation only.
C. An approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, does not relieve the applicant of the requirements to
obtain a certificate of historic review for properties within the Historic
District.
A. When required. A certificate of historic review, issued by the Planning
Board upon review of the recommendations of the Commission, shall be
required before a permit is issued or before work can commence for any
of the following activities within an Historic District or historic site:
(1) The demolition of any building, improvement, site, place or
structure. When considering applications involving demolition, as
defined herein, the Commission's report shall contain advice and
recommendations for the applicant in regard to the
appropriateness of the proposed action, and the report may contain
recommended conditions for the Planning Board's review. The
Construction Code Official shall include the advice and
recommendations of the Planning Board in the permit, which shall
be deemed mandatory conditions.
§ 6-29 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-31
1:36
(2) Addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory building
or structure. When considering applications involving new
construction as defined herein, the Commission's report shall
contain advice and recommendations for the applicant in regard to
the appropriateness of the proposed action, and the report may
contain recommended conditions for the Planning Board's review.
The Construction Code Official shall include the advice and
recommendations of the Planning Board in the permit, which shall
be deemed mandatory conditions.
(3) Change in the exterior appearance of any building, improvement,
site, place or structure by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
maintenance. Exterior change for all primary and accessory
buildings shall include special consideration of character defining
features visible from the public right-of-way. When considering
applications involving change in exterior appearance, the
Commission's report shall contain advice and recommendations for
the applicant in regard to the appropriateness of the proposed
action, and the report may contain recommended conditions for the
Planning Board's review. The Construction Code Official shall
include the advice and recommendations of the Planning Board in
the permit, which shall be deemed mandatory conditions.
B. A certificate of historic review shall not be finalized until such review is
submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval.
C. When not required. A certificate of historic review shall not be required
before a permit is issued by the Construction Code Official for changes
only to the interior of a structure.
D. Procedures.
(1) All applicants shall complete an application form. Application forms
for a certificate of historic review shall be made available in the
office of the Construction Code Official. Completed applications
shall be filed with the Construction Code Official/Borough
Engineer.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions and other information to show the
proposed alterations, additions, changes or new construction. The
Commission may require additional materials as it reasonably
requires to make an informed decision.
(3) The Commission shall reach a decision on an application and
submit its report to the Construction Code Official within 45 days of
referral of same by the Construction Code Official. Nothing herein
shall prohibit an extension of time by mutual agreement of the
applicant and the Commission.
(4) Informational meetings. Persons considering action that requires a
certificate of historic review, as set forth in this section, are
§ 6-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-31
1:37
encouraged to request an informal informational meeting with the
Commission and/or its Chairman. Requests for such informational
meetings can be made to the Construction Code Official, who will
contact the Chairman of the Commission. The Commission shall
hold such informational meetings within 15 days of receipt of such
request. The purpose of an informational meeting is to review with
the applicant the standards of appropriateness and the procedures
for obtaining a certificate of historic review.
(5) Application review.
(a) In addition to complying with the requirements of the Open
Public Meetings Act,6 and except in the event of an emergency,
at least 15 days prior to such meeting, notice shall be given to
the applicant of the time, date, place and specific subject of the
meeting.
(b) A certificate of historic review shall be valid for a period of two
years from date of issue unless reasonable extensions are
requested by the applicant or the Commission.
(c) The owner shall post the certificate of historic review on a
conspicuous spot on the site visible to the public during the
entire process of work.
(d) An applicant is encouraged to attend the Historic Preservation
Commission meeting when the project is to be reviewed.
However, the applicant shall not be required to appear or to be
represented at the meeting to consider the application for a
certificate of historic review, and the Commission may take
action in the absence of the applicant.
(e) When an application is approved, the Commission shall
forthwith issue a certificate of historic review which shall be
forwarded to the applicant. Failure to report within a forty-fiveday
period shall be deemed to constitute a default approval in
favor of the proposed work.
(6) Emergency procedures.
(a) When a structure or improvement requires immediate repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the structure and/or the
health and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs
may be performed in accordance with construction codes
without first obtaining a certificate of historic review. Under
such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such
as are necessary to protect the health and safety of the
occupants of the structure or others and/or to maintain the
habitability of the structure.
6. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 6-31 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-31
1:38
§ 6-32. Standards, design guidelines and criteria.
The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards, design
guidelines and criteria for the regulations of the Historic District and any
designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places
for use by the Historic Preservation Commission. All projects requiring a
certificate of historic review and all applications for development in an
Historic District shall be guided by the principles of the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings.
(b) A request for the Commission's review shall be made
simultaneously with the onset of emergency work. Such
emergency work shall be permitted only if the Construction
Code Official certifies the immediate necessity for such permit
issuance. Upon notice to the full Commission by telephone,
personal contact or other appropriate means of
communication, at least three members of the Commission
shall convene as soon as possible, and such convening
members shall proceed to review the certificate of historic
review application as provided in this chapter. Subsequent to
such review, a certificate of historic review may be issued upon
a majority vote of the members convened.
(7) Procedure for granting certification of appropriate municipal
actions.
(a) It is recognized that the intent and purposes of this article
would not be fully served if the municipality were to control the
actions of others but fail to apply similar constraints to itself.
Accordingly, a certificate of historic review shall be required
before final approval of any municipal actions on public as well
as private lands, streets, easements and rights-of-way within
the Historic District or any designated sites, or sites listed on
the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places of the Master Plan.
This requirement shall be deemed to include any action by any
party which requires the approval or concurrence of the
municipality or any municipal agency and which is not
otherwise covered by the provisions of this chapter.
(b) In those circumstances where the municipality cannot require
compliance, as in certain cases involving the county, state and
federal governments, the Borough urges, most strongly, the
voluntary cooperation of such agencies in seeking a certificate
of historic review and hereby authorizes the Commission to
consider such requests and applications. This does not relieve
the property owner from complying with applicable state and
federal regulations regarding historic preservation.
A. Secretary of Interior's standards. In carrying out all of its duties and
responsibilities, the Commission shall be guided by the Secretary of the
§ 6-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-32
1:39
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings which are
as follows:
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, a structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible. In the event that replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture and other visual
qualities. Repair or reconstruction of missing architectural features
shall be substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence
rather than on conjectural design or the availability of different
architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale,
color, material and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
§ 6-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-32
1:40
(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
B. Visual compatibility factors. In assessing the design of any proposed
additions or new construction, the following visual compatibility factors
shall be considered in conjunction with the Secretary of Interior's
standards set forth above by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids
to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, its mass in relation to open
spaces and its windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall
§ 6-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-32
1:41
§ 6-33. Demolition; moving of structures.
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(12) Exterior features. A building's related exterior features, such as
lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those buildings and places
to which it is visually related and shall be appropriate for the
historic period for which the building is significant.
A. As set forth in § 6-31A(1) hereinabove, a certificate of historic review
and compliance is required for the demolition of any building,
improvement, site, place or structure located within the Historic
District or any designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory
of Historic Places.
B. Criteria. In regard to an application to demolish or move an historic
building, site, place or structure, the following matters shall be
considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic significance in
relation to the criteria of § 6-28B.
(2) Its current and potential use for those purposes currently
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance7 or for the use proposed.
(3) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would increase property values,
promote business, create positions, attract tourists, students,
writers, historians, artists and artisans, attract new residents,
encourage study and interest in American history, stimulate
interest and study in architecture, educate citizens in American
culture and heritage or make the municipality a more attractive
and desirable place to live.
(6) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the
Historic District.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 6-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-33
1:42
(7) The structural soundness and integrity of the building and the
economic feasibility of restoring or rehabilitating the structure so
as to comply with the requirements of the applicable building
codes.
(8) The compelling reasons for not retaining the structure or
improvement at its present site, the proximity of the proposed new
location and its accessibility to residents of the municipality and
the probability of significant damage to the structure or
improvement as a result of the relocation.
(9) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this chapter and whether the proposed new location is
visually compatible in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
(10) A discussion with the applicant regarding the applicant's consent
to the removal and reuse of certain important features of the
historic building or structure.
C. Procedure.
(1) Applications for a demolition permit must be made to the
Construction Code Official. For all properties within the Historic
District and any designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale
Inventory of Historic Places, a copy of the application will be
forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days
of receipt of the complete demolition application by the
Construction Code Official.
(2) When considering applications for demolition permits, the
Commission's report shall contain recommendations for the
applicant in regard to the appropriateness of the proposed action
for the Planning Board's review. The Construction Code Official
shall include the advice and recommendations of the Planning
Board and the Commission in the certificate of historic review in
any permit which is issued.
(3) Applications for demolition shall include current and archival
photographs of the interior and exterior of the building and
drawings to document the condition of the building.
(4) The Commission's review of a demolition application may take up
to 45 days from receipt of completed application, just as in the case
of a development application.
(5) Demolition notice posting and publication. Notice of proposed
demolition shall be posted on the premises of the building, place or
structure in a location that is clearly readable from the street. In
addition, the applicant shall publish a notice in the official
§ 6-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-33
1:43
newspaper of the Borough within 10 days of an application for a
demolition permit.
(6) Review of application.
(a) Every building and site in the historic district or designated
site or listed site on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places
is a contributing building and site to the Borough, and the
Historic Preservation Commission and the Planning Board
shall consider its demolition or moving in relation to its impact
on the streetscape and neighborhood, whether or not it is of
historic or architectural significance.
(b) On any application for a certificate of appropriateness permit
to demolish any structure in the Historic District, designated
place or on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places, the
Planning Board shall hold a public hearing. At this public
hearing, the Planning Board shall hear from the Historic
Preservation Commission or any other interested party or
organization as to whether the permit shall be issued. In
making its determination, the Planning Board shall use the
criteria set forth in this article. If the Planning Board
determines that the demolition is not appropriate, it may
postpone issuance of the permit for a period of six months.
During this time, the Planning Board may hold other hearings
to determine if there is some other means to preserving the
building. The Planning Board is empowered to work out with
the owner feasible plans for preservation of structures where
moving or demolition thereof would be a great loss to the
public, the Borough, the streetscape and the neighborhood. In
the event that it is shown that the owner has a reasonable
economic use of the property and that the structure should be
preserved on the basis of the standards set forth in this article,
the Planning Board may deny the application for a certificate of
appropriateness permit to demolish the building.
(7) New construction; zoning requirements for moved buildings.
(a) All new construction on the site of a building demolished
within the Historic District or any designated sites or sites
listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places, is subject
to mandatory review by the Historic Preservation Commission.
The certificate of historic review will be issued only when the
Historic Preservation Commission is satisfied that the facades
of the replacement structure meets all the criteria of the
design guidelines deemed applicable and fits appropriately
within the Historic District.
(b) When it is necessary to move an historic building to another
site within the Borough to preserve it, upon approval of the
relocation plans by the Planning Board, said buildings may be
§ 6-33 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-33
1:44
§ 6-34. Review of other permit applications.
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether such
application involves any activity which should also be the subject of an
application for a certificate of historic review. If it should, the officer shall
inform both the Construction Code Official and the applicant, as well as the
Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 6-35. Violations and penalties; injunctive relief.
relocated, providing it fulfills the area regulation of said zone
as to lot size, setback and yard area.
(8) When a certificate of historic review has been issued, the
Construction Code Official or his appointee shall, from time to time,
inspect the work approved by such certificate and shall regularly
report to the Planning Board the results of such inspections, listing
all work inspected and reporting any work not in accordance with
such certificate.
A. Violations.
(1) If any person shall undertake any activity regarding any
improvement in the Historic District or any designated sites or sites
listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic Places without first
having obtained and posted a certificate of historic review, such
person shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. He or she
shall be required to immediately stop the activity, apply for
approval and take any necessary measures to preserve the
landmarks affected pending a decision.
(2) Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally
serve upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring a
notice describing the violation in detail and giving the owner 10
days to abate the violation by seeking review of the extent and
proposed work by the Historic Preservation Commission. If the
project is denied, he shall immediately restore the site to its
preactivity status. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to seek
injunctive relief in the Superior Court of New Jersey not less than
10 days after the personal service of notice by the Zoning Officer
upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is occurring.
(3) If the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality
with said notice, a copy shall be posted on site and a copy sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last
known address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
B. Penalties. If any person shall undertake demolition or removal or new
construction affecting an improvement in the Historic District or any
designated site or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic
§ 6-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-35
1:45
§ 6-36. Appeals.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.2
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 may be taken by any interested party affected by
any order, requirement, decision or refusal of the Construction Code Official
pursuant to a report submitted by the Historic Preservation Commission
or Planning Board, including a denial of a certificate of historic review, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111. Such appeal shall be taken within 20
days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal
is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
§ 6-37. Effect on other requirements.
The requirements of this article shall be considered to be in addition to and
in no case shall they be interpreted as a substitute for any other approval,
permit or other action as otherwise provided for.
§ 6-38. Notice of changes.
Notice shall be made to all Historic District property owners 30 days
prior to any change(s), addition(s), deletion(s) or revocation(s) affecting the
purposes and conditions set forth herein. Notice shall be made by copy sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the last known
address as it appears on the municipal tax rolls.
§ 6-39. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth
herein. In the event that this article conflicts with state law, state law shall
take precedence.
Places without first having obtained a certificate of historic review
or without subsequent review by the Commission following discovery
of the omission, he may be required to restore same to the previous
condition. In addition, there shall be imposed upon such person the
fines and penalties set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Allendale.
C. Injunctive relief. In the event that any action which would permanently
and adversely change an improvement in the Historic District or any
designated sites or sites listed on the Allendale Inventory of Historic
Places, such as demolition or removal, is about to occur without a
certificate of historic review having been issued, the Zoning Officer may
apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for such injunctive relief as is
necessary to prevent the destruction of such site or landmark.
§ 6-35 ALLENDALE CODE § 6-40
1:46
§ 6-40. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect and to this end the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 6-41. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict including
§§ 6-19 to 6-26 of the Code.
§ 6-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 6-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-42
1:47

ARTICLE V
Allendale Volunteer Goose Patrol (AVGP)
[Adopted 4-28-2016]
§ 6-43. Membership and terms; duties and responsibilities;
compensation.
A. Membership and terms. The AVGP shall consist of five members, all of
which are Allendale residents whom will be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council. The terms for each member shall be
one year. The members of AVGP shall elect a chair annually.
B. Duties and responsibilities. The members of the AVGP are responsible
for herding Canadian geese away from public areas. The members of
the AVGP shall adhere to and abide by the rules and regulations
regarding the AVGP, which will be approved by the Mayor and Council
annually via resolution.
C. Compensation. The members of the AVGP shall serve with no
compensation.
§ 6-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-43
1:49
Chapter 9
BONDS AND NOTES
§ 9-1. Interest rate.
All ordinances heretofore adopted authorizing the issuance of bonds or
bonds and notes of the borough and all resolutions authorizing the issuance
of notes in anticipation of the issuance of bonds which recite that the bonds
or notes thereby authorized shall bear interest at a rate which shall not
exceed 6% per annum are hereby amended so as to recite that all such
bonds and notes issued in anticipation of such bonds shall bear interest at a
rate per annum within the limitations prescribed by law.
Chapter 14
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 14-1. Procedure.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17, all claims shall be submitted
for the furnishing of supplies or rendering of services in writing, under
oath or certification in lieu of oath, upon voucher forms provided by the
Governing Body for that purpose. The said voucher form shall include a
detailed statement of the goods furnished or services rendered as to dates,
quantities, if appropriate, or scope of the services, and if sufficient spare
is not provided on said voucher form, shall be continued in rider attached
thereto and signed by the claimant.
§ 14-2. Voucher to be certified.
The said voucher form shall be certified by the department chief, his
assistant or the employee having personal knowledge employed by the
borough, under whose department the furnishing of said goods or services
were required and evidenced by his signature upon said voucher, which
certification shall state that the said goods or services were actually
received by or furnished to the municipality in accordance with the claim
therein presented.
§ 14-3. Further certification by Clerk.
A further certification shall appear upon the said voucher by the Borough
Clerk or another municipal employee designated by resolution to so act, and
evidenced by the signature of said person that the receiving slips, or other
documentation supporting said claim, has been examined and corroborates
the voucher, and that funds have been appropriated and an unexpended
balance therefrom is available for payment thereof.
§ 6-43 ALLENDALE CODE § 14-4
9:50
§ 14-4. Review by Governing Body; approval or disapproval.
All such vouchers shall be reviewed by a member of the Governing Body,
who shall be either the Chairman of the Finance Committee, or his
assistant, or the chairman of the committee under whose jurisdiction the
claim for materials or services fall, or by his assistant, and shall be either
approved or disapproved by the signature appearing on said voucher by
said person. In the event of disapproval, a notation shall be made on a
separate writing and attached to said voucher, stating the reason or reasons
for such disapproval.
§ 14-5. Approval or disapproval by resolution; public hearing.
The said vouchers shall be presented to the Governing Body by the Borough
Clerk at any regular meeting next succeeding five days (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays) of receipt of the voucher from the claimant.
In the event that any such voucher has been disapproved as aforesaid, the
reasons therefor shall be stated in the record and the Governing Body shall
thereupon approve or disapprove, by resolution, of all vouchers before it. In
the event that said Governing Body shall disapprove of any such claim as
presented by voucher, the claimant shall be notified thereof by the Borough
Clerk by certified mail within five days thereafter. A public hearing shall
be afforded any claimant whose voucher has been so disapproved by action
of the Governing Body, and no suit shall lay against the borough until the
claimant has exhausted his remedies as herein provided.
§ 14-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect after adoption and publication as provided by
law as of the first day of January 1962.
Chapter 18
COUNTY SERVICES, CONTRACTS FOR
§ 14-4 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 14-6
14:51

ARTICLE I
Purchasing
[Adopted 7-24-1969]
§ 18-1. Borough authorized to enter into contracts.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 to 40:23-6.29 and
40:23-6.34 to 40:23-6.37, the Borough of Allendale is hereby authorized
to enter into contracts with the County of Bergen for the joint use by the
Borough of Allendale and other municipalities in the County of Bergen of
administrative services and facilities of the Office of Purchasing Agent of
the County of Bergen appropriate to the procurement of certain materials,
supplies and equipment which may be determined to be required from time
to time by the Borough and which the Borough may otherwise lawfully
purchase for itself. The services and facilities of said Office of County
Purchasing Agent shall be provided without cost to the Borough.
§ 18-2. Officials authorized to execute contracts.
The proper municipal officials of the Borough are hereby authorized and
empowered to execute, on behalf of the Borough, all such contracts with the
County of Bergen as may be authorized and approved by resolution of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough.
§ 18-1 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 18-2
14:53

ARTICLE II
Public Health Services
[Adopted 1-27-1983]
§ 18-3. Designated agency.
A. In compliance with the provision of N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-1 et seq., the
Bergen County Department of Health Services be and is hereby
designated as the agency for the performance of public health services
in the Borough of Allendale as required by the applicable statutory
provisions.
B. The appropriate officials of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Allendale be and they are hereby authorized and directed to execute a
contract for such services with the Bergen County Department of
Health Services, essentially in the form of the Agreement for Public
Health Services annexed hereto,8 for the year 1983 and succeeding
years or until such time as it is otherwise determined in accordance
with the applicable statutory provisions.
C. The authorizations ordained herein are subject to approval of the Mayor
and Council and the appropriation of the necessary funds for payment
of the costs of the said public health services.
8. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 18-3 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 18-3
14:55
Chapter 21
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 18-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 18-3
21:56
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 36 of the 1967 Code]
§ 21-1. Court established.
A Municipal Court for the Borough of Allendale is established as of January
1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as
amended and supplemented.
§ 21-2. Title.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Borough of Allendale."
§ 21-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 21-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-3
21:57

ARTICLE II
Public Defender
[Adopted 6-27-1974]
§ 21-4. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Public Defender within the Borough.
§ 21-5. Qualifications.
The Public Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey,
but need not be a resident of the Borough.
§ 21-6. Appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate, with the advice and consent of the Council, and
appoint a Public Defender, including the filling of a vacancy in the office
which shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 21-7. Term of office.
The term of office of the Public Defender shall be for one year, commencing
on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same year, and until a
successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
§ 21-8. Duties.
The duties of the Public Defender shall be to defend all cases brought
against indigent defendants in the Municipal Court of the Borough alleging
violation of the criminal laws of the State of New Jersey and the motor
vehicle statutes of the State of New Jersey whenever such defendants are
entitled to such representation by law or whenever such representation is
deemed necessary or desirable in the interest of justice and in the discretion
of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 21-9. Compensation.
The salary of the Public Defender shall be on a court appearance basis
in such amounts as shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the
Council.
§ 21-10. Application fee. [Added 3-9-1995; amended 7-27-1995;
12-21-1998]
Each individual applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall be required to pay an application fee of not more than $200. The
Municipal Court Judge may waive any required application fee, in whole
or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the application
fee represents an unreasonable burden on the individual seeking
representation.
§ 21-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-10
21:59

ARTICLE III
Borough Prosecutor
[Adopted 8-25-1977]
§ 21-11. Office created. [Amended 4-24-1997]
There is hereby created and established the office of Borough Prosecutor.
Pursuant to authority of Public Law 1996, c. 96, Section 14, the Borough
may employ an attorney at law as a Prosecutor under the supervision of
the Attorney General or County Prosecutor, who may represent the state,
county or municipality in any matter within the jurisdiction of the Central
Municipal Court or any other municipal court.
§ 21-12. Qualifications.
The Borough Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 21-13. Appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and with the advice and consent of the Council
appoint a Borough Prosecutor, including the filling of a vacancy in such
office, which shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 21-14. Term of office.
The term of office of the Borough Prosecutor shall be for one year,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same
year and until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
§ 21-15. Duties.
The duties of the Borough Prosecutor shall be to prosecute cases to be tried
before the Municipal Court alleging violations of criminal laws of the State
of New Jersey, the ordinances of the Borough, the motor vehicle statutes of
the State of New Jersey and such other cases as may be designated by the
appropriate authority as within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. The
Borough Prosecutor shall also appear before the Borough Council upon its
request to prosecute any matters which may be within its jurisdiction.
§ 21-16. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Prosecutor shall be on a court
appearance basis and in such amounts as shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 21-16.1. Alternate Borough Prosecutor. [Added 9-12-2002]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4, there is hereby created and
established the office of Alternate Borough Prosecutor. The qualifications,
appointment, term of office and duties of the Alternate Borough Prosecutor
§ 21-11 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 21-16.1
21:61
shall be the same as the Borough Prosecutor, provided, however, that the
Alternate Borough Prosecutor shall serve only in such circumstances where
the Borough Prosecutor is unavailable.
§ 21-16.1 ALLENDALE CODE § 21-16.1
21:62
Chapter 22
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 67.
§ 22-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 22-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Director of Operations.
B. Municipal Prosecutor.
C. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Building Subcode Official.
F. Plumbing Subcode Official.
G. Fire Subcode Official.
H. Zoning/Property Maintenance Official.
I. Electrical Subcode Official.
J. Fire Prevention Official.
K. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
L. Tax Assessor.
M. Municipal Planner.
N. Registered Municipal Clerk.
§ 21-16.1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 22-2
21:63
§ 22-3. Implementation and construal.
This chapter shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 22-4. Filing required.
A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
Chapter 24
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
§ 24-1. Intent and purpose.
The Borough hereby finds that it is appropriate to provide for the
indemnification and defense of Borough employees, appointees, and
officials in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-4 and applicable
law which empowers local public entities to provide for such
indemnification.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any official, officer or member of the Borough's agencies,
commissions or Council of the Borough, or employee or servant, whether or
not compensated, full- or part-time, elected, appointed or employed, who is
authorized to perform any act or service; provided, however, that the term
does not include an independent contractor. The term shall also include
persons formerly holding office or employment. The term "employee" is to
be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
§ 24-3. Indemnification authorized.
O. Principal Public Works Manager.
P. Superintendent of Water and Sewer Department.
Q. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
§ 22-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 24-3
21:64
§ 24-4. Provisions for indemnification of employees.
§ 24-5. Notification.
An employee shall not be entitled to indemnification or the cost of defense
under this chapter unless, within 10 days of the time such employee is
served with any summons, order to show cause, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, he/she delivers the same, or a copy thereof, to the
Borough Clerk, who shall then forthwith notify the Mayor and Council of the
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by provisions of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, and applicable law, the Borough of
Allendale does hereby authorize and provide to its employees
indemnification in accordance with the indemnification provisions
applicable to all state employees under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
B. The Borough does also hereby authorize indemnification of any person
formerly or presently holding any office, position or employment,
elected or appointed, hereafter referred to as an "employee," in
accordance with the provisions herein.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Borough shall indemnify and
save harmless any employee from financial loss resulting from any civil
action, suit or proceeding, including a cross action, counterclaim or a
cross complaint, against such employee on account of any act or
omission done in the scope of his/her employment; provided, however,
that the act or failure to act does not arise out of actual fraud, willful
misconduct, actual malice or an intentional wrong.
B. The Borough shall defray all costs of defending a legal action against
said employee, including attorney's fees, court costs and expert or
technical witness fees, and any amount paid in settlement thereof, and
actually and reasonably incurred in connection therewith, to the extent
permitted by general law. Expenses thus incurred may be paid in
advance of final disposition of the action, but the Borough may, in its
discretion, wait for a final determination before being obligated to make
any payments.
C. Nothing herein shall authorize the Borough to pay for damages
resulting from the commission of a crime; however, the Borough shall
indemnify and save harmless each employee from financial loss
resulting from any action described above, including punitive or
exemplary damages, if, in the opinion of the governing body, the acts
committed by the employee upon which the damages are based do not
constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
D. If the Borough employee files a counter action or counterclaim in the
legal proceeding, the Borough shall not be obligated to reimburse such
employee for any attorneys fees or Court costs attributable to such
counter action or counterclaim.
§ 24-3 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 24-5
21:65
pending action; provided, however, that this time period may be extended
for good cause by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership
of the governing body.
§ 24-6. Choice of counsel.
The Borough may provide any defense required of it under this chapter
through the Borough Attorney or by employing other counsel as it deems
appropriate. Where a conflict of interest may exist, the public employee
may engage his or her own counsel, which counsel shall be subject to the
reasonable satisfaction of the governing body. Such engagement shall be
further subject to an appropriate agreement between the Borough and the
public employee.
§ 24-7. Borough to control representation.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the Borough
provides any defense required of it under this chapter, the Borough, through
counsel, may assume exclusive control over the representation of the public
employee, and such employee shall cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 24-8. Proceedings beyond trial court level.
In the event that a judgment is entered in favor of the public employee
at the trial court level and the adverse party files an appeal therefrom,
the governing body shall be obligated to pay the costs of counsel beyond
the trial court level. In the event that an adverse judgment is entered
against the public employee at the trial court level and the public employee
or adverse party seeks to appeal therefrom, it shall be within the sole
discretion of the governing body to decide whether to pay for the costs of
counsel beyond the trial court level.
§ 24-9. Disclaimer of coverage.
A. The governing body may disclaim liability for coverage or defense costs
if any of the following conditions shall occur:
(1) The employee is covered by insurance for the cost of his/her
defense and indemnification.
(2) The legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the employee.
(3) The legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the municipality
against the employee.
(4) Any of the acts or omissions complained of was, in the opinion of
the governing body, the product of actual fraud, actual malice,
willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
(5) The legal proceeding involves a question concerning the election
laws.
§ 24-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 24-9
21:66
§ 24-10. Forfeiture of indemnification.
An employee claiming indemnification under this chapter shall cooperate
fully and in good faith with the Borough and with attorneys, adjusters,
investigators or experts, or technical personnel engaged by the Borough
for the preparation and presentation of a defense to such action, or the
settlement or other disposition thereof, and if the employee neglects, fails or
refuses to cooperate, as herein required, the governing body, after a hearing
on 10 days' written notice to the employee, and for cause, may declare all
rights created under this chapter for the benefit of such employee to be
forfeited and terminated by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
membership of the Borough Council.
Chapter 26
DEPARTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mutual aid — See Ch. 46.
(6) The legal proceeding involves a claim for misfeasance or
malfeasance in office or a claim of fraud, theft or misappropriation
of public funds, and the employee is found liable for the charge.
(7) The legal proceeding is a criminal or disciplinary action.
(8) The legal proceeding involves an act or omission of the employee
which was not within the scope of employment.
B. The Borough may not disclaim coverage under this chapter if there
shall have been a specific determination by the trier of fact that the
employee's actions or omissions complained of were within the
employee's scope of employment, duties and responsibilities and,
further, that the employee's actions or omissions complained of did not
involve actual fraud, actual malice or willful misconduct.
§ 24-9 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 24-10
21:67

ARTICLE I
Fire Department
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 23 of the 1967 Code]
§ 26-1. Establishment.
A Fire Department of the Borough of Allendale be and the same is hereby
created and established, coextensive with the territorial limits of said
Borough.
§ 26-2. Fire Committee.
There shall be appointed by the Mayor a committee consisting of three
members of the Borough Council, to be known as the Fire Committee, and
said Committee shall have full charge and control of the Fire Department
and all of the fire equipment belonging to the Borough.
§ 26-3. Responsibility for equipment.
The use of any fire apparatus or equipment belonging to the Borough shall
be entrusted to the Allendale Fire Department, or such companies thereof
as may hereafter be organized and made parts of said Department.
§ 26-4. Membership limitations.
Said companies shall be limited to a membership not to exceed 50 members
in each company.
§ 26-5. Signing roll; performing duties.
The members and officers of the Allendale Fire Association who shall sign
the membership roll of the Allendale Fire Department and promise to
perform the duties of firemen as prescribed by the bylaws of the companies
shall become members of the Allendale Fire Department.
§ 26-6. Membership requirements. [Amended 7-26-1973;
2-14-1985; 10-13-1988; 8-23-2012]
A. No person shall be a member of the Allendale Fire Department unless
he shall be:
(1) A resident of the Borough of Allendale; or
(2) A nonresident, full-time Borough employee and over the age of 18;
or
(3) Is an active firefighter in a fire department of another municipality
and is employed in the Borough of Allendale; or
(4) Resides in a municipality that borders or is within a three-mile
radius of Allendale, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 26-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-6
21:69
§ 26-7. Officers of Department.
The officers of the Fire Department shall consist of a Chief and Assistant
Chief.
§ 26-8. Company officers; elections.
The officers of each company shall consist of a Captain and Lieutenant and
such other officers as may be provided for in the bylaws. The Chief and
Assistant Chief shall be elected by the members of the Department, shall
hold office for one year and shall be chosen by ballot at the annual meeting
of said companies as hereinafter provided; the election of said Chief and
Assistant Chief shall be confirmed by the Borough Council before they shall
be entitled to hold office.
§ 26-9. Temporary appointments pending confirmation by Borough.
In case the Borough Council shall refuse to confirm the election of any
Chief or Assistant Chief, the Mayor of the Borough shall appoint a Chief
or Assistant Chief to hold office until such officers are elected by the
companies and confirmed by the Borough Council.
§ 26-10. Monthly reports by Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Chief to submit a report to the Borough Council
at its first regular meeting in each month, showing the condition of the Fire
Department and of the apparatus and any other matters concerning the
Department he may deem necessary.
§ 26-11. Election procedures. [Amended 8-24-1972; 6-9-1983;
11-10-1983; 9-23-1993]
B. In the event that an active member no longer resides in the Borough of
Allendale, such active membership shall cease and become an associate
membership, unless the active member is a full-time Borough employee
or establishes a legal residence in one of the municipalities that borders
or is within a three-mile radius of the Borough of Allendale and he/she
requests retention of active membership status.
A. The election of Chief and Assistant Chief shall be held at the firehouse
by each company in the Borough at the annual meeting on the second
Friday in November of each year at the hour set forth in the bylaws of
the Fire Department unless otherwise designated by special notice
mailed to all members at least three days before such meeting. Two
members from each company shall represent such company at such
election to act as tellers. A Chairman shall be elected at such election,
who shall be judge of the election, and he shall appoint two tellers from
each company. Such election shall be by ballot, and the person
receiving the highest number of votes shall be duly declared elected.
§ 26-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-11
21:70
§ 26-12. Vacancies.
In case of any vacancy from any cause in the office of Chief, the Assistant
Chief shall perform the duties of Chief, and the Mayor shall appoint an
Assistant Chief for the unexpired term, subject to approval of the Council.
§ 26-13. Powers of Chief.
The Chief shall have complete charge of all fire apparatus during any fire
and charge of all companies and shall have power to order drills whenever
he shall deem it necessary, and at all drills and parades the companies and
members shall be subject to the orders of the Chief.
§ 26-14. Disobedience.
In case of disobedience of any members of the Department, the Chief shall
make complaint to the Fire Committee of the Borough Council, who shall
have the right to hear the same, and if charges are sustained, the Fire
Committee may suspend or expel such member from the Department on
approval of Borough Council.
§ 26-15. Notices to companies not needed at fires.
In case any company is not needed at a fire, it shall be the duty of the Chief
to immediately send notice to such company.
§ 26-16. Bylaws. [Amended 8-24-1972]
The bylaws of said companies, a copy of which shall be on file with the
Borough Clerk, shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council
on all matters pertaining to the active organization involving firematics
or where an expenditure of Borough funds is involved. All changes in
the bylaws not involving firematics or the expenditure of Borough funds
shall be subject only to approval by the membership of the Allendale Fire
Association, and notification of any such changes shall be made to the
Borough Council, to be placed on file with the Borough Clerk.
§ 26-17. Borough's right to amend bylaws.
The Borough Council reserves the right to further alter or amend bylaws as
it shall see fit.
B. Any member, eligible to vote and unable to be present at the annual
meeting in November for good and sufficient reasons, shall be entitled
to receive an absentee ballot. Absentee ballots shall be available
Monday through Friday from 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. during the week
prior to the annual meeting from the member appointed by the
President and shall be returned prior to the annual meeting in a sealed
envelope marked "Secret Ballot." In case of a runoff election, only the
members present will be counted. Each member receiving an absentee
ballot shall sign for the same.
§ 26-11 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-18
21:71
§ 26-18. Badges of members.
Each member of said companies, upon signing the roll of said Department,
shall be entitled to receive a badge of the Fire Department. Said badge shall
remain the property of the Borough and be surrendered to the Council on
the death, removal, resignation, suspension or expulsion of any member.
§ 26-19. Services to be voluntary.
The services rendered by the members of said Department shall be
voluntary to the Borough of Allendale and the residents thereof.
§ 26-20. Guaranties for signing roll and becoming members.
Such members and officers of the Allendale Fire Association, a voluntary
organization now existing, as shall sign the roll and become members of the
Borough Fire Department, as herein provided, shall retain their respective
offices and membership for one year; provided, however, that any of said
officers may be removed from office at any time by the Borough Council
for neglect of duty or other just cause, after charges thereof are made and
sustained.
§ 26-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-20
21:72
ARTICLE II
Police Department
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 45 of the 1967 Code; amended in its
entirety 3-11-1982]
§ 26-21. Establishment; composition; table of organization; Chief of
Police; Director of Public Safety; vacancies and duties. [Amended
8-26-2010]
A. The Police Department of the Borough of Allendale is hereby
established and shall consist of the following personnel to be appointed
to these positions by the Borough Council in accordance with § 26-22:
not more than one Chief of Police or one Director of Public Safety, as the
case may be; up to four sergeants; up to one detective; up to nine patrol
officers; and one Class Three special law enforcement officer (SLEO III)
who is a retired regular police officer and who may, from time to time,
be appointed and shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body for a
term not to exceed one year, which officers shall not be members of the
regular police force but shall nevertheless be under the control and
supervision of the Chief of Police for use solely as school security
officers as detailed in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq., as necessary.
[Amended 8-24-2017; 7-25-2019]
(1) Designation of the foregoing members shall not make appointment
thereto at any time mandatory and vacancies therein may occur
from time to time. Special policemen, marshals, police matrons,
traffic officers, school traffic officers and police dispatchers
authorized by the Council shall not be considered members of the
Police Department within the meaning of any provision of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 et seq., but shall be subject to the rules of the
Department.
(2) There shall be a review of the Allendale Police Department Table of
Organization at least every two years by the Chief of Police or
Director of Public Safety, Public Safety Committee and Municipal
Attorney to ensure that it meets the needs of the Borough, its
residents, businesses and visitors and is in compliance with all
relevant statutes and judicial decisions. Failure to conduct such a
review shall not render this section invalid.
B. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and
directly responsible to the Mayor and Council for all operations of the
Department in accordance with the regulations hereinafter set forth in
the Police Manual. The Chief of Police shall have the powers and duties
provided by law in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, including powers set forth in
the Allendale Police Department Manual and shall have those further
duties promulgated by the Public Safety Committee with the approval
of the Mayor and Council.
C. Director of Public Safety.
§ 26-21 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-21
21:73
(1) Position established. There is hereby established the administrative
position of Director of Public Safety.
(2) Method of appointment. The Director of Public Safety may be
appointed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.1 by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
(3) Term of appointment. The Director of Public Safety shall serve for a
term at the pleasure of the Borough Council.
(4) Qualifications of appointee. The person appointed to the position of
Director of Public Safety shall be qualified by training and
experience for the duties of the position. The person shall not be
appointed unless he or she meets the following minimum
qualifications, unless said qualifications are waived by affirmative
vote of at least 2/3 of the entire Council.
(a) A bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university in
public safety administration, police science or a related field.
(b) A minimum of 10 years' experience as a member of a police
department or other law enforcement agency, five years of
which shall have been in a supervisory and administrative
capacity.
(5) Powers. Under the general direction of the Borough Council and
Borough Administrative Officer, the Director of Public Safety shall
have control over the Police Department in such manner as may be
consistent with all applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations.
The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible for the
administration, regulation and discipline of the Police Department.
All officers and patrolmen of the Police Department shall perform
their duties subject to the supervision and control of the Director of
Public Safety.
(6) Duties. The duties of the Director of Public Safety shall include but
not be limited to the following:
(a) The Director of Public Safety shall have full control over the
Police Department and see to the proper enforcement of the
rules and regulations adopted by the Borough Council, State of
New Jersey and federal government. The Director of Public
Safety shall report to the Borough Administrative Officer and/
or Council from time to time on such matters as may be
required. The Director of Public Safety shall provide the
Administrative Officer and Borough Council with
recommendations related to conditions of the Department and
its improvements and needs. The Director of Public Safety
shall perform such other matters in connection therewith as
may be prescribed by the Administrative Officer or Council;
shall provide rules for application to become members of the
police force; shall examine all applicants for positions on the
§ 26-21 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-21
21:74
police force and recommend for positions on the police force
such persons as the Director may deem proper from time to
time; shall prefer charges against and in his or her discretion;
pending a final hearing on the charges, suspend any officer or
member of the force and otherwise exercise control over all
subordinates, subject to law; and may employ special police in
emergencies and discharge them at the expiration thereof.
(b) To keep abreast of the public safety requirements of the
Borough and formulate policies, plans and procedures
responsive to determined needs.
(c) To develop organization, manpower and resource
recommendations and, upon approval of same by the Borough
Council, effect their implementation.
(d) To establish performance criteria for the Police Department as
a whole as well as its individual members and conduct periodic
evaluations to assure compliance with those criteria.
(e) To establish and maintain relations with school, civil and
private organizations to assure a full understanding of the
public safety effort.
(f) To conduct public relations and public information programs
on behalf of the Police Department in order to maintain the
required relationship between the Police Department and the
citizens of the Borough.
(g) To promote a close liaison with the various agencies of the
Borough, and to attend all meetings of the Borough Council
when necessary, to better coordinate the functioning of the
Police Department with the work of all municipal agencies.
(h) To regularly review the ordinances of the Borough dealing with
public safety to assure their propriety with the prevailing
public safety needs of the Borough.
(i) To annually prepare a budget request for the Police
Department and administer same.
(j) To plan and implement an ongoing program of training and
education, subject to the approval of the Borough Council for
all members of the Police Department, so that they will be fully
apprised of current developments in law enforcement.
(k) To take an active part in any land use proposals or studies
which are or might be conducted for the Borough Council so
that adequate consideration is given to the present and future
needs of the Police Department as well as to facilities and
programs incidental to the functioning of the department and
the implementation of a program of preventive law.
§ 26-21 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-21
21:75
§ 26-21.1. Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety. [Added
8-26-2010]
Whenever the title "Chief of Police" is mentioned within the text of this
article, it shall be amended to read "Chief of Police or Director of Public
Safety."
§ 26-22. Appointments.
The Borough Council, upon nomination by the appropriate Council
Committee, shall appoint all members of the Police Department to hold
office as provided by law.
§ 26-23. Rules and regulations. [Amended 3-13-2014]
The "Appropriate Authority" shall, from time to time as may be necessary,
adopt and amend the rules and regulations for the government and
discipline of the Police Department and employees thereof. Said rules and
regulations may fix and provide for the enforcement of such rules and
regulations and the enforcement of penalties for the violation of such rules
and regulations. All employees of the Police Department shall be subject to
such rules and regulations and penalties.
§ 26-24. Other employment; hours of employment.
(l) To otherwise function in an executive capacity in evaluating,
planning, organizing, and directing the Police Department of
the Borough.
(7) Compensation. Compensation for the position of Director of Public
Safety shall be memorialized in an employment agreement and
shall also be included in the annual salary ordinance and
implementing resolution adopted each year.
D. The duties and responsibilities of members of the Police Department
are set forth in the Allendale Police Department Manual as adopted
pursuant to § 26-23 herein.
A. Each member of the Police Department shall devote his full time and
service to police duties, except that any member of the Department may
pursue other employment in off duty hours as approved by the Chief of
Police or Director of Public Safety. [Amended 8-26-2010]
B. Although certain hours will be allotted for the performance of regular
tours of duty, officers are considered at all times available for duty and
must act promptly at any time that their services are required, except
when on authorized leave or in the event of disability.
C. No police officer shall be required to be on regular duty for more than
an average of 40 hours a week, but in case of an emergency, the Mayor
or Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety shall have full authority to
§ 26-21 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-24
21:76
§ 26-25. Promotions. [Amended 8-26-2010]
The Borough Council, upon nomination by the appropriate Council
Committee, shall make all promotions in the Police Department. No member
of the Police Department shall be promoted to or hold any superior office
within the Police Department until he has served at least three years as
a patrolman in the Police Department. The Chief of Police or Director of
Public Safety may grant a member credit of up to one year towards the
required three years of service on the basis of prior police experience.
An advisory promotional examination may be given, notwithstanding only
one member has applied for promotion. Such promotional examination
shall be given when more than one member has applied for promotion.
No promotion shall become final until a three-month probationary period
has been served, and the Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety has
recommended that the promotion become permanent. Any superior officer
shall serve a minimum of one year in grade to be eligible for promotion.
§ 26-26. Special policemen; police dispatchers; qualifications.
[Amended 8-26-2010]
§ 26-27. School crossing guards. [Amended 8-26-2010]
School crossing guards shall be appointed to regulate and direct the
movement of vehicles and pedestrians at specified intersections in the
summon and keep on duty any and all such officers during the period of
emergency. [Amended 8-26-2010]
A. The Borough Council, upon the nomination by the appropriate Council
Committee, shall appoint all special policemen for a term not exceeding
one year and may revoke such appointments without cause or hearing.
All special policemen shall be residents of the State of New Jersey. Such
special policemen shall carry out their duties and responsibilities under
the direct supervision of the Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety.
The powers, rights and duties, however, shall immediately cease at the
expiration of the term for which they are appointed or upon revocation
of their appointment. Special officers shall not carry any firearms or
other weapons at any time except as otherwise directed by the Chief of
Police or Director of Public Safety.
B. No person shall be appointed as a special policeman or a police
dispatcher unless he is a citizen of the United States, is able to read,
write and speak the English language, is physically qualified, is of good
moral character and shall not have been convicted of any crime. Every
such special policeman and police dispatcher shall be fingerprinted,
and his fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Reports shall be made by the Chief of
Police or Director of Public Safety to the Council concerning the
eligibility and qualifications of any person proposed to be appointed as
a special policeman or police dispatcher.
§ 26-24 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-27
21:77
Borough. School crossing guards shall be under the supervision of the Chief
of Police or Director of Public Safety, subject to the ultimate control of the
Council.
§ 26-28. Chaplains. [Added 2-25-1999]
§ 26-29. Records. [Amended 8-26-2010]
The Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety, with the assistance of such
other members of the Department as he shall detail for that purpose, shall
keep complete records as follows:
§ 26-30. Salaries.
The salaries of the members of the Police Department, including school
crossing guards and police dispatchers, shall be as set forth in the
ordinance establishing the compensation for employees of the Borough of
Allendale.9
A. Appointment. The Borough Council is hereby authorized, upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police or Director of Public Safety, to
appoint one or more Chaplains to the Police Department. Any person
appointed as Chaplain(s) shall serve at the pleasure of the Governing
Body. [Amended 8-26-2010]
B. Qualifications. Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained
clergyman in good standing in the religious body from which he is
selected.
C. Membership. Upon appointment, said Chaplain(s) shall become a
member of the Police Department to serve without rank or salary.
A. A police blotter in which shall be entered by the superior officer in
charge the rank and hour of reporting each day for duty of each
member and all complaints and matters pertaining to the Police
Department.
B. A Department record book in which shall be entered the names in full of
every person arrested and detained; the time of arrest; the nature of the
complaint; the disposition made thereof; the name of the officer making
the arrest; and the names and residences of all witnesses, together with
a brief statement of any circumstances and facts of special interest
pertaining thereto.
C. Every member of the Police Department shall carry at all times a book
in which he shall enter, while on duty, all matters coming to his
attention as a member of the Police Department and from this book
shall transcribe the same to the permanent record book of the
Department.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 26-27 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-30.1
21:78
§ 26-30.1. Designation of Appropriate Authority. [Added 3-13-2014]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Allendale is hereby designated as the Appropriate Authority and
is hereby vested with the powers and duties of an appropriate authority as
delegated by law.
§ 26-30.2. Disciplinary actions. [Added 3-13-2014]
Discipline of employees and police officers will be imposed consistent with
New Jersey State statutes and the rules and regulations of the Allendale
Police Department. The Chief of Police or designee will proffer written
charges as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the Police Department's
rules and regulations. Police officers, special police officers, and employees
may also be subject to discipline for violating other statutes, ordinances,
and policies.
§ 26-30.1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-30.2
21:79

ARTICLE III
Outside Employment
[Adopted 5-9-2013]
§ 26-31. Contracted off-duty employment.
A. Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Allendale
Police Department and to authorize the outside employment of Borough
police while off duty, the Borough hereby establishes a policy regarding
the use of said officers.
(1) Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police-related employment for private employers or school districts
only during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency
duty of the Borough.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be
granted if, in the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not
be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation
of the Police Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or
threaten the safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the
work.
B. Escrow accounts.
(1) Except as provided hereinafter, any person or entity requesting the
services of an off-duty law enforcement officer in the Allendale
Police Department shall estimate the number of hours such law
enforcement services are required, which estimate shall be
approved, in writing, by the Chief of Police, and shall establish an
escrow account with the Borough CFO by depositing an amount
sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and administrative
fees set forth hereinafter for the total estimated hours of service.
(2) If the amount required to be deposited with the Borough pursuant
to Subsection B(1) hereinabove exceeds $20,000, an escrow
deposit of $20,000 shall be required. Said deposit of $20,000 shall
be maintained until such time as the amount required to be
deposited for all remaining services on any given project shall be
less than $20,000, and then such lesser amount shall be required to
be maintained.
(3) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify
that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees
for the number of hours specified in the request for services. The
Chief of Police shall not post a request for services from any person
§ 26-31 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-31
21:81
or entity unless all fees and compensation required in the manner
described above have been deposited with the Borough CFO. No
officer shall provide any such services for more hours than are
specified in the request for services.
(4) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should be
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease
and request for further or future services shall not be performed or
posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above. In the case of an
emergency, an escrow shall be posted within 48 hours of the
conclusion of services.
(5) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(6) Public utilities, houses of worship, nonprofit entities and local
public schools shall be exempt from the requirements for the
posting of an escrow deposit.
(7) Any person or entity who performs services of an emergent nature
and who cannot post an escrow deposit prior to commencing work
shall post such deposit within 72 hours after such work has been
performed. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute
a violation of this article and subject such person or entity to the
penalties pursuant to § 26-32 of this article:
C. Requests for services. All requests to the Borough for the services of offduty
law enforcement officers in the Allendale Police Department for a
period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police
for posting at least 10 days before such services are required. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by the Borough, shall be
treated as an employee of the Borough; provided, however, that the
wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the
pension benefits of law enforcement officers so employed.
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services. Rates
of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be based on a rate equal to that of time and
1/2 of the contractual hourly rate for the individual officer being
compensated. An additional fee of 25% of the rate as calculated above is
hereby established to cover administrative costs, overhead, and out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough.
E. Insurance requirements.
(1) No person or entity shall employ a police officer for extra duty
without having first filed with the Borough Clerk a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of not less
than $1,000,000 for one person and $2,000,000 for any one
§ 26-31 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-31
21:82
§ 26-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who employs a police officer while off duty to perform
services without first having complied with the requirements of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of
not more than 90 days, or both. In addition, the judge may order restitution,
as appropriate.
occurrence with respect to injuries and damages sustained or
caused by police officers while performing such extra duty.
(2) No certificate of insurance required by this subsection shall be
deemed filed with the Borough Clerk unless it has been first
approved by the Borough's Risk Manager. All policies of insurance
evidenced by any certificate filed hereunder shall be maintained by
the person or entity employing such police officer in full force and
effect at all times while any police officer is so employed. The
Borough of Allendale and its Police Department shall be named as
additional named insured for liability purposes.
(3) Any person or entity which employs a police officer for extra duty
shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the Borough, its police
officers against and from any and all claims, suits, damages, costs
and attorneys' fees to which the Borough and its police officers may
put by any negligent act or omission by such person or entity in
connection with or arising from the work being performed herein.
§ 26-31 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 26-32
21:83
Chapter 40
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 26-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 26-32
21:84
ARTICLE I
Land Use Board
§ 40-1. Establishment; composition.
There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,10 in the Borough
of Allendale a Land Use Board of nine members, and up to and including
four alternate members, consisting of the following four classes:
§ 40-2. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor or his or her designee in the absence of the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the Borough, other than a member of the
Governing Body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it by the
Mayor.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the Borough to be appointed by the Mayor
and four alternates to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class
IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that one member may be
a member of the Board of Education.
E. Alternates may participate in discussions of the proceedings, but may
not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member
of any class. Where the application for development involves relief
pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 (a "d" variance),
alternate members shall not participate in place of the legislatively
excluded Class I and Class III members. This reduction in voting
membership preserves the statutory scheme of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70
requiring the affirmative vote of five members of the statutory sevenmember
board to grant a "d" variance.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his or
her official tenure; or, if the member is the Mayor's designee, the
designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's
tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall
be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms
of office, whichever occurs first.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of
the Board of Education or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of the
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 40-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-2
21:85
§ 40-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 40-4. Organization.
The Land Use Board shall elect by a majority vote a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, and Secretary from its Class IV members. The Chairperson shall
be responsible for the running of public hearings.
Governing Body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed
for terms of four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All terms
shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was
made. The alternates shall be appointed for a term of two years from
January 1 of the year of their appointment, except that the term of
two of the alternates first appointed shall be for one year only and
thereafter for two years, so that the term of not more than two
alternates shall thereafter expire in any one year. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," "Alternate No. 3," and "Alternate
No. 4."
D. Removal for cause. Any member or alternate member, other than a
Class I member, after a public hearing, if so requested, may be removed
by the Borough Council for cause.
E. Meeting carryover. When any hearing before the Land Use Board shall
carry over two or more meetings, a member of the Land Use Board who
was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on
the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his
or her absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however,
that such Land Use Board member has available to him or her a
transcript or recording of the meeting and has certified in writing that
the transcript was read or recording listened to.
F. Absenteeism. Any Class IV Land Use Board member may be removed by
the Land Use Board if he/she misses three regular meetings in a
calendar year.
G. Service without compensation. Members of the Land Use Board shall
serve without salary but may be paid expenses incurred in the
performance of duties.
H. Conflict of interest. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter
in which he or she has, directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest.
§ 40-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-5
21:86
§ 40-5. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Land Use Board Attorney. The Land
Use Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Land Use Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Borough Attorney.
§ 40-6. Experts and staff.
The Land Use Board may also employ or contract for the services of such
experts and services as it may deem necessary. The Land Use Board shall
not exceed, however, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated
by the Governing Body for its use. The Borough shall designate a municipal
employee to provide administrative services to the Board.
§ 40-7. Powers and duties generally.
The Land Use Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-l et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers
and duties:
A. To make and adopt and, from time to time, to amend a Master Plan for
the physical development of the Borough, including any areas outside
its boundaries which, in the Land Use Board's judgment, bear essential
relation to the planning of the Borough, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance11 of the Board in accordance with the
provisions of said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, c. 291,
P.L. 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,12 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the Governing Body.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 40-5 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-7
21:87
§ 40-8. Time limits.
G. To consider and make report to the Governing Body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also to pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Land Use Board by the
Governing Body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and d.
(b) Direction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:550-34, for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32c direction, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:550-36 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
(3) The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit and a subsequent application for any required approval for
a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of
the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the
Land Use Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless the approval can be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent
or purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Land Use Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Land Use Board approval unless,
within such period, a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law13 or a deed clearly describing the
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 40-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-8
21:88
§ 40-9. Procedure for filing applications.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Land Use Board,
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk. The applicant shall file, at least 10 days before the date
of the monthly meeting of the Land Use Board, three copies of a sketch
plat, three copies of an application for minor subdivision approval, three
copies of an application for major subdivision approval or three copies of
an application for site plan review, conditional use approval or planned
development. At the time of filing the application, but in no event less than
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county
recording officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary
of the Land Use Board before it will be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Land Use
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Land Use Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Land Use Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Land Use Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 40-7H of this chapter, the Land Use Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Land Use Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Land Use Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The Land Use Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 40-8 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-9
21:89
10 days prior to the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all
plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter or any rule of the Land Use Board. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary forms from the Secretary of the Land Use Board. The Secretary
of the Land Use Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to
initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 40-10. Environmental Commission.
The Environmental Commission is hereby abolished. All references to same
in the Borough Code are hereby deleted and all provisions in the Borough
Code inconsistent with such abolishment are hereby repealed.
§ 40-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-10
21:90
ARTICLE II
Land Use Board Acting as Board of Adjustment
§ 40-11. Establishment.
The Land Use Board shall exercise, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions, all the powers of a Board of Adjustment, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(C).
§ 40-12. Rules and regulations.
The Land Use Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this article. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 40-13. Excluded members.
Where the application for development involves relief pursuant to
Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 (a "d" variance), the Class I and Class
III members shall be legislatively excluded from participation and voting.
An alternate member shall not sit for the aforementioned Class I and Class
III members whenever the Board considers relief pursuant to Subsection d
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. This reduction in voting membership preserves the
statutory scheme of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 requiring the affirmative vote of five
members of the statutory seven-member Board to grant a "d" variance.
§ 40-14. Powers of Land Use Board acting as Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
A. The powers of the Land Use Board acting as a Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 and 70 et
seq., and amendments and supplements thereto, and with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Land Use
Board acting as a Zoning Board of Adjustment as full and complete
powers as may lawfully be conferred upon such Land Use Board,
including, but not by way of limitation, the authority, in connection with
any case, action or proceeding before the Land Use Board, to interpret
and construe the provisions of this chapter or any term, clause,
sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map, in accordance with the
general rules of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
C. The Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in
appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, grant variances from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance in
accordance with the general or specific rules contained herein and with
the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be done in cases
where the strict construction of the provisions of this chapter would
§ 40-11 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-14
21:91
§ 40-15. Appeals and applications.
work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the Land Use Board
having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the Land Use
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L.
1975, c. 291, or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same
a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or applications
may properly be filed with the Land Use Board for its decision thereon.
A. Appeals to the Land Use Board acting as Zoning Board of Adjustment
may be taken by any interested party. Each appeal shall be taken within
the 20 days prescribed by the statute by filing a notice of appeal with
the officer from whom the appeal was taken, together with three copies
of said notice with the Secretary of the Land Use Board. Said notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Land Use Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Land Use
Board acting as a Zoning Board of Adjustment without prior application
to an administrative officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Land
Use Board. Three copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior
to the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps or other papers required by virtue of any provisions of this
chapter or any rule of the Land Use Board acting as a Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Secretary of the Land Use Board. The Secretary of the Land Use Board
shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Land Use Board.
The filing deadlines for use variances and bulk variances ("c") for
nonresidential properties shall be as provided in Article I, § 40-9 hereof.
Applications for bulk variances for residential properties involving
additions to an existing residential dwelling shall be submitted to the
Secretary of the Land Use Board no later than 30 days prior to the
requested hearing date. In addition to the required copies of the
application, the applicants shall also submit the required number of
copies of the plot plan showing the proposed work, the proper fee and
escrow and any other supporting documents. The applicant shall also
provide the statutory notice as set forth in Article III, § 40-26.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Land Use Board acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been
filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
§ 40-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-15
21:92
§ 40-16. Power to reserve or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Land Use Board acting as
the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of
P.L. 1975, c. 291, or amendments thereto or subsequent statutes applying,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and make such other requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made and to that end have all the
powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 40-17. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting
a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and
every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted use
has actually been commenced, within one year from the date of publication
of the notice of the judgment or determination of the Land Use Board acting
as the Zoning Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the
period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an
appeal from the decision of the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board
of Adjustment to the Governing Body or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 40-18. Powers granted by law.
order, which may be granted by the Land Use Board acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
A. The Land Use Board acting as a Board of Adjustment shall have such
powers as are granted by law to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to pass.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property, or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property
§ 40-15 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-18
21:93
or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application
of any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; and where, in an application or appeal
relating to a specific piece of property, the purposes of the
Municipal Land Use Law would be advanced by a deviation from
the Zoning Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from the regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance; provided, however, that no variance from those
departures enumerated in Subsection A(4) of this section shall
be granted under this subsection, and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the Land Use
Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction
with which the Planning Board has power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to§ 40-7H of this chapter and Section 47a of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60).
(4) Variance to allow departure from the regulations of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(a) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance
to permit:
[1] A use or principal structure in a district restricted against
such use or principal structure.
[2] An expansion of a nonconforming use.
[3] Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to
Section 54 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67)
pertaining solely to a conditional use.
[4] An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
Section 3.1 of P.L. I975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4).
[5] An increase in the permitted density as defined in Section
3.1 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as
applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or
lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision.
(b) A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
§ 40-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-18
21:94
§ 40-19. Additional powers.
§ 40-20. Time limit for decision.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Land Use
Board shall act.
A. The Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in
addition to the powers specified in § 40-18 of this article, have the
power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Land Use Board subdivision or site plan approval
pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or conditional use approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, whenever the proposed development
requires approval by the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to § 40-18A(4) of this chapter. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless such approval can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance. The number of votes of
Land Use Board members required to grant any such subsequent
approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval
in question, and the special vote pursuant to § 40-18A(4) shall not be
required.
A. The Land Use Board, acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall
render its decision not later than 120 days after the date an appeal is
taken from the decision of an administrative officer or the submission of
a complete application for development to the Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
§ 40-18 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-20
21:95
B. Failure of the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment
to render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 40-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-20
21:96
ARTICLE III
Provisions of Combined Board
§ 40-21. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Land Use Board shall act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever
any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter,
he shall not continue to sit with the Land Use Board on the hearing of such
matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 40-22. Meetings.
§ 40-23. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Land Use Board
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Land
Use Board and the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The
minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested
party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such
minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the
minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the Land Use Board.
§ 40-24. Fees.
A. Meetings of the Land Use Board shall be scheduled no less often than
once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, except as otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975,
c. 291. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to
approve an application for development pursuant to § 40-18A(4) or
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 shall be deemed an action denying the application.
A. Fees for applications for rendering any service by the Land Use Board
or any member of their administrative staffs shall be set by the Borough
Council by ordinance and copies of said fee schedules shall be available
to the public.
§ 40-21 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-24
21:97
B. Fees for applications to the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall be as follows:
(1) Applications for use variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $500.
(2) Applications for hardship variances under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and
all other types of applications to the Land Use Board acting as the
Zoning Board of Adjustment: $500.
(3) Fees for site plan and subdivision approvals: as set forth in Land
Use Board fee schedules.
C. Fees for applications to the Land Use Board shall be as follows:
(1) Minor subdivision: $150 plus $50 per lot.
(2) Major subdivision:
(a) Sketch plat: $50.
(b) Preliminary plat: $350 plus $50 per lot.
(c) Final plat: $150.
(3) Minor site plan under 1/2 acre: $150.
(4) Major site plan over 1/2 acre: $250.
(5) Use permit: $25.
D. In addition to the fees noted in Subsections A, B and C of this § 40-24,
an applicant with a pending application or appeal before the Land Use
Board shall place in an escrow account with the Treasurer of the
Borough of Allendale a $600 fee in order to cover legal fees of the
attorney for the Land Use Board, engineering fees of the Borough
Engineer, publication fees, and resolution fees incurred by the Borough
in the processing of the application, and such other fees and costs for
other professional consultants as the Land Use Board may from time to
time reasonably and within its sole discretion determine are necessary
for a proper review of the application and to supplement the applicant
in support thereof.
E. In making a determination as to what professional consultants shall be
required, if any, except for the services and fees of the attorney for the
Land Use Board and the Borough Engineer, the Land Use Board shall
review the application and consider the nature and extent of the
application, and any professionals which may be required, including
whether any environmental or other conditions may exist.
F. When the Land Use Board makes a determination that a professional
consultant's services are required (other than those of the attorney for
the Land Use Board or the Borough Engineer), it shall estimate the fees
and costs therefor. Notice of such fees and costs shall be conveyed to
the applicant, who shall forthwith deposit such funds, in addition to
§ 40-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-24
21:98
those set forth in § 40-24D hereinabove, in an escrow account with
the Treasurer of the Borough of Allendale. Any funds contained within
the escrow account not required for such legal, engineering or other
professional consultants shall be returned to the applicant upon
completion of the application or proceeding. In the event of a failure by
an applicant to comply with these regulations or to deposit the escrow
funds determined by ordinance or by the appropriate board as set forth
herein, the Land Use Board may, in its discretion, suspend or dismiss
proceedings before it or suspend or revoke such municipal permits or
approvals as may have been issued with regard to said application.
G. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
municipality or Land Use Board to perform required application review
or processing, including but not limited to the payment for services
performed by professional consultants for the municipality or the Land
Use Board, the Chief Financial Officer shall provide the applicant with a
notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to
continue on the application, the applicant shall, within a reasonable
time period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed
upon by the Borough or Land Use Board.
H. Payment procedure when a professional consultant's services are
required.
(1) The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall make all of the
payments required for legal, engineering, publication, and
resolution preparation, and to professionals for services rendered
to the Borough and/or Land Use Board for reviewing an
application. In addition to fees, the Chief Financial Officer shall pay
all costs associated with the above. The only costs that shall be
added to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of
the Borough or the Land Use Board, or professionals or
consultants. No applicant shall be charged for any Borough,
clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting
room charges or any of the Borough costs and expenses except as
provided for specifically by statute, nor shall a Borough
professional add any such charge to his or her bill.
(2) Scope of reimbursed services. The Borough shall be entitled to be
reimbursed for the review of applications, both as to completeness
and as to content, and for the review and preparation of documents
such as, but not limited to drafting resolutions, agreements and
necessary correspondence with the applicant or applicant's
professionals.
(3) Deposit of escrow funds; refunds. Deposits received from any
applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the Chief Financial
Officer in a special interest-bearing deposit account, and upon
receipt of bills from professionals and approval of said bills as
hereinafter provided for, the Chief Financial Officer may use such
funds to pay the bills submitted by such professionals or experts.
§ 40-24 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-24
21:99
The Borough shall not be required to refund an amount of interest
paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the
amount of interest exceeds $100, the entire amount shall belong to
the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the Borough annually
or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied for the purposes
for which it was deposited, as the case may be, except that the
Borough may retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent
to no more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount, which shall be in
lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses. All sums not
actually so expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 90
days after the final decision by the appropriate Borough agency
with respect to such application, upon certification by the Land Use
Board Secretary that such application has been finally decided.
(4) Payments.
(a) Each payment charged by a professional shall be pursuant to a
voucher from the professional, which voucher shall identify the
personnel performing the service and each date the services
were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All
professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough on a monthly basis in accordance with
the schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial Officer. The professional shall send an informational
copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough simultaneously to the
applicant and the Borough agency for whom said services were
performed.
(b) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the
applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of
funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and
the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This information
shall be provided on a quarterly basis if monthly charges are
$1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed
$1,000.
(c) Payments required prior to issuance of permits. No certificates
of occupancy or permits of any kind may be issued with respect
to any approved application until all bills for reimbursable
services have been received by the Borough from professional
personnel rendering services in connection with such
application and payment has been made.
(5) Closeout procedures. The following closeout procedures shall apply
to all deposits and escrow accounts established under this § 40-24.
(a) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough and the approving
authority and to the relevant Borough professional, that the
§ 40-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-24
21:100
§ 40-25. Hearings.
application, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt
of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Borough within 30 days and
shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough shall render a written final
accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit
was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances
remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including interest,
shall be refunded along with the final accounting.
(b) Substitution of professionals. If the Borough retains a different
professional or consultant in the place of a professional
originally responsible for application review, the Borough or
approving authority shall be responsible for all time and
expenses of the new professional to become familiar with the
application or the project, and the Borough or approving
authority shall not bill the applicant or charge to the deposit or
the escrow account for any such services.
A. Rules. The Land Use Board shall make rules governing the conduct of
hearings before such bodies, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, c.
38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Land Use Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
E. Records. The Land Use Board shall provide for the verbatim recording
of the proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Land Use Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his
expense.
§ 40-24 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-26
21:101
§ 40-26. Notice requirement for hearings.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate, located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it; or horizontal property regime, in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner
as shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the
property, or by mailing a copy thereof, by certified mail, to the property
owner at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to
a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community trust
or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which is the
subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to § 40-26B of this article to the owners of lands in
such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
§ 40-26 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-26
21:102
§ 40-27. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the Borough shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor
make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and
addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to Article III, § 40-26B, of this chapter.
§ 40-28. Decisions.
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Borough Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
P.L. 1975, c. 291.
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the Land Use Board.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Borough's Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. The Land Use Board shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The Land Use Board shall provide the
findings and conclusions through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law for action by the Land Use
Board on the application for development; or
(2) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Land Use
Board voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Land Use Board who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
An action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9, resulting from the failure
of a motion to approve an application, shall be memorialized by
§ 40-26 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-28
21:103
§ 40-29. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Land Use Board, without separate charge to the applicant.
Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10
days of the date of any such decision.
§ 40-30. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Land Use Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on
said property, any approvals or other relief granted by the Land Use Board
shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such manner that the Borough will be adequately protected.
§ 40-31. Determination of completeness of application.
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the Borough Engineer
when so certified by the Borough agency or its authorized committee or
resolution as provided above, with those members voting against
the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall
be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the Land Use
Board and not to be an action of the Board; however, the date of the
adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(h) and (i). If the Land Use Board fails to adopt
a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified,
any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary
manner for an order compelling the Land Use Board to reduce its
findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the
cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed
against the Borough.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Land Use Board within 10
days of the date of decision to the applicant, or, if represented, then to
his attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also
be mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the
fee prescribed by the Land Use Board for such service. A copy of the
decision shall also be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall
make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party
upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those
established for copies of other public documents in the municipality.
§ 40-28 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-31
21:104
designee. In the event that the agency, committee or designee does not
certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration
of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable
time period, unless the application lacks the information indicated on the
checklist attached to and made a part of this chapter, a copy of which
shall have been provided to the applicant; or the Borough agency or its
authorized committee or designee has notified the applicant, in writing,
of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of the
application. The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its authorized
committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein
shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the
application process that he is entitled to approval of the application. The
Borough agency may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not specified
in the chapter or any revisions in the accompanying documents as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for the approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the agency.
§ 40-32. Approval of Land Use Board application and checklist.
The application for development for the Borough of Allendale Land Use
Board and Schedule A, Checklist for Submissions of Development
Applications, on file with the Secretary of the Allendale Land Use Board,
be and the same is hereby authorized and adopted for use by the Land Use
Board.
§ 40-33. Approval of Land Use Board acting as Zoning Board of
Adjustment checklist.
The required materials and checklist for the Borough of Allendale Land Use
Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment hearings now on file with
the Land Use Board be and the same is hereby authorized and adopted for
use by the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 40-31 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-33
21:105

ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 40-34. Appeals to Land Use Board acting as Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
An appeal to the Land Use Board acting as a Zoning Board of Adjustment
may be taken by any interested party affected by any decision of the
Administrative Officer of the Borough based on or made in the enforcement
of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within
20 days by filing a notice of appeal in the manner set forth in Article II,
§ 40-15, of this chapter and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 40-35. Appeals from Land Use Board.
All appeals from decisions of the Land Use Board shall be to the Superior
Court and not to the Borough Council.
§ 40-36. Appeal to Governing Body from Land Use Board acting as
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal from any decision of the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment granting a use variance pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken to the Superior Court.
§ 40-34 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-36
21:107

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 40-37. Definitions.
§ 40-38. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan
Review Ordinance or any other ordinance of the Borough of Allendale which
contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 40-39. Provisions continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, Section 81, the substantive
provisions of the following ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
and shall be read in pari materia with this chapter:
§ 40-40. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
A. Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention
is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter. The provisions of
the definitions sections of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 through
40:55D-7, inclusive), are incorporated by reference thereto.
B. Wherever the term "Zoning Board," "Zoning Board of Adjustment" or
"Board of Adjustment" shall appear in any other ordinance, application
for, checklist, etc., of the Borough of Allendale, said term shall be
replaced with the term "Land Use Board acting as a Zoning Board of
Adjustment," and all references thereto shall be read as applying only
to the Land Use Board acting as the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Chapter 32 of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, known as the
"Revised Land Subdivision Ordinance," and specifically the following
provisions thereof: Article I, Article II, § 10 of Article III, Article IV,
Article V and Article VI.
B. Chapter 77 of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, known as the
"Zoning Ordinance-1958," and specifically the following provisions
thereof: Article I, Article II, Article IV, Article V, Article VI, Article VII,
Article VIII, Article IX, Article X, Article XI, Article Xll, Article XIII
(except the provisions of § 77-63.1D and E, insofar as these provisions
require the approval by the Governing Body which is hereby eliminated
except as to those uses involving a substantial change of use), Article
XIV, Article XV, Article XVII and Article XVIII.
§ 40-37 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 40-40
21:109
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 40-41. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale."
§ 40-42. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the Bergen County Planning Board as required
by law. The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of
all other ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the
Subdivision, Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
§ 40-43. Interim Zoning Ordinance.
The existing Zoning Ordinance is hereby saved from repeal.
§ 40-44. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
§ 40-40 ALLENDALE CODE § 40-44
21:110
Chapter 46
MUTUAL AID
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26, Art. I. Police Department — See Ch. 26, Art. II.
§ 46-1. Participation in mutual aid system authorized.
The Borough of Allendale be and is hereby authorized to participate in the
intermunicipal mutual fire and emergency aid system14 in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, and the Borough Council be and is
hereby authorized to enter into agreements to implement this authorization
with other local municipalities.
Chapter 53
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Background checks — See Ch. 4.
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 6.
Public Defender — See Ch. 21, Art. II.
Borough Prosecutor — See Ch. 21, Art. III.
Departments — See Ch. 26.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
Residency exemption — See Ch. 63.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 67.
14.Editor's Note: The preamble of Ord. No. 454, adopted 8-11-1977, stated that the mutual
aid system referred to in the text of the ordinance is the Northwest Bergen Mutual Aid
Association.
§ 40-44 MUTUAL AID § 46-1
46:111

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)15
§ 53-1. through § 53-6. (Reserved)
15.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Administrator, adopted 4-27-1972, as amended, was repealed
1-24-2008.
§ 53-1 MUTUAL AID § 53-1
46:113

ARTICLE II
Attorney
[Adopted 4-13-1972]
§ 53-7. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Attorney.
§ 53-8. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
the Municipal Attorney, who shall be a person (meaning an individual,
partnership or professional corporation) licensed to practice law in the
State of New Jersey, for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 53-9. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the Mayor and
Council; represent the Borough in litigation; draft ordinances and
resolutions upon request of the Mayor and Council; and render such other
professional legal services as may be required by statute or as requested by
the Mayor and Council from time to time, whether by ordinance, resolution
or otherwise.
§ 53-10. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Municipal Attorney shall be as the Mayor
and Council shall hereafter from time to time prescribe by the Annual Salary
Ordinance.16
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-7 MUTUAL AID § 53-10
46:115

ARTICLE III
Engineer
[Adopted 4-13-1972]
§ 53-11. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Engineer.
§ 53-12. Appointment and term. [Amended 2-27-2002]
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
a Municipal Engineer, who shall be a person licensed as a professional
engineer in the State of New Jersey. Unless otherwise provided by law, his/
her term of office shall be three years.
§ 53-13. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Engineer shall provide professional engineering advice and
assistance to the Mayor and Council; provide engineering advice to the
Planning Board for the review of subdivision applications and plats, master
planning studies; maintain the Borough Official Map and Borough Zoning
Map; prepare plans and specifications for public works authorized by the
Mayor and Council, and make such field surveys as may be required
therefor; make such inspections of the work of public contractors as may be
necessary or desirable; supervise the performance of public works contracts
and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder; and provide any and
all other professional engineering advice and assistance as may be required
of him by statute or as requested of him by the Mayor and Council, whether
by ordinance, resolution or otherwise.
§ 53-14. Compensation. [Amended 2-27-2002]
The compensation to be paid the Municipal Engineer shall be fixed in the
Annual Salary Ordinance17 or on a fixed-fee basis or at an hourly rate and
based upon actual time and expenses agreed on prior to the rendering of
the services.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-11 MUTUAL AID § 53-14
46:117

ARTICLE IV
Treasurer
[Adopted 1-27-1983; amended in its entirety 3-14-1996]
§ 53-15. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Borough Treasurer for the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 53-16. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, the
Borough Treasurer, for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 53-17. Powers and duties.
The Treasurer shall have, perform and exercise all the functions, powers
and duties provided by general law and Borough ordinances. Such person
shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial transactions of
the Borough in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs of the State of New Jersey. Such person shall have custody of
all public moneys of the Borough and shall make monthly reports to the
Council and Administrator of all receipts, expenditures, commitments and
unexpended appropriations. All moneys received from any source by or on
behalf of the Borough or any department, board, office or agency thereof,
except as otherwise provided by Borough ordinance, shall be paid to the
Treasurer, who shall, by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt,
deposit them in the authorized public depository of the Borough to the
credit of the proper account.
§ 53-18. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Borough Treasurer shall be as the Mayor
and Council shall, from time to time, prescribe by the Salary Ordinance.18
§ 53-19. Treasurer permitted to reside outside Borough.
It is hereby authorized that the Municipal Treasurer of the Borough of
Allendale be and is hereby permitted to reside outside the territorial limits
of the Borough of Allendale.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-15 MUTUAL AID § 53-19
46:119

ARTICLE V
Tax Collector
[Adopted 1-27-1983]
§ 53-20. Office established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141, there is hereby established the office of
Municipal Tax Collector.
§ 53-21. Appointment, qualifications and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, the Municipal Tax Collector, who shall hold a certificate in
accordance with the applicable statutory requirements and shall hold office
for a term of four years from the first day of January next following the said
appointment. Vacancies in the office, due other than to the expiration of the
term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only.
§ 53-22. Powers and duties.
The Tax Collector shall possess all of the powers and duties established by
law. The Collector shall:
§ 53-23. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Municipal Tax Collector shall be as the
Mayor and Council shall, from time to time, prescribe by the Salary
Ordinance.19
A. Enter, in suitable books to be kept for that purpose, the sums received
by him each day for taxes, with the names of persons on whose account
the same shall have been paid.
B. Within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year or when otherwise
required by the Council, make and furnish a report thereof with a
detailed and true statement of all moneys received from the
commencement of his official year to the date of the report and for such
period as the Council may require.
C. Keep a record of all delinquent taxpayers and shall furnish a list thereof
for the previous year.
D. File a report with two copies of the statement and a list of delinquent
taxpayers with the Borough Clerk, within the time hereinbefore
specified or when otherwise required by law.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-20 MUTUAL AID § 53-23
46:121

ARTICLE VI
Marsh Warden
[Adopted 6-23-1983; amended in its entirety 2-25-1999]
§ 53-24. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Marsh Warden and two Assistant
Marsh Wardens.
§ 53-25. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, a Marsh Warden and up to two Assistant Marsh Wardens, who
shall be people familiar with the environmental aspects of the Celery Farm -
Nature Preserve. The term of such offices shall be for one year commencing
on January 1 and terminating December 31 in each year. Vacancies in the
offices, due other than to the expiration of the term, shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
§ 53-26. Powers and duties.
§ 53-27. Compensation.
The positions of Marsh Warden and Assistant Marsh Warden shall be
uncompensated unless otherwise ordained by appropriate action of the
Borough Council.
A. The Marsh Warden shall have the following duties:
(1) To monitor the Celery Farm - Nature Preserve for the purpose of
maintaining a primitive and safe environment.
(2) To make recommendations to the Borough Council for maintenance
and improvement of the Celery Farm - Nature Preserve and to
recommend to the Borough Council appropriate regulations for the
use of the facility.
(3) To direct and coordinate the activities of the Assistant Marsh
Wardens appointed in accordance with the provisions herein.
(4) To coordinate the activities of volunteer groups performing
maintenance tasks and other work at the Celery Farm - Nature
Preserve.
(5) To maintain a current map of the Celery Farm - Nature Preserve
delineating trails, stream crossings, bridges and other significant
structures or topographical features.
B. The duties of the Assistant Marsh Wardens shall be as directed by the
Marsh Warden and shall be for the purpose of assisting the Marsh
Warden in handling the requirements of this article, especially
Subsection A(1), (2), (4) and (5) above.
§ 53-24 MUTUAL AID § 53-27
46:123

ARTICLE VII
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-9-1989]
§ 53-28. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, there is hereby created
the office of Chief Financial Officer for the Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-29. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, the
Chief Financial Officer, who shall be a person holding a certificate issued by
the Division of Local Government Services as a Municipal Finance Officer,
for a term of one year commencing January 1 and terminating December 31
in each year.
§ 53-30. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall have, perform and exercise all of the
functions, powers and duties as provided by law and Borough ordinances.
Such person shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the Borough in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. Such person
shall have custody of all public moneys of the Borough and shall make
monthly reports to the Council of all receipts, expenditures, commitments
and unexpended appropriations. All moneys received from any source by
or on behalf of the Borough or any division, department, board, office or
agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, will be paid to
the Chief Financial Officer, who shall, by the next ensuing bank day after
such receipt, deposit such funds in the authorized public depository of the
Borough to the credit of the proper account. Such person shall also disperse
funds in payment of bills.
§ 53-31. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Chief Financial Officer shall be as the
Borough Council shall from time to time provide for in the Annual Salary
Ordinance and implementing resolutions.20
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-28 MUTUAL AID § 53-31
46:125

ARTICLE VIII
Tax Assessor
[Adopted 6-26-1997]
§ 53-32. Office established.
There is hereby established within the Borough of Allendale the office of Tax
Assessor.
§ 53-33. Term of office.
The Tax Assessor shall hold office for a term of four years from the first day
of July next following his or her appointment. Vacancies, other than due to
expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 53-34. Qualifications; duties.
The Tax Assessor shall hold a tax assessor's certificate provided for in P.L.
1967, c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq.) and shall have the duty of assessing
property for the purpose of general taxation. The Tax Assessor shall:
§ 53-35. Part-time employee.
The Tax Assessor of the Borough shall be a part-time employee and shall
devote 151/2 hours of service to the Borough weekly.
§ 53-36. Compensation.
The Tax Assessor shall receive such compensation as may be fixed and
determined by the governing body in the Annual Salary Ordinance and
implementing resolutions.21
A. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor.
B. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of real
property assessed or exempted.
C. Maintain a current Tax Map of the Borough as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character of
the real property assessed, employing for that purpose such
professionals and/or departments as authorized by the governing body.
D. Be subject to supervision and control by the County Board of Taxation
and be governed by such rules or directions as may be issued by the
County Board of Taxation or otherwise required by law.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-32 MUTUAL AID § 53-36
46:127

ARTICLE IX
Zoning Officer
[Adopted 4-25-2002]
§ 53-37. Office established.
There is hereby created the Office of Zoning Officer for the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 53-38. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
the Zoning Officer for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year or the unexpired portion thereof.
§ 53-39. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Officer shall exercise the following powers and duties,
including, but not limited to:
§ 53-40. Compensation.
The Zoning Officer shall receive such compensation as may be fixed and
determined by the governing body in the annual salary ordinance and
implementing resolutions.22
A. Inspect properties, as required, for possible violations of the Zoning
Ordinance.
B. Enforce the Zoning Code, Chapter 270.
C. Review and process applications for zoning permits.
D. Review and issue nonconforming use and structure certifications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
E. Receive appeals filed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
F. Such other powers and duties required under ordinance or at law.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-37 MUTUAL AID § 53-40
46:129

ARTICLE X
Property Maintenance Officer
[Adopted 4-25-2002]
§ 53-41. Office established.
There is hereby created the office of Property Maintenance Officer for the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-42. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint with the advice and consent of the Council, a
Property Maintenance Officer for a term of one year commencing January 1
and terminating December 31 or the unexpired portion thereof.
§ 53-43. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-6-2008]
The Property Maintenance Officer shall enforce the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Allendale (Chapter 199 of the Code) and the Soil
Movement Ordinance (Chapter 225 of the Code).
§ 53-44. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Property Maintenance Officer shall be
fixed by the Borough Council from time to time as provided for in the annual
salary ordinance and implementing resolutions.23
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 67, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 53-41 MUTUAL AID § 53-44
46:131

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 7-27-2006]
§ 53-45. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough of Allendale's responsibility to
assist in the provisions of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 53-46. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Allendale to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-47. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough
of Allendale.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Allendale, including the following responsibilities which may be not be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Allendale's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Allendale's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 53-45 MUTUAL AID § 53-47
46:133
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Borough of Allendale as described in
Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Allendale may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Borough of Allendale. If the Borough of Allendale contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing
plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Allendale and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
§ 53-47 ALLENDALE CODE § 53-47
46:134
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Allendale when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
§ 53-47 MUTUAL AID § 53-47
46:135
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 53-47 ALLENDALE CODE § 53-47
46:136
ARTICLE XII
Municipal Clerk/Administrative Officer
[Adopted 2-14-2008]
§ 53-48. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Municipal Clerk/Administrative
Officer for the Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-49. Appointment and term.
The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed for a term of three years in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.
§ 53-50. Powers and duties of Clerk.
The Municipal Clerk shall perform the duties and functions as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133e.
§ 53-51. Powers and duties of Administrative Officer.
§ 53-52. Compensation.
The compensation for the Municipal Clerk/Administrative Officer shall be
as the Borough Council from time to time provides for in the annual Salary
Ordinance and implementing resolutions.24
A. Serve as Administrative Officer representing the Mayor and Council;
B. Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council as needed; [Amended
7-23-2015]
C. Make recommendations as to administrative operations of the Borough;
D. Receive and reply to general inquiries concerning Borough business
and provide information as necessary;
E. Supervise the administrative staff at Borough Hall;
F. Oversee maintenance of personnel records of Borough employees;
G. Report to the Mayor and Council as necessary;
H. At the direction of the Mayor and Council, compile and release public
information;
I. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and
Council;
J. Coordinate staff schedules;
K. Administrative coordinating point for all departments. [Amended
7-23-2015]
§ 53-48 MUTUAL AID § 53-52
46:137
24.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 53-52 ALLENDALE CODE § 53-52
46:138
ARTICLE XIIA
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Adopted 3-14-2013]
§ 53-52.1. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk for the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-52.2. Term of appointment.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed for a term of one year,
commencing January 1 and terminating December 31 in each year or the
unexpired portion thereof.
§ 53-52.3. Powers and duties.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall perform the duties and functions as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133(e) and such other duties as may be assigned
by the Municipal Clerk. During the absence or disability of the Municipal
Clerk, the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal
Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
§ 53-52.4. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be as
the governing body from time to time provides for in the annual Salary
Ordinance and implementing resolutions.25
25.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 53-52.1 MUTUAL AID § 53-52.4
46:139

ARTICLE XIII
Director of Operations
[Adopted 2-14-2008]
§ 53-53. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Director of Operations for the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 53-54. Term of office.
The Director of Operations shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body.
§ 53-55. Powers and duties of Director of Operations.
§ 53-56. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Director of Operations shall be as
the Borough Council from time to time provides for in the annual Salary
Ordinance and implementing resolutions.26
A. Supervise the operations of the DPW, Water and Fire Departments,
reporting directly to the Mayor and Council;
B. Represent the Borough in its relations with other governmental
agencies and oversee the Borough's interests in contracts, franchises
and other transactions;
C. Supervise the business administration of the DPW, Water and Fire
Departments in consultation with Department heads and respective
Council Chairmen;
D. Maintain a continuing review of DPW, Water and Fire Department
operations and report thereon to the Mayor and Council;
E. Recommend and coordinate with appropriate department heads the
nature, location and extent of public improvements and implement the
execution of such improvements when authorized by the Council;
F. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and
Council;
G. Purchasing. Exercise the duties of purchasing agent, approving all
requisitions from departments for services and materials up to a total
amount of $3,000. On purchases over said amount, approval of the
appropriate Council Committee Chair must first be obtained.
26.Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 53-53 MUTUAL AID § 53-56
46:141

ARTICLE XIV
Code Enforcement Official
[Adopted 9-13-2012]
§ 53-57. Office established.
There is hereby established the office of Code Enforcement Official for
the Borough of Allendale which shall collectively include the offices of
Construction Code Official, Building Subcode Official, Fire Subcode Official
and Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 53-58. Term of office.
The Code Enforcement Official shall serve at the pleasure of the governing
body.
§ 53-59. Powers and duties of Code Enforcement Official.
The Code Enforcement Official shall enforce the Uniform Construction
Code, building subcode, fire subcode, plumbing subcode, and all applicable
chapters of this Code as required and may issue summonses for violations
thereof.
§ 53-60. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Code Enforcement Official shall be as
the Borough Council from time to time provides for in the annual salary
ordinance and implementing resolutions.
§ 53-57 MUTUAL AID § 53-60
46:143
Chapter 55
OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND
§ 55-1. Fund established.
There is hereby established a fund entitled "County/Municipal Open Space,
Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Fund" in the Borough
of Allendale.
§ 55-2. Valuation tax established.
§ 55-3. Amount or rate of levy may be subdivided.
The amount or rate of the annual levy may be subdivided to reflect the
relative portions thereof to be allocated to any of the respective purposes
specified in § 55-1 above by the governing body after conducting at least
one public hearing thereon.
§ 55-4. Tax to be separate line item.
The dedicated tax established by § 55-2A herein shall be shown as a
separate line item on each property owner's tax bill and not as part of the
municipal tax rate in that it is to be a dedicated tax for the purpose set forth
above.
Chapter 59
PERSONNEL POLICIES, PRACTICES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Background checks — See Ch. 4.
Defined Contribution Retirement
Program — See Ch. 22.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
Residency exemption — See Ch. 63.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 67.
A. There is hereby established for the year 2006 and subsequent years a
$0.005 per $100 of assessed value per year valuation tax which shall be
dedicated specifically for acquisition, development and maintenance of
property and lands for recreation and conservation purposes;
acquisition and preservation of farmland and historical properties and
payment of debt services for purposes allowed in accordance with law
(N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1 et seq.).
B. The funds derived from this dedicated tax shall be maintained in a
separate fund account and shall be utilized only for the purposes
authorized pursuant to this chapter and the statute referred to
hereinabove.
§ 53-60 ALLENDALE CODE § 55-4
46:144
Chapter 60
PERSONNEL PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Background checks — See Ch. 4.
Defined Contribution Retirement
Program — See Ch. 22.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Residency exemption — See Ch. 63.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 67.
§ 60-1. Titles established.
The Governing Body shall, by ordinance, establish titles for public
employment by the Borough in salary ranges for Borough employees. Said
title shall conform to applicable law.
§ 60-2. Adoption of personnel policies and procedures.
The Governing Body shall, by resolution, adopt and amend from time to
time personnel polices and procedures, including rates concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all employees of the
Borough; however, if there is a conflict between said personnel policies
and procedures and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining
agreement, personnel services contract or federal or state law, the terms
and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail, but in all other cases the
practices adopted pursuant to this chapter shall prevail.
§ 60-3. Implementation.
The Borough Administrator shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section.
§ 60-4. Inconsistent provisions.
Chapter 59, Personnel Policies, Practices and Regulations, to the extent
inconsistent or in conflict with the terms hereof, is hereby repealed.
§ 60-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
§ 55-4 MUTUAL AID § 60-5
46:145
chapter which shall remain in full force and effect and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 60-6. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 60-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 63
RESIDENCY EXEMPTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
§ 63-1. Residency requirements.
No officer or employee of the Borough shall, as a condition of employment,
be required to be a resident of the Borough.
§ 63-2. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 63-3. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 63-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 60-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 63-4
46:146
Chapter 67
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defined Contribution Retirement
Program — See Ch. 22.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 53.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 59.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 60.
§ 63-4 MUTUAL AID § 63-4
46:147

ARTICLE I
Salaries and Compensation
[The salaries and compensation of municipal officers and employees
are fixed periodically by the Governing Body. Copies of the current
salary ordinances or resolutions are on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.]
MUTUAL AID § 63-4
46:149

ARTICLE II
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 6-26-2014]
§ 67-1. Direct deposit mandated.
All full-time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Allendale are mandated to have direct
deposit of their compensation as of July 1, 2014, in accordance with Chapter
28, P.L. 2013, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f, Subsection b.
§ 67-2. Exemptions.
A. Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough
of Allendale are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
B. Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the
direct deposit mandate to the Borough of Allendale's Chief Financial
Officer. Such requests will be presented to the Borough of Allendale's
Governing Body within 30 days. The Borough of Allendale's Governing
Body may grant such an exemption by resolution and only for good
cause.
§ 67-1 MUTUAL AID § 67-2
46:151
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 81
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 67-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 67-2
46:152
ARTICLE I
General Program Purposes, Procedures
§ 81-1. Affordable housing obligation.
A. This section of the Borough Code sets forth regulations regarding the
low- and moderate-income housing units in the Borough, consistent
with the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing", N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq.,27 and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
except where modified by the requirements for very-low-income
housing as established in P.L. 2008, c. 46 (the "Roberts Bill", codified at
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1) as reflected in the terms of the settlement
agreement between the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center
(FSHC), such that the statutory requirement to provide very-lowincome
units equal to 13% of affordable units approved and constructed
after July 17, 2008, to be affordable to households at 30% of the
regional median income with half of the very-low-income units made
available to families, overrides the UHAC requirement that 10% of all
low- and moderate-income units must be affordable at 35% of the
regional median income, and the Borough's constitutional obligation to
provide a fair share of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income
households. [Amended 5-23-2019]
B. This chapter is intended to assure that very-low, low- and moderateincome
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on
affordability over time and that very-low, low- and moderate-income
households shall occupy these units. This chapter shall apply to all
inclusionary developments and 100% affordable developments
(including those funded with low-income housing tax credit financing)
except where inconsistent with applicable law.
C. The Allendale Borough Joint Land Use Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. The Plan has also been endorsed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Allendale. The Fair Share Plan
describes the ways the Borough shall address its fair share for low- and
moderate-income housing as determined by the Superior Court and
documented in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
D. This chapter implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C 5:93,28 as may be amended and
supplemented.
E. The Borough shall file monitoring and status reports with Fair Share
Housing Center (FSHC) and place the reports on its municipal website.
Any plan evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
shall be available to the public at the Allendale Municipal Building, 500
27.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
28.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-1 MUTUAL AID § 81-1
46:153
§ 81-2. Definitions.
As used herein the following terms shall have the following meanings:
West Crescent Avenue, Allendale, New Jersey 07401. [Amended
5-23-2019]
F. By September 15 of each year through the end of the period of third
round judgment of repose, the Borough will provide annual reporting of
the status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website, with a copy of such posting
provided to all parties to the Borough's court-approved settlement
agreements, using forms previously developed for this purpose by the
Council on Affordable Housing or any other forms endorsed by the
Special Master and FSHC. [Amended 5-23-2019]
G. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be
taken by the Borough during the ten-year period of protection provided
in the Borough's Court-approved agreement with FSHC. The Borough
agrees to comply with those provisions as follows:
(1) By July 1, 2020, the Borough must prepare a midpoint realistic
opportunity review, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313,
which the Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its
Plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled
mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity. Such
posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to the
municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the Court regarding these issues. In the event the
Court determines that a site or mechanism no longer presents a
realistic opportunity and should be replaced or supplemented, then
the municipality shall have the opportunity to supplement or revise
its plan to correct any deficiency.
(2) Within 30 days of September 15, 2020, and September 15, 2024,
the Borough shall prepare a review of compliance with the verylow-
income housing requirements required by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1 and its Court-approved settlement agreement with
FSHC. The Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its verylow-
income requirements, including the family very-low-income
requirements referenced herein and in the Borough's settlement
agreement with FSHC. Such posting shall invite any interested
party to submit comments to the municipality and FSHC on the
issue of whether the municipality has complied with its very-lowincome
housing obligation.
§ 81-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-2
46:154
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this ordinance, N.J.A.C. 5:91, N.J.A.C.
5:9329 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.430; in the case
of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the
standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a portion of
which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:9331, and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
29.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
30.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
31.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-2 MUTUAL AID § 81-2
46:155
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where the unit
is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the units are occupied
by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3) the development has been
designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2)
of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements includes, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D, and E
boarding homes as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and
mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
§ 81-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-2
46:156
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
FAIR SHARE PLAN — The plan that describes the mechanisms, strategies
and the funding sources, if any, by which the Borough proposes to address
its affordable housing obligation as established in the Housing Element,
including the draft ordinances necessary to implement that plan, and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
HOUSING ELEMENT — The portion of the Borough's Master Plan, required
by the Municipal Land Use Law ("MLUL"), N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(3) and the
Act, that includes the information required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1 and
establishes the Borough's fair share obligation.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.[Amended 5-23-2019]
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or approved by the New
Jersey Superior Court.
§ 81-2 MUTUAL AID § 81-2
46:157
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — The regional median income by
household size for the applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or
approved by the New Jersey Superior Court.[Amended 5-23-2019]
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the
regional median as defined by adopted/approved regional income limits.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit
financed under UHORP or MONI.
SPECIAL MASTER — An expert appointed by a judge to make sure that
judicial orders are followed. A master's function is essentially investigative,
compiling evidence or documents to inform some future action by the court.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.[Amended 5-23-2019]
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
§ 81-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-2
46:158
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 81-3. Borough-wide mandatory set-aside.
A. A multifamily or single-family attached development providing a
minimum of five new housing units created through any municipal
rezoning or Joint Land Use Board action on a use or density variance,
redevelopment plan, or rehabilitation plan that provide for densities at
or above six units per acre is required to include an affordable housing
set-aside of 20% if the affordable units will be for sale and 15% if the
affordable units will be for rent. This requirement does not give any
developer the right to any such rezoning, variance or other relief, or
establish any obligation on the part of the Borough of Allendale to grant
such rezoning, variance or other relief. No subdivision shall be
permitted or approved for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this
requirement.
B. This Borough-wide mandatory set-aside requirement does not
supersede the effects or requirements of the Inclusionary Overlay
Zoning Districts established per sections § 270-185 et. seq. for any
inclusionary multifamily residential development that occurs within the
boundaries of those districts.
C. In the event that the inclusionary set-aside percentage (15% or 20%) of
the total number of residential units does not result in a full integer, the
developer may choose one of two options of addressing the fractional
unit:
(1) The developer shall round the set-aside upward to construct a
whole additional affordable unit; or
(2) If the set-aside includes a fractional unit equal to 0.49 or less, the
developer may round the set-aside downward and construct the
lesser whole number of affordable units, but must also make a
payment in-lieu of constructing the fractional additional unit
("fractional payment in-lieu").
(a) The fractional payment in-lieu amount shall be calculated as
the fractional unit multiplied by the base payment in-lieu dollar
amount established in § 81-4C(1) of the Borough Code.
(3) For Example: If seven total units are developed at an inclusionary
site, a 20% set-aside would require 1.4 affordable units. Per the
requirements above:
(a) The developer shall round up the 0.4 unit to one whole
affordable unit so as to construct a total of two affordable
housing units, in accordance with § 81-3C(1); or
(b) In accordance with § 81-3C(2), the developer shall round the
set-aside downward so as to construct only one affordable unit
§ 81-2 MUTUAL AID § 81-3
46:159
§ 81-4. New construction.
The following requirements shall apply to all new or planned developments
that contain low- and moderate-income housing units.
and shall pay into the Borough's affordable housing trust fund
a fractional in-lieu payment equal to the dollar amount
established in § 81-4C(1) multiplied by 0.4 units.
A. Phasing. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent
upon the affordable housing development meeting the following
phasing schedule for low- and moderate-income units whether
developed in a single phase development, or in a multiphase
development:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
B. Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
C. Payments-in-lieu and off-site construction. The standards for the
collection of payments-in-lieu of constructing affordable units or
standards for constructing affordable units off-site shall be in
accordance with the requirements below:
(1) The base dollar amount of the payment in-lieu of constructing an
affordable unit at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be
pursuant to COAH's regulations and/or the amount in a
development pro forma on file with the Borough Clerk. This amount
shall be adjusted periodically by the Borough to reflect the most
current and accurate market conditions or better cover the cost to
the Borough to subsidize affordable housing construction. The
payment shall be imposed as a condition of development approval
by the Joint Land Use Board. [Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No.
18-22]
(a) During the development approval process, a developer may
demonstrate to the Governing Body that the actual
construction cost of an affordable unit less estimated
capitalized revenue at the development in question is lower
than the imposed payment in-lieu in § 81-4C(1). At its
discretion, the Governing Body may impose a payment in-lieu
§ 81-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-4
46:160
amount equal or proximate to the amount estimated by the
developer.
D. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source
as market units within the affordable development.
E. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Within rental developments, of the total number of affordable
rental units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income
households.
(4) At least half of the affordable units in each bedroom distribution
within each affordable housing development shall be affordable to
low-income households.
(5) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two
bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(6) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
F. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all new restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted multistory dwelling units attached to at least one other
dwelling unit shall be subject to the technical design standards of
the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
§ 81-4 MUTUAL AID § 81-4
46:161
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted
multistory dwelling units attached to at least one other dwelling
unit shall have the following features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
[1] An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Borough has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Allendale's affordable housing
trust fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection F(2)(e)[2] herein
shall be used by the Borough for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of any affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Borough of Allendale.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough of Allendale's affordable housing trust fund in
care of the Municipal Treasurer who shall ensure that the
§ 81-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-4
46:162
funds are deposited into the affordable housing trust fund
and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
G. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and by the Superior Court, utilizing the regional income
limits established pursuant to § 81-4F(10) of the Borough's Code.
[Amended 5-23-2019]
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
(a) At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be met:
(a) A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a one-person
household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
§ 81-4 MUTUAL AID § 81-4
46:163
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be met:
(a) A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a one-person
household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price. [Amended
5-23-2019]
(10) Income limits for all units for which income limits are not already
established through a federal program exempted from the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 shall
be updated by the Borough annually within 30 days of the
publication of determinations of median income by HUD as follows:
[Amended 5-23-2019]
§ 81-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-4
46:164
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for Region 1 based
on the median income by household size, which shall be
established by a regional weighted average of the uncapped
Section 8 income limits published by HUD. To compute this
regional income limit, the HUD determination of median
county income for a family of four is multiplied by the
estimated households within the county according to the most
recent decennial census. The resulting product for each county
within the housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the
estimated total households from the most recent decennial
census in Region 1. This quotient represents the regional
weighted average of median income for a household of four.
The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of
four shall be 80% of the regional weighted average median
income for a family of four. The income limit for a low-income
unit for a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD
determination of the regional weighted average median
income for a family of four. The income limit for a very-lowincome
unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the regional
weighted average median income for a family of four. These
income limits shall be adjusted by household size based on
multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. In no event shall the income limits be less than
those for the previous year.
(b) The income limits calculated each year shall be the result of
applying the percentages set forth in Subsection G(10)(a)
above to HUD's determination of median income for the
relevant fiscal year, and shall be utilized until the Borough
updates the income limits after HUD has published revised
determinations of median income for the next fiscal year.
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Borough annually by
taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated
pursuant to Subsection G(10)(a) above over the previous year's
income limits, and applying the same percentage increase to
the regional asset limit from the prior year. In no event shall
the regional asset limit be less than that for the previous year.
(11) The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may
be increased annually based on the percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area, upon
its publication for the prior calendar year. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing tax
credits. [Amended 5-23-2019]
§ 81-4 MUTUAL AID § 81-4
46:165
§ 81-5. Condominium and homeowners' association fees.
For any affordable housing unit that is part of a condominium association
and/or homeowners' association, the master deed shall reflect that the
association fee assessed for each affordable housing unit shall be
established at 100% of the market rate fee.
§ 81-6. through § 81-9. (Reserved)
(12) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall
be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program. [Added
5-23-2019]
§ 81-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-6
46:166
ARTICLE II
Affordable Unit Controls and Requirements
§ 81-10. Purpose.
The requirements of this article apply to all developments that contain
affordable housing units, including any currently unanticipated future
developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing units.
§ 81-11. Affirmative marketing.
A. The Borough shall adopt by resolution an affirmative marketing plan,
subject to approval of the Superior Court, compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region 1 and covers the period of deed
restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 1,
comprised of Bergen, Hudson, Sussex, and Passaic Counties.
D. The administrative agent designated by the Borough shall assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units is consistent with the
affirmative marketing plan for the municipality.
E. The Borough shall add to the list of community and regional
organizations in its affirmative marketing plan, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15(f)(5), Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey State
Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, Bergen County
NAACP, Bergen County Urban League, and Bergen County Housing
Coalition, and shall, as part of its regional affirmative marketing
strategies during its implementation of this plan, provide notice to
those organizations of all available affordable housing units. The
Borough also agrees to require any other entities, including developers
or persons or companies retained to do affirmative marketing, to
comply with this subsection.
F. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
§ 81-10 MUTUAL AID § 81-11
46:167
§ 81-12. Occupancy standards.
§ 81-13. Selection of occupants of affordable housing units.
§ 81-14. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
H. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Borough of Allendale.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children;
(3) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall be
provided in the municipal operating manual.
A. The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to select
occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
B. A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the controls on affordability for a period of at least 30 years,
until the municipality takes action to release the controls on
affordability.
B. Rehabilitated owner-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standards shall be subject to affordability controls for a period of 10
years.
C. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
§ 81-11 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-14
46:168
§ 81-15. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 81-16. Buyer income eligibility.
D. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
E. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
§ 81-14 MUTUAL AID § 81-17
46:169
§ 81-17. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 81-18. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 81-19. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject
to the controls on affordability for a period of at least 30 years, until the
municipality takes action to release the controls on affordability.
(1) Restricted rental units created as part of developments receiving
low income housing tax credits of 9% must comply with a control
period of not less than a thirty-year compliance period plus a
fifteen-year extended use period.
B. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standards shall be subject to affordability controls for a period of 10
years.
C. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Bergen. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
D. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
§ 81-17 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-19
46:170
§ 81-20. Tenant income eligibility.
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income, lowincome
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to
the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40%
for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
§ 81-19 MUTUAL AID § 81-20
46:171
§ 81-21. Conversions. [Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
Each affordable housing unit created through the conversion of a
nonresidential structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall
be subject to the affordability controls for a new housing unit.
§ 81-22. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 81-23. through § 81-24. (Reserved)
(5) The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.832 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
32.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-23
46:172
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 81-25. Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 81-26. Administrative agent.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough of Allendale
is hereby established. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by duly adopted resolution of the Borough Council and be
subject to the approval by the Superior Court.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison must be either a full-time or part-time
employee of the Borough of Allendale.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison must meet the requirements for
qualifications, including initial and periodic training found in N.J.A.C.
5:93.33
D. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Allendale, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(2) The implementation of the affirmative marketing plan and
affordability controls.
(3) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative agent.
(4) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Allendale's Fair Share Plan;
(5) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required by
the Superior Court;
(6) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(7) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court.
A. The Borough shall designate by resolution of the Borough Council,
subject to the approval of the Superior Court, one or more
administrative agents to administer newly constructed affordable units
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:9334 and UHAC.
33.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
34.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-25 MUTUAL AID § 81-26
46:173
§ 81-27. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
B. An operating manual shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to
be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to approval
of the Superior Court. The operating manuals shall be available for
public inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s)
of the administrative agent(s).
C. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC and which are
described in full detail in the operating manual, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
(1) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court;
(2) Affirmative marketing;
(3) Household certification;
(4) Affordability controls;
(5) Records retention;
(6) Resale and re-rental;
(7) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(8) Enforcement, although the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(9) The administrative agent shall, as delegated by the Borough
Council, have the authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities, hereunder.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
§ 81-26 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-27
46:174
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Borough of
Allendale Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount
of rent illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the
same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderateincome
unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession
terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to
the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by
§ 81-27 MUTUAL AID § 81-27
46:175
§ 81-28. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated pursuant
to this chapter shall be filed in writing with the Borough.
the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In the
event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens,
the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit
by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit
could have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing
affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable
housing units.
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 81-27 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-28
46:176
ARTICLE IV
Development Fees
§ 81-29. Purpose.
§ 81-30. Basic requirements.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. COAH was authorized by P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2), and the Statewide Non-residential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7) to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that were
under the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of competent jurisdiction and
had a COAH- or court-approved spending plan were permitted to retain
fees collected from nonresidential developments. [Amended
5-23-2019]
C. In Re: Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the Mount Laurel
IV decision, the Supreme Court remanded COAH's duties to the
Superior Court. As a result, affordable housing development fee
collections and expenditures from the municipal affordable housing
trust funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair Share Plans
through July 1, 2025, are under the Court's jurisdiction and are subject
to approval by the Court.
D. This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 through 3835. Fees
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This chapter shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.36
A. COAH had previously approved ordinances adopting and amending
Article II of Chapter 2, which established the Borough's affordable
housing trust fund. The Borough's development fee ordinance which
has been further amended and relocated to Article IV of Chapter 81
remains effective pursuant to the Superior Court's jurisdiction in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93.8.37
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7, respectively.
36.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
37.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-29 MUTUAL AID § 81-30
46:177
§ 81-31. Residential development fees.
B. COAH approved the Borough's initial Spending Plan in 1994 and
approved the Borough's Third Round Spending Plan in 2009, and an
amendment to the Spending Plan in 2010. Subsequently, the Superior
Court approved second and third amendments to the Borough's Third
Round Spending Plan on September 20, 2016, and January 5, 2017. At
such time that the Court approves the Borough's Amended Third Round
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and the fourth amended Third
Round Spending Plan, the Borough may begin spending development
fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-838 for the new 2018 Plan
activities.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all Zoning Districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the
site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
38.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-30 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-31
46:178
§ 81-32. Nonresidential development fees.
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced as a
result of a natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 81-31 MUTUAL AID § 81-32
46:179
§ 81-33. Collection procedures.
(2) The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
§ 81-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-33
46:180
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should Allendale fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount
of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final
inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that
estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth in
Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Allendale. Appeals
from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax Procedure
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Allendale. Appeals from a determination of the Director may be
made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
§ 81-33 MUTUAL AID § 81-34
46:181
§ 81-34. Affordable housing trust fund.
§ 81-35. Use of funds.
A. There shall be maintained a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls. [Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22]
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Allendale's affordable
housing program.
C. Allendale Borough previously provided COAH with written
authorization, in the form of three-party escrow agreements between
the municipality, Lakeland Bank, and COAH, to permit COAH to direct
the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8. The
Superior Court shall now have such jurisdiction to direct the
disbursement of the Borough's trust funds per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.39
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by the Court to address the Borough's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
39.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-34 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-35
46:182
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.1640
and specified in the approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Allendale for past housing
activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Allendale may contract with a private or public entity to administer any
part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.16.41
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
40.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
41.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 81-35 MUTUAL AID § 81-35
46:183
§ 81-36. Monitoring. [Amended 5-23-2019]
By September 15, or as otherwise required by the State of New Jersey, of
each year through 2025, Allendale shall provide annual reporting of trust
fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (DCA),
COAH, or Local Government Services (LGS), or other entity designated
by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for
this purpose by the DCA, COAH, or LGS. This reporting shall include an
accounting of all housing trust fund activity, including the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with Allendale's housing program, as well as to the
expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan approved by the
Court.
§ 81-37. Ongoing collection of fees. [Amended 11-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-22]
The ability for Allendale to impose, collect and expend development fees
shall expire with its Court-issued Judgment of Compliance and Repose
unless Allendale has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
with the Court or other appropriate jurisdiction, has filed a declaratory
judgment action, and has received the Court's approval of its development
fee ordinance. If Allendale fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance
and Repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited
into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant
to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Allendale shall
not impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its Judgment
Compliance and Repose, nor shall Allendale retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. Allendale shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and
Repose.
units, and compliance with the monitoring requirements set forth in the
Court-approved September 15, 2017, executed settlement agreement
with Fair Share Housing Center. Legal or other fees related to litigation
opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's
regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the affordable housing
trust fund.
§ 81-35 ALLENDALE CODE § 81-37
46:184
Chapter 82
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26, Art. I.
Police Department — See Ch. 26, Art. II.
Noise — See Ch. 170.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are two-fold: to provide standards and
regulations for various types of intrusion, burglar and other emergency
alarm equipment which produce a visual or audible signal or function by
direct line, radio, telephone or by any other means, requiring a response
by the Police Department or other municipal agencies; and to provide for
the installation in the headquarters of the Police Department or such other
place as may be designated by the Chief of Police of an alarm console as
herein defined.
§ 82-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
and designed to summon or alert the police or other municipal agencies in
response thereto.
§ 82-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The approved panel installed in accordance with
directions of the Police Department for the purpose of giving visual or
audible response to alarm systems installed within the Borough of Allendale
and connected to said alarm console. The alarm console shall be installed,
operated and maintained at such place in the Police Department
headquarters or in such other place as the Chief of Police shall designate.
Said alarm console shall be of such design, capacity, size, power, utility,
efficiency and quality as the Chief of Police shall recommend to the Mayor
and Council. Said alarm console shall be furnished, installed, operated and
maintained in good working order exclusively by and at the sole cost and
expense of the licensee, who shall, in consideration of said exclusive license,
have the privilege of installing, operating and maintaining the alarm console
and have the use and occupancy of the area designated by the Chief of
Police.
§ 81-37 MUTUAL AID § 82-3
46:185
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device or an assembly of equipment and
devices to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Police Department or other municipal agency
may be expected to respond. In this chapter, the term "alarm system" shall
include the terms "alarm device," "local alarm" and "dial alarm."
BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR — The Borough Administrator of the Borough
of Allendale.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Borough of Allendale or his
designated representative.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The designated representative of the
Chief of Police to perform a function required or permitted by this chapter
under the supervision of the Chief of Police and who shall be a member of
the Allendale Police Department.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines transmitting
an alarm directly through the police switchboard providing warning of
intrusion or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated by inadvertence,
negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person other than an
intruder, and including as well alarms caused by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment but not including alarms created by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm console.
LICENSEE — The person who holds the exclusive license to install, operate
and maintain the alarm console pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which when activated produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console or the police switchboard, i.e.,
store burglar alarms actuating bell devices providing warning of intrusion
or other peril. The term "local alarm" shall not include an alarm system
solely connected to a registered motor vehicle. The term "local alarm" shall
also not include equipment designed to signal solely within a building or
series of buildings, if owned by the same person on which it is located,
and which does not emit signals, visible or audible, to persons outside such
building or buildings.
PERMITTEE — Any person who owns an alarm device who has obtained a
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All permits shall be
issued and fees paid therefor on a calendar-year basis renewable on January
1 of each succeeding year.
PERSON — Any natural person or individual or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation or any
other business entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Allendale.
WRITTEN NOTICE — Written notice used herein shall mean by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
§ 82-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 82-4
46:186
§ 82-4. Dial alarms.
No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall have first been registered
with the Chief of Police as hereinafter required and approved by the Chief
of Police after approval thereof by the New Jersey Bell Telephone Company
and a test conducted by the alarm owner or on his or her behalf.
A. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a separate special number to be
provided by the Chief of Police. No dial alarm shall be coded to dial the
general police number.
B. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
police headquarters in the event of a false alarm.
C. The owner of each dial alarm system shall pay to the Borough of
Allendale an annual fee, as set by resolution of the Borough Council, to
cover the cost of registration and testing and to amortize the cost of the
special telephone line or lines required in police headquarters. The
annual fee shall be due and payable to the Borough of Allendale upon
installation of any dial alarm system or, in the case of a dial alarm
system in existence at the time of the effective date of this chapter,
within 30 days after the effective date. [Amended 9-25-1986]
D. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedures
and penalties set forth in this chapter.
E. If any person has any dial alarm in existence at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, it shall be reprogrammed within 30 days of said
effective date to comply with this chapter.
F. If any dial alarm hereafter shall be found to be dialing the general
police number rather than the special number, the Chief of Police shall
send the person in whose name the telephone is listed a written notice
requiring compliance with this chapter. If the occupant or telephone
subscriber fails to comply within 30 days after service of said notice,
said failure shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the person
shall be liable to the penalties as set forth under § 82-9 hereof. Each and
every day that this chapter is not complied with shall constitute a
separate offense.
G. The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clear and intelligible and
in the format approved by the Chief of Police. No such message shall be
transmitted more than three times as a result of a single stimulus of the
mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15 seconds, and the time gap
between each shall not exceed 10 seconds.
H. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
§ 82-4 MUTUAL AID § 82-4
46:187
§ 82-5. Systems to be registered.
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
system has been registered with and approved by the Chief of Police.
I. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. On failure to comply with the operational requirements, the
owner of a dial alarm shall disconnect until the operational
requirements are reestablished. If, upon written notice from the Chief
of Police, the owner of a dial alarm shall fail to disconnect said alarm
within 10 days, such action shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
and said person or persons shall be liable for the penalties set forth in
§ 82-9 hereof.
A. A dial alarm system shall be deemed registered when the annual fee has
been remitted to the Borough of Allendale and a permit has been issued
by the Chief of Police.
B. Local alarm systems shall be deemed registered when the occupant of
the building in which the alarm is installed has filed an approval
registration form with the Chief of Police.
C. All permittees are required to register their alarms, no matter what the
type, with the Chief of Police on a form which shall include: the name,
type and location of the device; the name, address and a twenty-fourhour
telephone number of the alarm installer or person responsible for
its maintenance; a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm; the person responsible to remit any fees or liens assessed under
this chapter; and all other information as may be required by the Chief
of Police.
D. No further registration will be required unless a change occurs in the
information previously submitted with respect to any alarm system. It
shall be the duty of the occupant of a building served by an alarm
system, within 10 days of any change in the registration information, to
notify the Chief of Police by completing a new registration form. Failure
to comply with these provisions will be deemed a violation of this
chapter and will subject the violator to the penalties contained in § 82-9
hereof.
E. Each permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of
Allendale and its agents, servants and employees from and against all
claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses and to release the
Borough of Allendale and its agents, servants and employees from any
and all liability or damages in any way resulting from or arising out of or
connected with the installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm
system or any act or omission connected therewith.
§ 82-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 82-6
46:188
§ 82-6. Bids for alarm console to be solicited.
Upon adoption of this chapter, the Chief of Police shall recommend to
the Mayor and Council written specifications covering the alarm console
hereinbefore defined. The Borough Administrator shall cause to be
published an advertisement inviting sealed bids for the installation,
operation, maintenance and fees for the alarm console in accordance with
this chapter and the specifications of the Chief of Police. Said bids shall be
in a form prescribed by the Borough Administrator.
§ 82-7. False alarms.
§ 82-8. Testing alarms.
Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this
chapter shall notify the police headquarters immediately prior to and after
the testing is completed. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation herein
and subjects such person to such penalties as set forth in § 82-9 hereof.
A. In the event of the occurrence of three false alarms in a calendar year,
the alarm user shall, within three days after written notice to do so,
complete a written report to the Chief of Police setting forth the cause
of the false alarms, the corrective action taken, a statement as to
whether the alarm system has been inspected by an alarm service
company and such other information as the Chief of Police may
reasonably require.
B. Service fees.
(1) A written notice by the Chief of Police shall be given upon the third
occurrence of a false alarm in a calendar year. Thereafter, a service
fee shall be assessed against the alarm user, in an amount set by
resolution of the Borough Council. [Amended 9-25-1986]
(2) Service fees shall be payable to the Borough of Allendale within 30
days of service of written notice of fourth, fifth or subsequent false
alarms.
C. In addition to the service fee of the fourth or subsequent false alarms
which have resulted due to the failure of the alarm system user to take
corrective measures to have the alarm comply with this chapter, the
owner of said alarm system shall disconnect the alarm system within 10
days after written notice from the Chief of Police. Upon failure to
disconnect after due notice, the alarm system owner shall be subject to
the penalties contained in § 82-9 hereof. Each and every day said owner
shall fail to comply shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to remit
the required service fee or the misuse of the permitted number of false
alarms will result in the disconnection of the alarm system from the
alarm console at police headquarters after written notice to the alarm
system owner or user.
§ 82-6 MUTUAL AID § 82-9
46:189
§ 82-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-25-1986]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 82-10. General regulations.
§ 82-10.1. Alarm registration annual fee. [Added 5-13-2010]
The annual fee for any registered alarm system shall be $25.
§ 82-11. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police shall from time to time promulgate rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for the efficient management
of the same. Said rules shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
Chapter 85
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to inspection of the premises on which said alarm
devices are located at reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative.
B. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter. Maintaining or installing unauthorized equipment shall be a
violation of this chapter, and the person or persons responsible shall be
subject to such penalties as are set forth in § 82-9 hereof.
C. Any licensee for the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any alarm company shall provide for a representative to be
on call at all times, and such repair service shall be provided
immediately, when necessary, after notification by the Police
Department of any malfunction of any equipment or false alarms.
D. In addition to the penalties herein otherwise set forth, the Chief of
Police may revoke any license or permit upon 10 days' written notice
when the Chief of Police has determined that the alarm owner or
permittee has failed to make the proper repairs and has failed to
comply with this chapter.
E. Any alarm sounding an audible signal shall have built into its
mechanism a device that shall automatically shut off the audible signal
within 15 minutes.
§ 82-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 82-11
46:190
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Sale
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 3, Art. I of the 1967 Code]
§ 85-1. Number of licenses.
§ 85-2. Fees. [Amended 4-26-1973; 9-8-1977; 3-26-1981; 3-22-1984;
4-11-1985; 2-27-1986; 4-27-1989; 12-11-1997; 2-28-2002;
5-27-2004; 5-24-2007; 10-28-2010]
The annual license fee for each type of license be and the same is hereby
fixed as follows:
§ 85-3. Hours of sale. [Amended 9-26-1974; 6-11-1981; 7-9-1981]
§ 85-4. Distribution or transporting in violation of provisions.
No person shall possess, sell, distribute or transport alcoholic beverages
within the Borough of Allendale in violation of the provisions of an act
entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," and amendments thereof
and supplements thereto.
A. The number of licenses to sell alcoholic beverages at retail in the
Borough of Allendale be and the same is hereby fixed for each
classification of license as follows:
(1) Plenary retail consumption licenses: three.
(2) Plenary retail distribution licenses: four.
B. No other type of license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be granted in
the Borough of Allendale.
A. Plenary retail consumption license: $2,500.
B. Plenary retail distribution license: $2,500.
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses. No alcoholic beverages shall be
sold, served or consumed on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Allendale between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. on Sundays. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, it
shall be permissible to sell, serve and consume alcoholic beverages on
premises licensed for this purpose on January 1 of each year from 2:00
a.m. until 4:00 a.m.
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold
on premises licensed for the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages in the
Borough of Allendale between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays and Saturdays and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. on Sunday. [Amended 12-23-1996]
§ 85-1 MUTUAL AID § 85-5
46:191
§ 85-5. Number of licenses limited.
Not more than one license shall be granted to any person, corporation,
partnership, limited partnership or association in said Borough, and said
license shall cover only the licensed premises.
§ 85-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 85-5
46:192
ARTICLE II
Consumption
[Adopted 6-12-1975]
§ 85-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the terms and words as set forth below shall be
defined as follows:
CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONE — The area as defined and described in the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale and the Zoning Map included
therein as defined in the provisions of Chapter 270, §§ 270-4 through 270-6,
of the Code of the Borough of Allendale, and further described to include
the following areas:
CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Drinking or possession
in open containers or possession in nonoriginal containers of any alcoholic
beverage as defined by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, firm, club, organization or
partnership. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall
include the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine.
PLACES OF PUBLIC USE — Any facility available for public use and
convenience, including streets, highways, alleys, roads, sidewalks, parks or
other public grounds, parking lots, train and bus depots, lavatories, rest
rooms, vacant or unimproved Borough lands and other public or quasipublic
places, excepting therefrom any premises or places specifically
licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
West Allendale Avenue from Franklin Turnpike to the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad right-of-way.
A.
B. Memorial Drive from West Allendale Avenue to West Orchard Street.
C. Maple Street from West Allendale Avenue to 250 feet northerly.
D. Myrtle Avenue from West Allendale Avenue to Central Avenue.
E. Central Avenue from West Allendale Avenue to Myrtle Avenue.
Rockland Electric Company right-of-way along the easterly side of Erie
Lackawanna Railroad from Park Avenue to West Orchard Street.
F.
Park Avenue from West Allendale Avenue to the Erie Lackawanna
Railroad right-of-way.
G.
Park Avenue from Erie Lackawanna Railroad right-of-way to 265 feet
southerly of Erie Plaza.
H.
I. Erie Plaza from Park Avenue to West Allendale Avenue.
§ 85-6 MUTUAL AID § 85-7
46:193
§ 85-7. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in central business
zone prohibited.
The consumption of alcoholic beverages, as described herein, is hereby
prohibited in all places of public use, as defined herein, in the central
business zone of the Borough of Allendale, excepting therefrom any
premises specifically licensed for the sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
§ 85-8. Consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under legal
age prohibited. [Added 3-26-1992]
§ 85-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the terms and provisions of this article
shall, for each and every violation, be subject to imprisonment in the Bergen
County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or a fine not to exceed $500,
or both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction may be
had.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage in or on any
school property, public conveyance, public place or place of public
assembly or on private property shall be in violation of this article.
Upon conviction, such underage person shall be subject to a fine of
$250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense; have a
New Jersey driving privilege suspended or postponed for six months; at
the discretion of the court, perform community service for a period not
to exceed 90 days; and, if considered necessary by the court, be
referred to an alcohol treatment program at the defendant's expense.
The penalty set forth herein shall apply only to a violation of this article.
[Amended 10-25-2001]
B. This section shall not apply to persons under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages who possess or consume alcoholic beverages in the
presence of and with the permission of the parent or legal guardian of
said person, providing that said guardian is of the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages or if alcoholic beverage is being consumed in any
organized religious observance, ceremony or rite.
§ 85-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 85-9
46:194
Chapter 89
AMUSEMENT GAMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 95.
§ 89-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAME — All automatic amusement games of
the type commonly known and designated as bagatelle, baseball or pinball
games or similar amusement machines or devices operated, maintained,
used or actuated by means of a token, coin or similar object for the purpose
of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged.
§ 89-2. Multiple or arcade-type operations prohibited.
§ 89-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be liable to a penalty of not
more than $200 for each such offense or imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 93
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 170.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Animals in public places — See Ch. 203, Arts.
V and VI.
A. It shall be unlawful to maintain in or on any premises for use by the
public or to which the public is invited any multiple or arcade-type of
automatic amusement game operation in excess of two such devices.
This does not include vending machines which are not gaming or
amusement devices nor any coin-operated mechanical musical device.
B. This chapter is not intended to prohibit automatic amusement games in
commercial establishments such as restaurants or bars, provided that
there are no more than two such devices in any one establishment.
§ 85-9 MUTUAL AID § 89-3
46:195

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 20 of the 1967 Code by the Governing
Body]
§ 93-1. Licenses and registration tags. [Amended 9-25-1986]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., shall, in the month of January each year, apply
to the Borough Clerk for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
Such licenses and registration tags shall be issued pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of state statute, and all dogs shall be kept
and controlled in the manner provided for in such statute and be subject to
all the provisions thereof.
§ 93-2. Fees. [Amended 10-24-1974; 10-12-1978; 10-25-1979;
10-22-1981; 7-28-1983]
A. Pursuant to said statute, the annual license fee for any spayed/neutered
dog, and each renewal thereof, shall be $10, including those fees
prescribed by state law for population-control funds. Pursuant to said
statute, the annual license fee for any non-spayed/neutered dog, and
each renewal thereof, shall be $13, including those fees prescribed by
state law for population-control funds. [Amended 9-25-1986;
2-11-2016]
B. From February 1 until March 31 of each year, there shall be an
additional late registration fee in the amount of $5, but the applicant
shall not be subject to a summons.
C. After March 31 of each year, in addition to the fees and late registration
fee set forth above, an applicant shall be subject to a summons and fine.
D. Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned and licensed in the State of New Jersey, and
such license and tag shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence of
compliance with this section.
E. In the event that a procured license or registration tag is lost, a fee of
$5 shall be charged for the replacement thereof. [Amended
2-11-2016]
F. The annual fee for a potentially dangerous dog license and renewal
thereof shall be $500. [Added 4-24-1997; amended 2-11-2016]
G. All other license fees shall be as provided in said statute, and all said
fees and other funds collected shall be received and disposed of in
accordance with said statute. [Amended 4-24-1997]
§ 93-1 MUTUAL AID § 93-3
46:197
§ 93-3. Pound and Dog Warden.
The Borough Council may hereafter, by resolution, establish a pound and
shall appoint a Dog Warden, who shall hold office for such length of time,
perform such duties and receive such compensation as the Council may
hereafter, by resolution, from time to time determine. Any dog taken into
custody and impounded as provided in said statute shall be kept in said
pound, if established, or in any private pound, or with some person or
persons hereafter by resolution designated by the Borough Council, in the
manner provided for and subject to the provisions of said statute.
§ 93-4. Required control of dogs; running at large; prohibited
locations; defecation. [Amended 11-24-1976; 6-13-1985;
12-10-2015; 4-28-2016]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALLENDALE VOLUNTEER GOOSE PATROL (AVGP) — As defined and
set forth in Chapter 6, Article V, of the Borough Code.
CUSTODIAN PREMISES — The residence or premises of the dog
custodian.
DOG CUSTODIAN — The owner, caretaker, service provider, or person
responsible for immediate care and control of a dog's care, behavior,
and activities.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Any dog not confined or secured by a leash.
B. Running at large.
(1) Except as set forth in this article, no person owning, keeping or
harboring any dog, shall suffer or permit such dog to run at large
within the limits of the Borough of Allendale.
(2) The provisions of Subsection B(1) hereinabove shall not apply to:
(a) Law Enforcement and Emergency Services dogs.
(b) Allendale Volunteer Goose Patrol (AVGP) who are properly
registered, wearing their assigned vest and working within an
AVGP-approved area.
(c) A dog while within its custodian premises.
C. Prohibited locations.
(1) Except as set forth in this article, dogs are prohibited in the
following locations:
(a) Celery Farm.
(b) Crestwood Park Playground.
§ 93-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-4
46:198
§ 93-5. Injuring or damaging property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog, whether of licensing age
or not or whether licensed or not, shall suffer or, permit such dog to do any
injury or damage to the lawn, shrubbery, grounds or property of another
within the Borough of Allendale.
(c) Crestwood Lake sandy beach.
(d) Recreational fields designated as:
[1] Fields 1, 2 and 3, located in the Allendale Recreational
Park.
[2] Fields 4 (Kunisch), 5 and 6, located in Crestwood Park.
[3] West Maple Field, located in Crestwood Park.
[4] Multipurpose field, located in Crestwood Park.
(2) Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection C(1) hereinabove shall
not apply to:
(a) Law Enforcement and Emergency Services dogs.
(b) Allendale Volunteer Goose Patrol (AVGP) who are properly
registered, wearing their assigned vest, and working within
any AVGP-approved area.
D. Defecation.
(1) No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private
property without the permission of the owner of said property.
(2) Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection D(1) hereinabove shall
not apply to that portion of the street lying between the curblines,
which such portion may be used to curb a dog under the following
conditions:
(a) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove
all feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method
approved by the local health authority; and
(b) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area
shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping
or in charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the
provisions of this article in a sanitary manner approved by the
Borough Department of Health.
§ 93-4 MUTUAL AID § 93-6
46:199
§ 93-6. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. [Added 4-24-1997]
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-7 through and including 4:19-36,
amendments and supplements thereto, are hereby incorporated herein by
reference. A copy of said statutory provisions shall be on file with the office
of the Borough Clerk.
§ 93-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 6-27-1991; amended
8-14-2014; 4-28-2016]
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of no less than
$200 and not to exceed $500 or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or both. The Police Department of the Borough of Allendale shall be
the enforcement agency pursuant hereto.
§ 93-8. Limit on number of dogs. [Added 6-3-1999]
No more than four dogs shall be sheltered or kept on any property having
a single- or two-family dwelling. This limitation shall not apply to properly
licensed pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
§ 93-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-8
46:200
ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 4-25-1991 by the Governing Body]
§ 93-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction, as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of six
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Allendale or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 93-10. Rabies vaccination.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over six months of age within the Borough of
Allendale unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this section do not apply to cats held in a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or
other treatments.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian of the State of New Jersey in accordance with the latest
Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization, published by the National Association of the Public
Health Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
§ 93-9 MUTUAL AID § 93-10
46:201
§ 93-11. Licensing.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Allendale Board of
Health, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or a regimen of
therapy, the vaccination of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Borough Clerk or other official designated by the
governing body thereof a license and official registration tag with
license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored. Acceptable methods of displaying a license number shall
include, but are not limited to, an official license tag or sleeve securely
affixed to a breakaway or elastic collar, an ear tattoo or ear marking
tag. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license for such cat within 10 days after such
acquisition or age attainment. The requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Borough of Allendale for no longer
than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Allendale any cat licensed in another state for the current year
and displaying such license as required by this article and who
shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the
Borough of Allendale for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Allendale any unlicensed cat and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Borough of Allendale for a
period of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license
for each cat unless otherwise exempted under this article.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which the
license is sought and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety, the
date on which such cat was vaccinated against rabies, and also the
name, street, post office address and phone number of the owner and
the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information on said
application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of one year by the Borough Clerk or other
designated official.
§ 93-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-11
46:202
§ 93-12. Interference with enforcement personnel.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized and
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 93-13. Disposition of fees collected.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this article shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer and shall be placed
in the general treasury of the Borough.
§ 93-14. Sick or diseased cats.
Any cat showing a change in disposition or an illness suggesting that it
might be rabies, or any cat that bites another animal or human, may be
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the Borough and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the Borough. If the owner
shall elect to have the license number displayed by ear tattoo or ear tag,
the same number shall be issued each year starting with the letter "A."
F. Evidence of rabies vaccination or certification of exemption;
requirement for license. The Borough Clerk or other official designated
by the governing body to license cats shall not grant any such license
for any cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to
be licensed and registered has been vaccinated or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 93-10 of this article.
G. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee as
provided in the Borough's General Fee Ordinance. In the absence of
such provision, the fee for the first cat licensed shall be $11 for a
nonaltered cat and $8 for an altered cat. For each additional cat
licensed at the same time as the first cat, the fee shall be $5 for each
additional altered cat and $8 for each additional nonaltered cat.
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The fee for
the renewal of a license shall be the same as for the original.
(2) Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality
shall be accepted by this Borough as evidence of compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Borough Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer or Animal Control Officer.
§ 93-11 MUTUAL AID § 93-14
46:203
required by the Health Officer, Animal Control Officer or designated agent
to be quarantined for a period of 10 days. Owners or those harboring cats
evidencing a change in disposition or an illness suggesting that it may
be rabies may be required to have such animal examined by an approved
veterinarian. Any cost incurred in quarantining such animal or veterinary
service examination shall be paid for by the owner or harborer of such cat
or cats.
§ 93-15. Annual canvass.
The Chief of Police of the Borough shall annually cause a canvass of all cats
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough and shall report
on or before May 31 of each year to the Borough Clerk, to the Borough
Board of Health and to the State Department of Health (if required by law)
the result thereof, setting forth the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring such cats and the number of licensed cats owned, kept
or harbored by each of said persons, together with the license numbers of
each of said cats, and also setting forth the names and addresses of persons
owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats and the number of unlicensed
cats owned, kept or harbored by each said person, together with a complete
description of each unlicensed cat.
§ 93-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-27-1991]
Except as otherwise provided for in this article, any person who violates or
who fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to a penalty of
no more than $25 for each offense.
§ 93-17. Initial licenses; late fee.
The initial license shall be a half-year license covering the period July 1,
1991, to December 31, 1991. The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to
issue licenses free of charge for all applications made prior to July 1, 1991.
Licenses issued after July 1, 1991, shall be at 1/2 the annual fee. A late fee
of $5 shall apply after July 31, 1991.
§ 93-18. Limit on number of cats. [Added 6-3-1999]
No more than five cats shall be sheltered or kept on any property having
a single- or two-family dwelling. This limitation shall not apply to properly
licensed pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
§ 93-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-18
46:204
ARTICLE III
Rabies Control
[Adopted 3-5-1992 by the Board of Health]
§ 93-19. Reports of suspected cases or rabies or animal bites.
A. Every veterinarian or other person who is called to examine or
professionally attend any animal within the Borough suspected of
infection with rabies shall, within 12 hours thereafter, report in writing
to the Board of Health (the "Board") the following facts:
(1) The location of the diseased animal.
(2) The name and address of the owner thereof.
(3) The type and character of the disease.
B. Any person owning, controlling or having in his possession any animal
affected by or suspected of rabies shall immediately notify the Board.
Upon notice from the Board, the owner or person having control of said
animal shall confine it securely under supervision of the Board until a
certificate of release is issued.
C. Every physician shall, within 12 hours after his first professional
attendance upon any person bitten by any animal, report to the Board
the name, age, sex and residence of such person.
D. If any child shall be bitten by any animal and no physician attends such
child, the parents or guardian of the child shall report to the Health
Officer the name, sex, age and residence of such child. Such report shall
be made within 12 hours after the parent or guardian shall first have
knowledge that the child was bitten.
E. If any adult shall be bitten by any animal and no physician attends him,
it shall be the duty of such adult, if not incapacitated, or if he be
incapacitated, then it shall be the duty of the person caring for him, to
report to the Health Officer the name, age, sex and residence of such
adult. Such report shall be made within 12 hours after the person
caring for him shall first have knowledge that the adult was so bitten.
F. The Board shall require the owner or person in charge of any animal
which has attacked or bitten any person to confine such animal at the
expense of the owner or the person in charge of such animal for at least
10 days after the attack. The animal shall not be released until proof of
a licensed veterinarian's examination of said animal is furnished to the
Health Officer who shall countersign the release certificate.
G. Proof of such examination shall be furnished to the Health Officer
within 72 hours after the ten-day quarantine period.
§ 93-19 MUTUAL AID § 93-20
46:205
§ 93-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-6-1993]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be liable to a penalty of
$25 for the first offense and not less than $50 for each subsequent offense
to be recovered in a civil action brought by and in the name of the State
Department or Local Board of Health. Penalties hereunder shall be enforced
and collected pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-72, 26:3-77 and 26:3-78 of the
Revised Statutes.
§ 93-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-20
46:206
ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Animals
[Adopted 10-7-1999 by the Board of Health]
§ 93-21. Purpose and intent.
This article is adopted in order to protect the health, safety and well-being
of persons and property by prohibiting certain animals within the Borough
of Allendale. The Board of Health of the Borough of Allendale finds and
determines that the harboring of certain animals within the Borough may
be offensive to other residents so as to constitute a public nuisance and may
pose a threat to the safety of its inhabitants and their property.
§ 93-22. Prohibited animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, have in his or her
possession or under his or her control or to permit another to keep,
maintain or have under his or her control within the Borough limits of the
Borough of Allendale any cattle, chickens, bees,42 goats, guinea hens, hogs,
horses, ocelots, pigs, (including potbelly pigs), pigeons, sheep, swine or any
other animal that is deemed to be dangerous to humans. The foregoing
enumeration is not intended to be all-inclusive. The determination of
whether or not an animal is deemed to be dangerous to humans shall be
made by either the Borough's Animal Control Officer or a police officer of
the Police Department.
§ 93-23. Exemption.
Any person that keeps, maintains or has in his or her possession or under
his or her control any of the animals set forth in this article on the effective
date hereof shall be permitted to keep and maintain said animal(s);
provided, however, that such person may not increase the number of or
replace such exempt animals. Any person having such exempt animal shall
register such animal with the Animal Control Officer within 60 days from
the effective date of this article.
§ 93-24. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough's Animal Control Officer and/
or Police Department.
§ 93-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
42.Editor's Note: See Art. V, § 93-33.
§ 93-21 MUTUAL AID § 93-25
46:207

ARTICLE V
Beekeeping
[Adopted 10-8-2009 by the Governing Body]
§ 93-26. Preamble.
§ 93-27. Adoption of findings.
The findings contained in the preamble of this article43 are hereby adopted
as part of this article.
§ 93-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates another meaning:
APIARY — The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
BEEKEEPER — A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies
of bees.
BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT — Anything used in the operation of an apiary,
such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.
COLONY or HIVE — An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers,
but having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including
brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees.
HONEYBEE — All life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis
mellifera species.
§ 93-29. Purpose; unlawful conduct.
A. Honeybees are beneficial to mankind and to New Jersey, in particular,
by providing agricultural fruit and vegetable pollination services in
tandem with home garden vegetable and fruit production and by
furnishing honey, beeswax and other useful products; and
B. Domestic strains of honeybees have been selectively bred for desirable
traits, including gentleness, honey production, reduced swarming,
pollination attributes and other characteristics which are desirable to
foster and maintain; and
C. Honeybees can be maintained within populated areas in reasonable
densities to fill the ecological niche and exclude unwanted and
undesirable races of bees, without causing a nuisance if the honeybees
are properly located, carefully managed and maintained.
43.Editor's Note: See § 93-26, Preamble; a complete copy of Ord. No. 09-25 is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 93-26 MUTUAL AID § 93-29
46:209
§ 93-30. Registration; fee.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish certain requirements of sound
beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid problems that may
otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas.
B. Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this
article, it shall be unlawful for any beekeepers to keep any colony or
colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any
unhealthy or potentially dangerous condition, interfere with the normal
use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others or interfere with
the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of
others.
A. All honeybee colonies shall be registered with the Borough of Allendale
Health Department. An annual permit fee of $200 will be charged. The
license issued to keep bees shall automatically expire on the 31st day of
December in the year in which it is issued. The license shall bear the
date of issuance, the name of the person so licensed and a description
of the property covered by the license. Every license shall be
nontransferable and shall cover only the licensed property and the
named licensee (beekeeper).
B. The licensee (beekeeper) must register with the proper New Jersey
State Apiarist.
C. The licensee (beekeeper) must attend a training course on bee
handling. Proof of registration with the New Jersey State Apiarist and
proof of attendance at a training course must be provided to the
Registrar of the Board of Health prior to the issuance of a license.
D. No earlier than 30 days prior to applying for an initial license, the
proposed licensee must notify all property owners within 200 feet of the
applicant's property by certified mail, RRR, of the applicant's intent to
apply for a beekeeping license. Proof of mailing shall be supplied to the
Registrar of the Board of Health on forms to be supplied by the
Registrar. A list of property owners within 200 feet of the applicant's
property shall be obtained from the Tax Assessor's office. Each property
owner within 200 feet shall have 15 days from receipt of said notice to
notify the Board of Health Registrar if he/she objects to the proposed
license. If any property owner within 200 feet objects to the proposed
license, the license shall be denied. If no objection is received within the
applicable time period (30 days of mailing of original notice) and
provided all other requirements herein are satisfied, a beekeeping
license shall be issued.
E. The Registrar of the Board of Health shall be responsible for the
application and registration procedures herein and collection of fees.
§ 93-29 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-30
46:210
§ 93-31. Beekeeping regulations.
F. The Registrar of the Board of Health or her designee is hereby
authorized to promulgate forms for the application/registration and
notification procedures set forth herein.
A. It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number of colonies
on any property within the Borough, based upon the size or
configuration of the lot on which the apiary is situated:
(1) Up to 1/4 acre: one colony;
(2) More than 1/4 acre, but less than 1/2 acre property size: two
colonies;
(3) One-half acre tract, but less than one acre tract size: four colonies;
(4) More than one acre tract size: six colonies.
B. Any beehive must be protected by an appropriate fence, at least six feet
in height with a gate being locked at all times to prevent the beehive
from being accidentally disturbed.
C. No hive of any type shall be located less than 25 feet from any public or
private property line of the property upon which the apiary is situated,
as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line.
D. Any licensed colony or hive must be inspected at least once on an
annual basis or more frequently, if needed, by the appropriate state
agency having jurisdiction. Verification of the yearly inspection
certificate shall be provided by the licensee to the Allendale Board of
Health Registrar. Any cost involved in the inspection shall be the
responsibility of the licensee.
E. Each licensee shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the bees at all times during the year so that the bees will
not congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, birdbaths or
other water sources where they may cause human, bird or domestic pet
contact.
F. All honeybee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with
removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
G. Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials are
left upon the property of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the
hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed
container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
H. The Allendale Code Official shall inspect all colonies no less than three
times between March 1 and December 1 of any given year. Additionally,
the Code Official shall have the right to inspect any apiary between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in response to a complaint or for
§ 93-30 MUTUAL AID § 93-31
46:211
§ 93-32. Compliance; violations and penalties.
detection of honeybee pests and unwanted races of honeybees. Where
practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper.
I. Honeybees shall be kept for noncommercial purposes only.
J. There shall be a limit of four licenses in the Borough. A licensee may
renew any expired license no later than January 15. Thereafter, licenses
shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis up to the limit set forth
herein.
K. Beekeeping licenses are not transferable.
A. Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the
Borough is not being kept in compliance with this article, the Code
Official shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If it is found that
grounds exist to believe that one or more violations have occurred, then
the Code Official shall cause a written notice of hearing to be issued to
the beekeepers.
B. Notice.
(1) The notice of hearing shall set forth:
(a) The date, time and place at which the hearing will be
conducted;
(b) The violation(s) alleged;
(c) That the beekeeper may appear in person or through counsel,
present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, and provide for a
court reporter at his own expense;
(d) That the bees may be ordered destroyed or removed from the
Borough if the Mayor and Council finds that they have been
kept in violation of this article.
(2) Notices shall be given by certified United States mail or personal
delivery. However, if the Code Official is unable to locate the
beekeeper, then the notice may be given by publication one time in
the official newspaper of the Borough at least seven days prior to
the date of the hearing.
C. The hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor and Council. The burden
shall be on the Code Official to demonstrate by a preponderance of
credible evidence that the colony or colonies have in fact been kept in
violation of this article. If the Mayor and Council finds that the colony or
colonies have been kept in violation of this article, then it may order
that the bees be destroyed or removed from the Borough for a period
not to exceed 20 days and that bees not thereafter be kept upon the
tract for a period of two years. In instances where the Mayor and
Council finds that the violations were not intentional and that the
§ 93-31 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-32
46:212
§ 93-33. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, including, but not
limited to, Code § 93-22 relating only to bees and which are in conflict with
this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict herein.
§ 93-34. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 93-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
beekeeper has employed corrective actions that will probably be
effective to cure the violations alleged, then it may issue a warning
in lieu of ordering the bees destroyed or removed. Upon failure of
the beekeeper to comply with the order, the Mayor and Council or its
designee may cause the bees to be destroyed and the hive structures
to be removed. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed,
all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged
or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall upon the
beekeeper's request be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the
beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their return.
D. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the
conduct of a hearing for the destruction of:
(1) Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for
beekeeping; or
(2) Any swarm of bees; or
(3) Any colony residing in a standard or man-made hive which, by
virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the
beekeeper.
§ 93-32 MUTUAL AID § 93-35
46:213

ARTICLE VI
Deer Feeding
[Adopted 12-11-2014 by the Governing Body]
§ 93-36. Feeding of deer prohibited; exceptions.
§ 93-37. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Health
Officer of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 93-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 93-39. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 93-40. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed wild white-tailed deer
(Odocoileus Virginianus) in the Borough on lands either publically or
privately owned.
B. Nothing in this section shall apply to:
(1) Any agent of the Borough authorized to implement an alternative
control method set forth in any approved, community-based deer
management plan and possessing a special deer management
permit issued by the New Jersey Division of Fish and Wildlife in
accordance with the provisions of P.L. 2000, c. 46; or
(2) Any hunter engaging in baiting for the purpose of hunting pursuant
to a valid hunting license issued in accordance with the provisions
of Title 23 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes; or
(3) Any activity involving the feeding of birds.
§ 93-36 MUTUAL AID § 93-41
46:215
§ 93-41. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 93-41 ALLENDALE CODE § 93-41
46:216
ARTICLE VII
Feeding of Wildlife on Private Property
[Adopted 5-10-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
§ 93-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feed
does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game; the feeding
of birds by way of a bird feeder; or the humane trapping of animals.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 93-43. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed in or on any private property any wildlife within
the Borough of Allendale. Such activity shall be subject to the same
enforcement and penalties as provided in §§ 203-29 and 203-29.1.
§ 93-44. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 93-42 MUTUAL AID § 93-44
46:217
Chapter 95
BINGO AND RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement games — See Ch. 89.
§ 95-1. Licenses.
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to approve the granting of raffle
and bingo licenses to be held in the Borough of Allendale.
§ 95-2. Appeals.
Any appeals from a denial by the Borough Clerk of the issuance of a raffle
or bingo license shall be heard by the Mayor and Council and shall be filed
within five days of the date of notification of denial.
§ 95-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in consistent or in conflict with this
chapter are hereby repealed as to said inconsistencies and conflicts.
§ 95-4. Severability.
If any section, part of any section, or clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect the remaining provisions of this chapter. The governing body of the
Borough of Allendale declares that it would have passed this chapter and
each section and subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more of the subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 95-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after passage and publication
according to law.
§ 93-44 ALLENDALE CODE § 95-5
46:218
Chapter 97
BRUSH, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
Trees — See Ch. 244.
Vacant/abandoned properties — See Ch. 248.
Visual obstructions — See Ch. 256.
§ 97-1. Removal.
The owner, occupant or tenant of any dwelling or lands lying within the
limits of the Borough, where it shall be necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate
a fire hazard, shall remove from such lands or dwelling or destroy brush,
weeds, including ragweed, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after notice to
remove or destroy the same and to provide for the removal or destruction
of the same.
§ 97-2. Notice of violation; remedies.
Whenever the Property Maintenance Officer of the Borough determines
that there is or has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he
shall give notice of such violation to the owner, occupant or tenant of the
dwelling or lands responsible therefor. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance. The notice
shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if a copy is sent by
registered or certified mail and regular mail to the last known address of
the owner, occupant or tenant upon which the same is served as shown
by the most recent tax list of the Borough or a copy thereof be handed to
such person or persons or a copy thereof left at the usual place of abode
or office of such persons or entities. Notice shall be given as aforesaid
within or without the municipality. The notice shall also state that "unless
the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from within
10 days of the date of service of such notice, exclusive of the date of
service," a summons shall be issued and, in addition thereto, the Borough
will provide for removal or destruction of the same by or under the direction
of the Property Maintenance Officer, and a lien shall be imposed for the cost
thereof.
§ 95-5 MUTUAL AID § 97-3
46:219
§ 97-3. Cost of Removing brush, weeds, debris, etc.; lien.
In the event that the owner, occupant or tenant of any dwelling or lands
has refused or neglected to remove or destroy the matters hereinabove in
the manner and within the time provided above, the Property Maintenance
Official or his designee shall cause the removal or destruction of same.
In such event, the Property Maintenance Officer or his designee shall
certify the cost thereof to the Governing Body, which shall examine the
certificate and if found correct shall cause the cost as shown thereon to
be charged against said dwelling or lands; the amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such dwelling or lands and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such dwelling or lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes,
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 97-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 97-5. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 97-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 97-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
A. In addition to any other remedy set forth in this chapter, any person or
entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is issued under
the terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense: by a fine not to exceed $100.
(2) For a second offense: by a fine not to exceed $200.
(3) For a third offense or any subsequent offenses: by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not
to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 97-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 97-7
46:220
Chapter 100
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 40.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Fees — See Ch. 120.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Occupancy limits; unsafe structures — See
Ch. 180.
Plot plan approval — See Ch. 196.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Soil movement — See Ch. 225.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Zoning — See Ch. 270.
§ 97-7 MUTUAL AID § 97-7
46:221

ARTICLE I
State Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 12-22-1976]
§ 100-1. Enforcing Agency established; subcode officials
designated.
§ 100-2. Appeals.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127), and N.J.A.C. 5:23, all appeals from decisions of the Enforcing
Agency of the Borough of Allendale shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 100-3. Fees. [Amended 1-27-1977; 9-22-1977]
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Allendale a State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency to be known as the "State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency of the Borough of Allendale,"
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official,
Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official and Elevator
Subcode Official. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the Enforcing Agency. [Amended 9-10-1992]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,44 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold
each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at one central permit office located in the Municipal Building
except for emergencies and unforeseen circumstances.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed herein and shall be paid before the permit is issued: [Amended
9-25-1986; 11-14-1991; 9-10-1992; 5-27-1999; 7-24-2003;
2-9-2006; 5-1-2006; 8-13-2009; 5-26-20165-11-2006; 8-13-2009;
5-26-2016]
(1) Plan review fee:
(a) New construction, additions or renovation. The fee shall be
20% of the permit fee for proposed improvement, with a
minimum fee of $60, and is included in the building subcode
fee.
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 100-1 MUTUAL AID § 100-3
46:223
(b) Roofing and siding. No plan review fee is required.
(2) Building subcode fees. The fee for work under the building subcode
shall be as follows:
(a) New building and additions. Permit fees shall be based upon
the volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The building permit fee be
in the amount of $0.028 per cubic foot of volume for buildings
and structures of all use groups and types of construction as
classified and defined in Article 3 of the building subcode.
State of New Jersey training fees shall be in the amount of
$0.0016 per cubic foot of volume of new construction in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5.23-4.19(b).
(b) Renovations, alterations, decks, roofing, siding and repairs.
The fees shall be based upon the estimated cost of the work.
The fee shall be $22 per $1,000 of the estimated cost, with a
minimum fee of $75.
(c) Reinstatement of a lapsed construction permit shall be as
follows:
[1] Recalculation of the construction permit shall be based
upon the current fee schedule for all work to be
performed.
[2] The reinstatement fee shall be 20% of the recalculated
value of all work which is to be performed.
(d) Minimum building permit fees shall be: $75.
[1] Principal buildings, additions and accessory buildings
shall be charged in accordance with criteria under the
Uniform Construction Code.
[2] (Reserved)
[3] (Reserved)
[4] Sheds 100 square feet or greater: $75.
[5] For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the
applicant shall submit to the enforcing agency, if available,
cost data produced by the architect or engineer of record
or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The enforcing agency will
make the final decision regarding estimated cost. Included
in the building subcode permit is a plan review fee which is
20% of the building subcode fee.
[6] Swimming pools. Permit fees for in-ground pools shall be
$120, in addition to electric, plumbing, fence and
§ 100-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 100-3
46:224
certificate of approval permits. Aboveground pools shall
require a permit fee of $35 in addition to electric,
plumbing, fence and certificate of approval permits.
Swimming pools which require subcode permits shall
include plan review fees as part of the subcode permit,
which is 20% of the subcode fee.
[7] Tennis courts. Permit fees for tennis courts shall be $200.
[8] Asbestos hazard abatement permit shall be $150 in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.10(a)1 and $200 for
certificate of occupancy following successful completion of
abatement in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.10(a)2.
[9] Demolition permits. The fee for demolition permits shall be
as follows:
[a] Principal building: $150.
[b] Accessory building: $40.
[c] Demolition of structures less than 5,000 square feet
and less than 30 feet in height, including one- and twofamily
residences, structures on farms and
commercial farms: $150. All other structures: $80.
[d] Interior demolition: $150. [Added 3-22-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-06]
[10] Signs. A sign shall be $0.085 per square foot of surface
area of the sign, with a minimum fee of $50, computed on
each side of the sign to be displayed. The fee shall be in
addition to any Planning or Zoning Board application fees
required.
[11] Fences. The fee for a permit to construct a fence around a
pool shall be $75, which includes the plan review fee. This
fee shall be in addition to any Planning or Zoning Board
application fees which may be required.
[12] Certificate of occupancy.
[a] The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be as
follows: $200.
[b] A certificate of occupancy/approval shall only be
issued if any outstanding building violation penalties
have been paid.
[c] Temporary certificates of occupancy shall be $50, or
each renewal thereof.
[d] A certificate of continued occupancy for business or
commercial establishments shall be $250. A certificate
§ 100-3 MUTUAL AID § 100-3
46:225
of continued occupancy for business or commercial
establishments with a change of use shall be $25.
[e] Change of contractor. The fee shall be $20.
[f] Variation. The fee shall be $65.
[13] Dry well. The fee shall be $50. [Added 3-22-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-06]
[14] Commercial tent. The fee shall be $100. [Added
3-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
[15] Underground storage tank removal or abandonment of
tank. The fee shall be $150. [Added 3-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-06]
(3) Plumbing subcode fees.
(a) The fees for installation or replacement under the plumbing
subcode shall be as follows: [Amended 3-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-06; 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-23; 1-31-2019]
Fixture/Equipment Fee
Water closet $20
Urinal/bidet $20
Bathtub $20
Lavatory $20
Shower $20
Floor drain $20
Sink $20
Dishwasher $20
Drinking fountain $25
Washing machine $25
Hose bib $15
Gas piping (install and replace) $65
Water heater (install and replace) $75
Boiler (install and replace) $125
Sewer pump or ejector $85
Interceptor/separator $85
Backflow preventer $75
Grease trap $100
Water-cooled air-conditioning or refrigeration
unit
$100
Sewer connection $80
§ 100-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 100-3
46:226
Fixture/Equipment Fee
Water service connection (install and replace) $80
Gas service connection $50
Commercial dishwasher $50
Vent stack $35
Minimum plumbing fee $60
LP gas tank $75
Steam boiler $125
Hot water boiler $125
Residential A/C unit $100
Active solar system $65
Pool heater $65
Vacuum $40
Generator $100
Condensate line $20
Fuel oil piping $75
Pool drain $50
Water softener $15
Water cooler $15
Water booster pump $85
Chimney liner $75
Oil tank $75
Furnace $125
Commercial A/C $100
Sump pump $50
(b) A plan review fee of 20% is included in the plumbing subcode
fees as listed in Subsection A(3)(a) above.
(c) Minimum fee exemption. Only owner-occupied single-family
residential dwellings shall be exempt from the minimum
plumbing and fire subcode fees.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) (Reserved)
(7) (Reserved)
(8) (Reserved)
§ 100-3 MUTUAL AID § 100-3
46:227
(9) (Reserved)
(10) Fire subcode fees.
(a) The fees under the fire subcode shall be as follows: [Amended
3-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
Description Fee
Automatic fire alarm system
1 to 10 detectors $50
11 to 20 detectors $100
21 to 100 detectors $150
101 to 200 detectors $300
201 to 400 detectors $425
401 to 1,000 detectors $550
Over maximum entry, each device $25
Fuel storage tank $80
All storage tanks other than fuel $150
Sprinkler systems
1 to 20 heads $50
21 to 100 heads $100
101 to 200 heads $150
201 to 400 hands $315
401 to 1,000 heads $500
1,001 or more $650
Kitchen hood exhaust systems, commercial $75
Kitchen hood protection systems $150
Gas- or oil-fired appliance $75
Fireplace or woodburning stove $75
CO2 suppression $180
Halon suppression $200
Foam suppression $200
Dry chemical $200
Wet chemical $200
Underground storage tank removal or
abandonment of tank
$150
Standpipes per riser $100
Minimum fire subcode fee $60
Incinerator $260
§ 100-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 100-3
46:228
Description Fee
Crematorium $260
Signaling device $60
Supervisory device $60
(b) A plan review fee of 20% is included in fire subcode fees as
listed in Subsection A(10)(a) above.
(11) Electrical subcode fees.
(a) The permit fees for installation or replacement under the
electrical subcode shall be as follows: See attached Electrical
Fee Schedule.45
(12) Mechanical subcode fees.
(a) The fees under the mechanical subcode shall be as follows:
[Amended 3-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06; 1-31-2019]
Description Fee
Water heater $75
Fuel oil pumping $75
Gas piping $65
Steam boiler $125
Hot water boiler $125
Hot air furnace $125
Oil tank $75
LP gas tank $75
Fireplace $75
Surcharge fee $0.0006 per cubic
foot of volume
Chimney liner $75
Condensate line $20
Residential A/C $100
Commercial A/C $100
Backflow preventer $75
Sump pump $50
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Borough Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
45.Editor's Note: Included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 100-3 MUTUAL AID § 100-3
46:229
§ 100-4. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code
or the rules promulgated thereunder shall be as set forth in P.L. 1975, c.
217, Section 20, as amended (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-138).
§ 100-5. Effective date.
This article shall take effect on January 1, 1977.
Agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
C. Surcharge fee.
(1) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the regulations,46 the Enforcing Agency shall collect, in
addition to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per
cubic foot of volume of new construction. Said surcharge fee shall
be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters
ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first
become effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the
third and fourth quarters only.
(2) The Enforcing Agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
D. Additional moneys must be deposited as directed by the Borough
Administrator to establish an escrow account, where appropriate, to
cover legal and engineering costs, which amounts shall be estimated by
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Attorney where applicable. Any
such moneys so deposited which are not required for legal and
engineering services shall be returned to the applicant upon completion
of the improvement involved. If additional moneys for legal and
engineering services are required, such moneys must be deposited by
the applicant upon two weeks' notification by the Borough
Administrator. Failure to comply with these regulations may, in the
discretion of the Borough Council, result in suspension or revocation of
all municipal permits. [Added 5-24-1979]
46.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 100-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 100-5
46:230
Chapter 104
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100. Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
§ 104-1. Numbering required.
All houses and other buildings on streets, avenues and roads shall be
properly numbered.
§ 104-2. Numbering system.
In numbering said houses and other buildings, there shall be allowed 20
feet front on each of said streets, avenues and roads for a number, and the
even numbers shall be on the right-hand side and the odd numbers shall be
on the left-hand side.
§ 104-3. Notice of proper number.
The owner or occupant of every house or building in said Borough shall be
notified, in writing, by the Clerk of the proper number of such house or
building.
§ 104-4. Display of numbers.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of every house or building
in said Borough to display the street number of such house or building
and to keep and maintain the same at his or her expense, in good, legible
condition, in a conspicuous place upon the front of such house or building,
and the size of the digits shall not be less than four inches.
§ 104-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 104-6. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter regarding the system of numbering shall
apply as the Mayor and Council shall from time to time direct by resolution.
A. Any such person or persons aforesaid who shall fail to properly display
the number of any such house or building in said Borough or fail to
repair or renew such number when required so to do by the provisions
of this chapter, after 30 days' notice in writing from the Borough Clerk
that such number shall be displayed or is in need of repair or renewal,
shall be subject to a penalty of $5.
B. All fines imposed under this chapter are for revenue.
§ 100-5 MUTUAL AID § 104-6
46:231
Chapter 112
DEMONSTRATIONS
§ 112-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Allendale.
DEMONSTRATION — The gathering of 10 or more persons for the purpose
of demonstrating, picketing, speechmaking, marching and holding vigils
where such gathering shall be upon any street, sidewalk, park or other
public place.
§ 112-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to organize or conduct a
demonstration within the Borough without having first obtained a permit for
such purpose.
§ 112-3. Application for permit; fee.
Application for a permit to conduct a demonstration shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk, during regular office hours, on forms approved by resolution
of the Borough Council, not less than 72 hours in advance of a proposed
demonstration. Such application shall be accompanied by the proper permit
fee in an amount set by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 112-4. Review of application; issuance of permit.
The Borough Clerk shall refer each application to the Chief of Police for his
review and recommendations. When such application is properly made and
approved, the Clerk shall issue a permit in a form approved by resolution
of the Borough Council. Every permit so issued shall be valid only to the
person therein named.
§ 112-5. Notice to other Borough officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a permit hereunder, the Borough Clerk
shall send a copy thereof to the Mayor and Chief of Police.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
§ 104-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 112-6
46:232
Chapter 115
DONATION CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
§ 115-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 115-2. Placement; use for solicitation purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
unless all of the following requirements are met:
A. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a twelve-month period of
time, from the Borough's Zoning Officer, in accordance with the
following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent;
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin; and
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on
his property.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use or employ a donation clothing bin if he determines that
the placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such
hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a
§ 112-6 MUTUAL AID § 115-2
46:233
donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place which stores
large amounts of or sells fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall impose a fee for such application, not to
exceed $25, to offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter.
(4) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by
the Zoning Officer for such renewal, not to exceed $25 annually, to
offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter. Such application
shall include:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible
and, if the person intends to move it, the new location where
the bin would be situated after the renewal is granted and
written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection A(1)(c) of this section, of any
entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may
do so during the period covered by the renewal.
B. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin in
addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection D of this
section.
C. The person and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide
officer.
D. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
§ 115-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 115-2
46:234
§ 115-3. Investigation of complaints; violations and penalties.
§ 115-4. Additional penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of this
state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that the clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared or given entirely
to an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Zoning Officer in the most recent permit or renewal application,
indicating the manner in which the person anticipates any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
A. Within 30 days from receipt of any complaints from the public about the
bin, the Zoning Officer shall complete an investigation concerning such
complaint. Whenever it appears to the Zoning Officer that any person
has engaged in or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this
chapter, the person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning stating
that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Zoning Officer
is not requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violations or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Zoning Officer may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough.
§ 115-2 MUTUAL AID § 115-4
46:235
§ 115-5. Severability.
Each section of this chapter and every subsection hereof shall be deemed
independent, separate and distinct from all other sections, and the holding
of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any section or part hereof.
§ 115-6. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this chapter
are repealed or otherwise modified.
§ 115-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 118
DRONES AND UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DATA COLLECTION — The acquisition of information by use of one or more
sensing devices.
DRONE — An unmanned aircraft that can fly under the control of a remote
pilot or by a geographic positions system ("GPS") guided autopilot
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Zoning
Officer may bring this action in the Municipal Court or Superior Court
as a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty
monies collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to § 115-2 hereof. A person disqualified
from placing, using or employing a donation clothing bin by violating
the provisions of this chapter may apply to the Zoning Officer to have
that person's eligibility restored. The Zoning Officer may restore the
eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he or she made a good-faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 115-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 118-1
46:236
mechanism, and that is equipped with any sensing device or capable of any
data collection.
SENSING DEVICE — A device capable of acquiring data from its
surroundings. Sensing devices include, but are not limited to, cameras,
microphones, thermal detectors, chemical detectors, radiation gauges, and
wireless receivers in any frequency (including cellular, Wi-Fi, or other data
frequencies).
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT — An unmanned vehicle or device of any size that
is capable of remote-control flight by any means and that does not possess
any sensing device and is not capable of any data collection.
§ 118-2. Regulations; prohibited acts.
§ 118-3. Exceptions.
A. Except as otherwise provided in § 118-3, drones are prohibited from
flying in any airspace below 400 feet within the Borough.
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 118-3, unmanned aircraft are
prohibited from flying in any airspace below 400 feet with the Borough
in:
(1) The airspace over any residential or commercial zoned area in the
Borough;
(2) The airspace over any roads with the Borough; and
(3) The airspace over any government or public buildings, property, or
parks with the Borough.
A. This chapter shall not prohibit the constitutional use of drones and
unmanned aircraft by any law enforcement agency or emergency
services organization of or servicing the Borough, the State of New
Jersey, or the United States of America for lawful purposes and in a
lawful manner.
B. This chapter shall not prohibit any federal, state, county or municipal
agency from the use of drones and unmanned aircraft for any lawful
and authorized purpose pursuant to applicable regulation.
C. This chapter shall not prohibit individuals and entities from the use of
drones during daylight hours for business purposes in the airspace
within the boundary lines of private commercial or residential property
with the property owner's consent, except that data collection shall be
limited to data collection of and relating to the properties that provide
consent thereto alone.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the authorized and
lawful operation and use of drones for commercial, business,
educational, scientific, research, environmental, and personal purposes
§ 118-1 MUTUAL AID § 118-3
46:237
§ 118-4. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-18, General penalty, and shall be enforced by the
Police Department or the Administrative Officer of the Borough of Allendale.
The Chief of Police and/or the Administrative Officer may authorize a waiver
of any of the requirements or limitations of this chapter.
Chapter 120
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use fees — See Ch. 40, § 40-26. Building construction fees — See Ch. 100,
§ 100-3.
pursuant to and in accordance with specific FAA regulations, if any,
shall not be permitted.
E. This chapter shall not prohibit the use of unmanned aircraft by:
(1) Any federal, state, county or municipal agency, including, but not
limited to, law enforcement and emergency services agencies, for
lawful purposes and in a lawful manner; or
(2) An owner of private property in the Borough in the airspace within
the boundary lines of that property or in the airspace within the
boundary lines of private property in the Borough with that
property owner's consent.
§ 118-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 118-4
46:238
ARTICLE I
Public Records and Fees
[Adopted 9-25-200347]
§ 120-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Borough to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties
by any Borough officer or employee shall be deemed to be "government
records," as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records
shall be subject to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statute
or other regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor,
Rules of Court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 120-2. Custodian of records; records request form.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk is designated as
the custodian of records. The Clerk shall adopt a form for the use of any
person who requests access to a record, and such form shall contain all of
the information required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(f).
§ 120-3. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk,
during regular business hours, on the form provided. All requests for
public records shall be as specific as possible, including the type of
record and date created, if known.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is
unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall indicate on
the request form the specific basis for such inability to comply and shall
promptly return it to the requestor. The Clerk shall sign and date the
form and provide the requestor with a copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Municipal Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
government record as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the Attorney,
who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the
Municipal Clerk.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Fees for Borough Services,
adopted 12-13-1973 by the Governing Body, as amended, and Art. II, Board of Health Fees,
adopted 11-4-1982 by the Board of Health. In addition, inclusion of this ordinance as Art.
I resulted in the redesignation of former Art. III, Development Fees, as Article II.
§ 120-1 MUTUAL AID § 120-3
46:239
§ 120-4. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected
not to provide a name, address or telephone number or other means of
contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required to respond until
the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the
original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the
requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk
receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 120-5. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 120-6. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from a
copy of the record that portion which is exempt from access and shall
promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. if the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Municipal Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
§ 120-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 120-6
46:240
§ 120-7. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public
records.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing
for a period of time exceeding 1/2 hour, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the Clerk
or other employee.
A. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 x 14 inches in size.
(1) One to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleven to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
(3) All over 20: $0.25 per page.
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps.
(1) Zoning Map: $1.
(2) Street Map: $1.
(3) Drug-Free School Zone Map: $1.
(4) Soils Survey Map: $1.
(5) Site plan: $5 per page.
(6) Subdivision plat: $5 per page.
(7) Tax maps: $1.
(8) Engineering plans: $5 per page.
(9) Water or Sewer Maps: $5 per page.
C. Preprinted documents.
(1) Copy of the Code book: $261 or current price, whichever is greater.
(2) Each Code supplement: $20.
(3) Zoning pamphlet: $20 per copy.
(4) Land use pamphlet: $20 per copy.
§ 120-6 MUTUAL AID § 120-7
46:241
(5) Master Plan: $50 per copy.
D. Police reports and photographs.
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page for each
additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
(3) Photographs or copies: $5 each for the first 10; $3 each additional.
[Amended 6-12-2008]
(4) A fee of $10 is hereby established for fingerprinting of any
individual.
(5) For Municipal Court discovery, videotapes, DVDs and CDs shall be
charged at the rate of $25 per item; other forms of electronic or
digital storage media shall be charged at a rate to be determined as
needed. [Added 11-19-2004; amended 6-12-2008]
(6) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for herein, the actual cost
incurred in making the copy shall be charged. [Added
11-19-2004]
(7) Actual postage shall be charged for any discovery sent by mail, as
well as $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
[Added 11-19-2004]
(8) Where Municipal Court discovery must be obtained from an entity
other than the Borough of Allendale, e.g., another police
department, the actual cost paid to the other entity shall be paid by
the requestor. [Added 11-19-2004]
(9) Radio/tape: $15 per item. [Added 6-12-2008]
(10) Operations reports: $10 per report. [Added 6-12-2008]
(11) Investigation reports: $10 for one- to five-page reports; $16, six-ormore
page reports. [Added 6-12-2008]
E. Electronic records.
(1) Copy of videotape.
(a) Tape supplied by municipality: $50.
(2) Copy of audiotape.
(a) Tape supplied by requestor: $25.
(b) Tape supplied by municipality: $30.
§ 120-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 120-7
46:242
(3) Copy of electronic document or database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described below. For security reasons, the use of a
floppy disks or CD provided by the requestor is prohibited.
(a) Floppy disks: $5, plus cost of disk ($0.50 each).
(b) CD: $5, plus cost of CD ($3 each).
F. Miscellaneous.
(1) Municipal lien search, under N.J.S.A. 54:5-11: $10.
(2) Tax account history: $2.
(3) Water account history: $2.
(4) Assessment for improvement history: $2.
(5) Water and sewer specifications: minimum of $5.
(6) List of property owners, under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c.: $0.25 per
name or $10, whichever is more.48
G. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred. Charges shall be as follows:
(1) The actual cost (materials and supplies but no staff labor) of
duplication or reproduction; plus
(2) A special service charge of $50 per hour or the actual direct cost of
labor (if less) shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time
predicted to be utilized to respond to the request. The rate shall be
assessed in ten-minute increments. A deposit of 50% of the
estimated amount shall be made at the time of the request if the
estimated cost of reproducing and/or special service charge
exceeds $25. The balance will be paid at the time of pickup of
documents.
H. Conversion of records from one medium to another. Cost of duplication
plus special service charges as follows:
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form: $50 per hour.
48.Editor's Note: The former entry for certified copy of marriage, birth or death cetificate,
which immeditely followed this subsection, was repealed 2-5-2004.
§ 120-7 MUTUAL AID § 120-7
46:243
§ 120-8. Waivers for governmental or educational requestor.
The Mayor and Borough Council may, by resolution, waive the fees or other
charges otherwise chargeable if the requestor of governmental records is a
governmental or educational entity.
§ 120-9. No research or interpretation may be compelled.
Nothing in this article shall require the custodian of documents or any other
municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate or interpret documents
which are subject to production under the New Jersey Open Public Records
Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the Borough of
Allendale to furnish copies of any privileged documents or other documents
which have been determined not disclosable in accordance with law.
§ 120-10. Notice concerning copyright laws.
The Borough of Allendale may be compelled by New Jersey law to produce
or duplicate governmental records, but no compliance with these legal
obligations shall be deemed to constitute a license, sublicense or waiver of
copyright laws. The Municipal Clerk shall give the following notice to any
requestor of governmental records:
"Notice-Copyright Laws
You must comply with U.S. Copyright Laws. These laws may restrict
your right to use, duplicate or modify the records provided to you
by the Borough of Allendale. You should consult your own legal
counsel on this since severe civil and criminal penalties for violation
of copyright laws are provided.”
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: $50 per hour.
I. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated
cost of filling the request.
§ 120-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 120-10
46:244
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)49
§ 120-11. through § 120-22. (Reserved)
49.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Development Fees, adopted 2-25-1993 by the Governing
Body, as amended, was repealed 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-13. See now Ch. 81, Affordable
Housing.
§ 120-11 MUTUAL AID § 120-11
46:245

ARTICLE III
Zoning Fees
[Adopted 10-4-2004]
§ 120-23. Category; fees. [Amended 2-9-2006; 3-12-2009;
7-23-2009; 3-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-07]
The fees for various zoning activities and/or permits shall be as follows:
Category Fee
Certificate of compliance for change in
tenancy, use or ownership of residential
premises, pursuant to § 270-103
$100
Reinspection for certificate of compliance $25
Fence permit (no pool involved) $40
Shed permit (up to 100 square feet) $50
Formal zoning review $100
Tree permits, pursuant to Chapter 244
(Articles I and II)
$20
Dry well $50, plus engineering
escrow and required
performance guarantees,
if any
Certificate of occupancy for change in tenancy,
use or ownership of nonresidential or
residential premises, pursuant to § 270-103
$200
Formal zoning review for land use application
and/or construction permit (residential and
nonresidential)
$100
Residential and nonresidential curb or
sidewalk repair permit
$50
§ 120-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article or any amendment or
supplement thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 at the
discretion of the Judge before whom such person may be convicted.
§ 120-25. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 120-23 MUTUAL AID § 120-26
46:247
§ 120-26. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 120-27. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 120-26 ALLENDALE CODE § 120-27
46:248
Chapter 123
FILMING
§ 123-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape,
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on video receivers, television or in theaters or for
institutional use.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE/TELEVISION SERIES — Any film which is
financed and/or distributed by a major motion picture studio, including but
not limited to the following:
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park, playground or any other public place within the Borough which
is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 123-2. Permits.
A. Universal Pictures.
B. Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema.
C. Paramount, including MTV films and Nickelodeon Movie.
D. 20th Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight.
E. Sony/Columbia.
F. Disney/Miramax.
G. MGM — United Artists.
H. Dreamworks.
I. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
J. Recurrent weekly television series programming.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Allendale
without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall set forth
the location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall
take place. A permit is required to be applied for at least five days prior
to the first date that filming is to take place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Administrator
during normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in
a form approved by the Borough Administrator and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established herein.
§ 120-27 MUTUAL AID § 123-2
46:249
§ 123-3. Rules and regulations.
C. One permit shall be required for each location.
D. No permit shall authorize filming for more than three consecutive days
in any one location, and in no event shall filming at one location within
the Borough exceed a total of six days in any one calendar year,
regardless of the number of permits utilized in reaching the six-day
maximum. This six-day limitation may be extended only if the filming
requested constitutes a major motion picture as defined herein. When
filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture, the
approved location of such filming and approved duration of such filming
by specific reference to day or dates shall not exceed six days in
duration. Any days necessary to be used for setup in preparation for a
major motion picture filming may, in the discretion of the Borough
Administrator, be counted as a filming day where such setup is
anticipated to involve the following: traffic congestion at the location
caused by vehicles to be parked on the public street; applicant's ability
to remove film-related vehicles off the public street; when the applicant
is requesting restrictions on the use of public streets or public parking
during the course of the filming; nature of the film shoot itself, e.g.,
indoor or outdoor, day or night; prior experience of the film company/
applicant with the Borough, if any; and consultation with the Council
representative of the Land Use and Construction Code Enforcement
Committee. The Borough Administrator in his or her discretion may
extend the six-day filming location limitation provided for herein where
such filming occurs entirely upon public lands following a favorable
review of the factors set forth herein.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Administrator may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit
for filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Borough of Allendale unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury for any one
person in the amount of $1,000,000, for any aggregate occurrence
in the amount of $3,000,000 and for property damage for each
occurrence in the aggregate amount of $500,000. The Borough of
Allendale shall be named as an additional insured on the policy and
a certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough at the
time that the permit is issued.
(2) Agrees in writing to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Allendale from any and all liability or damages resulting from the
use of such public lands.
§ 123-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 123-3
46:250
(3) Posts a cash or maintenance bond of $1,000 in favor of the Borough
and protecting and insuring that the location utilized will be left
after filming in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and
equipment, and that due observation of all Borough ordinances,
laws and regulations will be followed. If no claim is made upon the
bond, the bond shall be returned to the permittee within 30 days of
the completion of the filming.
B. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Borough
Police Department with respect thereto.
C. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
D. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
E. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier,
provided that all requests for night scenes shall be approved in the
permit to be granted in accordance with these regulations. The setup,
production and breakdown required by all filming shall be included in
the hours as set forth herein.
F. Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or effect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed,
and any objections may be filed with the Borough Administrator, said
objections to form a part of applicant's application and be considered in
the review of the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent
owners shall be submitted to the Borough Administrator within two
days of the requested shooting date.
G. The Borough reserves the right to require one or more on-site
patrolmen in situations where the proposed production may impede the
proper flow of traffic; the cost of said patrolmen to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines
are to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may
be similarly required if the production company does not have a
licensed electrician on staff.
§ 123-3 MUTUAL AID § 123-3
46:251
§ 123-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized herein are as
follows:
§ 123-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
within the Borough of Allendale.
§ 123-6. Violations and penalties.
Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit required
by this chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be liable for
violations hereof. Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter or
these rules and regulations, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
H. The Borough Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming
on other public property not defined as "public lands" and may
authorize filming other than during the hours herein described or may
extend the duration of a permit beyond 10 days or may waive any other
limitation or requirement of this chapter whenever he determines that
strict compliance with such limitations will pose an unreasonable
burden upon the applicant and that such a permit may be issued
without endangering the public's health, safety and welfare.
I. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall notify the Fire Department and the
Police Department 24 hours before filming takes place and permit the
Fire Department and the Police Department to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all fire and
safety instructions issued by the Fire Department and the Police
Department.
A. Basic filming permit: $100. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provisions of § 123-2A requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming fee shall be $125.
B. Daily filming fee in addition to the basic filming permit: $500 per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture: $1,500 per day,
except that recurrent weekly television programming fees shall be
charged in accordance with Subsections A and B above.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
§ 123-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 123-6
46:252
Chapter 125
FIREARMS
§ 125-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted as a measure to safeguard the residents of the
Borough of Allendale and to protect their property.
§ 125-2. Discharge prohibited.
No person or persons shall at any time fire or discharge or cause to be fired
or discharged any pistol, shotgun, rifle or other firearm within the limits of
the Borough of Allendale.
§ 125-3. Exceptions. [Amended 12-14-2017]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of firearms by police officers
in the discharge of their duties, the use of firearms for the protection of life,
person or property or the use of firearms pursuant to a wildlife management
program approved by a resolution or ordinance adopted by the Borough
Council.
§ 125-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 128
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 26, Art. I.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82.
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Occupancy limits; unsafe structures — See
Ch. 180.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Vacant/abandoned properties — See Ch. 248.
§ 123-6 MUTUAL AID § 125-4
46:253

ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code Enforcement
§ 128-1. Local enforcement authorized.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act50 (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough
of Allendale.
§ 128-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Allendale Fire Department.
§ 128-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Allendale,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 128-4. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 128-2 hereof shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 128-5. Organization of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency established by § 128-2 hereof shall be a part of
Allendale Fire Department and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Official.
§ 128-6. Fire Official, inspectors and employees.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the direct supervision of a Fire Official, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Allendale with the advice and
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve a term of one year. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council with the advice and recommendation of the Fire
Official for terms of one year. Inspectors and other employees of the
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 128-1 MUTUAL AID § 128-6
46:255
§ 128-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,51 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Bergen County.
§ 128-8. Additional required inspections and fees.
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the Fire Official for
inefficiency or misconduct after a hearing by the appointing authority.
D. Assistant Fire Official. An inspector, who has obtained all of the
requirements for the appointment as Fire Official, may be appointed by
the Mayor and Council with the advice and recommendation of the
Chief of the Fire Department and the Fire Official, for a term of one year
to be an Assistant Fire Official. The Assistant Fire Official may perform
all of the duties of the Fire Official upon the Fire Official's absence,
unavailability, or unwillingness to perform the duties of Fire Official.
[Added 1-25-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
A. In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
(1) All industrial and commercial buildings and structures within the
boundaries of the Borough of Allendale not covered under the
Uniform Fire Safety Act.
(2) Eating and/or drinking establishments within a maximum
permitted occupancy of less than 50 in which no alcoholic
beverages are served.
B. Each additional inspection herein directed shall require an inspection
fee of $20, paid annually to the enforcing agency. The annual inspection
fee shall be billed annually in accordance with the procedure
established by the Administrator's office.
C. A certificate of fire code status shall be furnished upon application
therefor and the payment of a certificate fee in the amount of $5.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
§ 128-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 128-8
46:256
ARTICLE II
Fireworks Displays
[Added 9-25-1986]
§ 128-9. Permit required. [Amended 12-9-1999]
A permit for the display or discharge of fireworks in the Borough of
Allendale shall be obtained from the Mayor and Council. Such permit shall
only be issued upon recommendation of the Chief of the Police Department
and the Fire Department and the Fire Official.
§ 128-10. Permit applications. [Amended 12-9-1999]
Application for permits shall be made, in writing, at least 45 days in advance
of the date of the display or discharge of fireworks, with immediate
notification to the Fire Official of the application. The sale, possession, use
and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful under the terms
and conditions approved with the permit and for that purpose only. A permit
granted hereunder shall not be transferable, nor shall any such permit be
extended beyond the dates set out therein.
§ 128-11. Bond required.
The permittee shall furnish a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the
Mayor and Council and in form approved by the Borough Attorney. Such
bond shall be for the payment of all damages which may be caused either
to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display
and arising from any acts of the permittee or his agents, employees or
subcontractors.
§ 128-9 MUTUAL AID § 128-11
46:257

ARTICLE III
Smoke Detector Certificate of Inspection
[Added 11-14-1991]
§ 128-12. Installation.
Smoke detectors shall be installed in each dwelling as defined in N.J.S.A.
52:27D-196 upon a sale, rental, transfer, lease or change of occupancy
of any dwelling in the Borough of Allendale. Each dwelling that is sold,
rented, leased or transferred shall have a smoke-sensitive alarm device
on each level of the structure and outside each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and located on or near the ceiling
in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Standard No.
74-1984 for the installation, maintenance and use of household fire-warning
equipment. The installation of battery-operated smoke-sensitive alarm
devices shall be accepted as meeting the requirements of this article.
Smoke-sensitive devices shall be tested and listed by a product certification
agency recognized by the State Bureau of Fire Safety.
§ 128-13. Maintenance responsibility.
§ 128-14. Inspection; report.
Upon the transfer of title of a dwelling unit accompanied by a change in the
occupancy thereof, the seller, landlord or transferor is required to obtain
from the Allendale Construction Code Official a certificate of continued
occupancy evidencing that the property is in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Construction Code Official or his designee shall notify
the Allendale Bureau of Fire Prevention as to the results of his inspection.
§ 128-15. Fee; submission of application.
The fee for the certificate of continued occupancy pursuant hereto shall
be as set forth in § 100-3A(8)(a). Applications for certificates of continued
occupancy shall be submitted to the office of the Construction Code Official
of the Borough of Allendale, with the application fee prepaid. Within 10 to
A. Sellers, transferors, lessors, buyers, transferees and tenants of all
dwelling units subject to this chapter shall be responsible for the
correct installation and maintenance of smoke detectors as described
herein. The owner of a rental unit shall, at the time of installation of
smoke detectors and thereafter at the commencement of each tenancy,
provide to the tenant at least one copy of written instructions on the
operation, maintenance and testing of the smoke detector, including the
replacement of batteries in the battery-operated unit.
B. The owner and tenant of each rental unit shall be responsible for the
proper maintenance of the smoke detectors, including replacement of
batteries and repair or replacement of the unit in accordance with the
standards herein set forth.
§ 128-12 MUTUAL AID § 128-15
46:259
15 days of the receipt of the application and fee, the designated inspector
of the office of the Construction Code Official shall inspect the premises to
determine whether the same complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 128-16. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter of the Code of the
Borough of Allendale, any person or corporation, including an officer,
director or employee of a corporation, who violates any of the provisions
of this article shall commit a violation of the Uniform Fire Safety Act of
New Jersey52 and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for
a first offense and for each and every subsequent and separate offense
which shall be enforceable by civil action in a summary manner under the
Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq., with further provisions
that a violator who fails to pay may be imprisoned for up to six months. In
case of continuing violations, each day that the violation persists shall be
deemed a separate violation. In addition, the violator shall become liable
to the Borough of Allendale for the cost of suppressing any fire directly or
indirectly resulting from the violation pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
52:27D-210.
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 128-15 ALLENDALE CODE § 128-16
46:260
ARTICLE IV
Technical Amendments to Uniform Fire Code
[Added 12-9-1999]
§ 128-17. Purpose and intent.
The Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., requires certain properties
to be equipped with automatic alarm systems and/or sprinkler systems.
Such automatic systems may cause the Fire Department of the Borough of
Allendale to be summoned at a time when the structure is not occupied or
when the occupant is not able to provide entry for the Fire Department.
Accordingly, the Borough of Allendale intends to prevent damage through
forceful entry to structures and furthermore to provide swift entry to
structures by the Fire Department. Under N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.4(c) et seq., a
municipality may, by ordinance, make its fire code more restrictive than the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 128-18. Key box.
§ 128-19. Time for compliance.
All buildings subject to this article shall comply within 12 months from the
effective date hereof. All buildings under construction or new, unoccupied
buildings on the effective date hereof shall comply immediately.
§ 128-20. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, occupant and/or tenant of a building who violates this article
shall be subject to penalties as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
A. Any property within the Borough of Allendale having an automatic fire
alarm or a fire suppression system shall be equipped with a key box.
This requirement shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings.
B. The key box shall be of a UL type and approved by the Allendale Fire
Official. The key box shall be installed in a location approved by the
Allendale Fire Official.
C. The key boxes shall contain the following:
(1) Keys to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior
of such buildings;
(2) Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
(3) Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
(4) Keys to the elevator controls;
(5) Keys to any other areas as directed by the Fire Official; and
(6) A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
§ 128-17 MUTUAL AID § 128-20
46:261
Chapter 132
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Soil movement — See Ch. 225.
Stormwater control — Ch. 231.
Stream corridor protection — Ch. 232.
Zoning — Ch. 270.
§ 128-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 128-20
46:262
ARTICLE I
Title, Statutory Authorization, Findings, Purpose and Objectives
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance of
the Borough of Allendale."
§ 132-2. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Allendale, Bergen County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 132-3. Findings of fact.
§ 132-4. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Allendale are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
§ 132-1 MUTUAL AID § 132-4
46:263
§ 132-5. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 132-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-5
46:264
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 132-6. Terms defined.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO,
A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
§ 132-6 MUTUAL AID § 132-6
46:265
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 132-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-6
46:266
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without accumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 132-6 MUTUAL AID § 132-6
46:267
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. No. 97-348),53 includes substantial improvements and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab
or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
53.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C.A. § 3501 et seq.
§ 132-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-6
46:268
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition
before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 132-6 MUTUAL AID § 132-6
46:269

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 132-7. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Allendale, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 132-8. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 132-9. Compliance required; violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Allendale
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 132-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 132-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for Borough of Allendale, Community
No. 340019, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panels 34003C0067H,
34003C0069J, 34003C0086J, 34003C0088J, whose effective date is
August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 500
West Crescent Avenue, Allendale, New Jersey 07401.
§ 132-7 MUTUAL AID § 132-11
46:271
§ 132-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Allendale, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 132-11 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-12
46:272
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 132-13. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 132-8. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Code Official
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 132-14. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 132-15. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 132-18B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Construction Code Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 132-19 are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 132-8,
§ 132-13 MUTUAL AID § 132-15
46:273
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 132-18A, Specific standards, residential
construction, and § 132-18B, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. A licensed professional
engineer or surveyor will certify and the Construction Code Official
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 132-13C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Code Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review. The Construction Code Official shall:
(1) After an event resulting in building damage, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 132-18A, Specific standards, residential construction, § 132-18B,
Specific standards, nonresidential construction and § 132-18C,
Specific standards, manufactured homes.
§ 132-15 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-15
46:274
§ 132-16. Variance procedure.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Code Official shall
make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 132-16.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Land Use Board, as established by Allendale Borough Council,
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Land Use Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Land Use Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as
provided by law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Land Use Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
§ 132-15 MUTUAL AID § 132-16
46:275
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Land Use Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsection A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
§ 132-16 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-16
46:276
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4) or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 132-16 MUTUAL AID § 132-16
46:277

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 132-17. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 132-17 MUTUAL AID § 132-17
46:279
§ 132-18. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 132-8, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 132-15B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of
each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
§ 132-17 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-18
46:280
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more restrictive base flood elevation plus one foot or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(2) Within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above
the depth number specified in feet plus one foot above the highest
adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is specified),
and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment
either:
(1) Elevated at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified); and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures; or
(3) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table
6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(4) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(5) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 132-15C.
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 132-17A.
§ 132-18 MUTUAL AID § 132-18
46:281
§ 132-19. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 132-8 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 132-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 132-19
46:282
ARTICLE VI
Severability
§ 132-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 132-20 MUTUAL AID § 132-20
46:283

ARTICLE VII
Enactment
§ 132-21. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective upon passage and publication as provided by
law and shall remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the
Borough of Allendale, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 132-21 MUTUAL AID § 132-21
46:285
Chapter 134
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
§ 134-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCEPTIONS — Churches, schools, and quasi-public entities, as approved
at the annual reorganization meeting of the Governing Body, are exempt
from the regulations governing goods.
GARAGE SALES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Includes all sales entitled
"garage sale," "neighborhood garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale,"
"rummage sale," "flea market sale," "neighborhood sale," "estate sale,"
"yard sale" or any similar casual sale of tangible property which is
advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made
aware of said sale. Excluded from the meaning of this term shall be auctions
or similar events at which tangible personal property is sold to the highest
bidder.
GOODS — Includes any household goods, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder; provided,
however, that such goods, merchandise or other property is not purchased
and/or brought onto the premises specifically for the purpose of resale.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations,
organizations and corporations.
§ 134-2. License required; fee; limitation on number; term; display.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
Borough of Allendale without first filing with the Allendale Borough
Clerk the information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such
Clerk a license to do to, to be known as a "garage sale license." The fee
for such license shall be $10.
B. Only two such licenses shall be issued for a garage sale at any one
particular dwelling or parcel of land within any one calendar year, and
no such license shall be issued for more than three consecutive
calendar days.
C. Each license issued under this article must be prominently displayed on
the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the licensed sale.
§ 132-21 ALLENDALE CODE § 134-2
46:286
§ 134-3. Applications.
Application for a license shall be made, in writing, to the Borough Clerk at
least five days prior to the date of commencement of such sale and shall set
forth the following:
§ 134-4. Hours of sale.
Any garage sale authorized under the provisions of this article shall be
conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. only.
§ 134-5. Signs.
D. Persons conducting any garage sale in the Borough as part of any
Borough-wide garage sale approved in advance by the Borough
pursuant to a resolution shall not be required to obtain a license
referred to in § 134-2A hereinabove, but shall be required to comply
with all other provisions of this chapter.
E. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, no person
shall conduct more than two garage sales at any one particular dwelling
or parcel of kind within any one calendar year, inclusive of any garage
sales conducted by any such person as part of any Borough-wide garage
sales referred to in § 134-2D hereinabove.
A. Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
B. Name of the owners of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted and consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the
owner.
C. Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. Date or dates of the sale.
E. Date and nature of any prior sale.
F. Relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any other
person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sale.
G. General description of the type of goods to be sold, including a
statement as to whether or not any of said merchandise was purchased
by the applicant for the purpose of resale.
H. Whether or not the sale will be held indoors or outdoors, or both.
A. The following shall be the sole signs permitted in connection with
garage sales:
§ 134-2 MUTUAL AID § 134-5
46:287
§ 134-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 134-7. Enforcement.
It shall be duty of the Borough Property Maintenance Official and the Police
Department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 134-8. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates or
refuses to comply with this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of $100 for
each offense.
Chapter 135
(1) One on-premises sign, not exceeding three square feet in area,
posted only on the scheduled sale days, which sign shall be
removed immediately after the sale has been concluded.
(2) Two off-premises signs may be posted on a municipal right-of-way
and not on private property, provided that such signs shall be
freestanding and shall not exceed three square feet in area, which
signs shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale has been
concluded.
B. The name and address of the licensee shall be posted on the sign.
C. No signs shall be permitted to be posted on such structures as
telephone poles, street signs, trees or fences.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough54 or under the
protection of the nonconforming use provisions thereof, or any other
sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited in the Code.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 134-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 134-8
46:288
GLUE SALES AND HEAD SHOPS
§ 134-8 MUTUAL AID § 134-8
46:289

ARTICLE I
Glue Sales
§ 135-1. Definition.
As used in this article, the phrase "glue containing a solvent having the
property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes" shall mean and include any
glue, cement or other adhesive or other materials containing one or more
of the following chemical compounds: acetone, an acetate, benzene, butyl
alcohol, ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, isopropyl alcohol, methyl alcohol,
methyl ethyl ketone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum either, or toluene.
§ 135-2. Inhaling fumes prohibited.
No person shall, for the purpose of causing or inducing in himself or herself
or in another person a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement,
exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling or his or her senses or nervous system,
intentionally inhale or smell or intentionally assist another person to inhale
or smell the fumes or vapors from any glue containing a solvent which has
the property of releasing toxic fumes or vapors.
§ 135-3. Buying or selling for unlawful purpose prohibited.
No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another person to
violate any provision of this article, buy, sell, possess, transfer possession or
receive possession of any glue containing a solvent having the property of
releasing toxic fumes or vapors.
§ 135-4. Purchases by or sales to minors.
No person under the age of 18 years shall possess or buy any glue
containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic fumes or vapors,
and no person shall sell or transfer possession to any person under the age
of 18 years any glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing
toxic fumes or vapors; provided, however, that nothing contained in this
section shall prohibit the sale or transfer of possession to, or the purchase
or possession of any such glue by, a person under the age of 18 years where
said minor has in his or her possession and exhibits the written consent
of his or her parent or guardian; provided, further, that nothing contained
herein shall be deemed to prohibit the sale of a model kit containing as a
part thereof a container of any such glue; and provided further that nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the transfer or possession of
any such glue to any minor by the parent or guardian of said minor.
§ 135-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment in the
county/municipal jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof as
determined by the Municipal Court Judge. Each day on which a violation of
§ 135-1 MUTUAL AID § 135-5
46:291
this ordinance exists shall be considered a separate and distinct violation
and shall be subject to imposition of a separate penalty for each day of the
violation as the Municipal Court Judge may determine.
§ 135-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 135-5
46:292
ARTICLE II
Head Shops
§ 135-6. Sales or display of certain materials prohibited.
No person shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or other "drug
paraphernalia," as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1, used or intended
to be used in or for smoking, testing, weighing, measuring, injecting,
cooking, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish, any toxic substance or other
"controlled dangerous substances" or "controlled substance analog" as such
terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2
§ 135-7. Buildings used for manufacture or distribution of
paraphernalia considered nuisance.
It shall constitute a common nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance
or premises whatsoever which is resorted to by persons for the
manufacture, distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type
of syringe, needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper or
other "drug paraphernalia," as such term is defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:36-1, used
or intended to be used in or for smoking, testing, weighing, measuring,
injecting, cooking, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish, any toxic substance or
other "controlled dangerous substances" or "controlled substance analog"
as such terms are defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
§ 135-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment in the
county/municipal jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof as
determined by the Municipal Court Judge. Each day on which a violation of
this ordinance exists shall be considered a separate penalty for each day of
the violation as the Municipal Court Judge may determine.
§ 135-6 MUTUAL AID § 135-8
46:293
Chapter 137
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Improper disposal of waste to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 141.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 135-8 ALLENDALE CODE § 135-8
46:294
ARTICLE I
Improper Disposal
[Adopted 5-14-201555]
§ 137-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of hazardous materials on any property owned by the Borough of Allendale,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 137-2. Word usage; definitions.
§ 137-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, release, discharge or disposal of hazardous materials
on any real property owned by the Borough of Allendale is prohibited. The
spilling, dumping, or disposal of hazardous materials in such a manner as
to cause the discharge of hazardous materials to any property owned by the
Borough of Allendale is also prohibited.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the rest of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those substances and/or materials which,
when released, discharged, placed or dumped into the environment,
pollute, or which are harmful or injurious to, said environment,
including but not limited to those substances and materials described
in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 6901
et seq., the New Jersey Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11 et seq., the New Jersey Industrial Site Recovery Act, as
well as those described in any applicable state or local laws and the
regulations promulgated under any of the foregoing acts or laws, as
same may be amended.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
55.Editor's Note: This article was originally enacted as Ch. 142 but was renumbered to fit the
organizational structure of the Code.
§ 137-1 MUTUAL AID § 137-4
46:295
§ 137-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Borough Engineers
and other Code Officials of or contracted by the Borough of Allendale.
§ 137-5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 for a
first offense and up to $2,000 for a second and each subsequent offense.
§ 137-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 137-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 137-6
46:296
ARTICLE II
Recovery of Costs of Cleanup
[Adopted 5-28-201556]
§ 137-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assign to the transporter or owner of
materials the responsibility for the cost of cleaning and clearing spills onto
the roadways or property located in the Borough of Allendale.
§ 137-8. Responsible parties.
The following described parties are responsible for all of the costs incurred
by the Borough of Allendale for the cleanup of materials dumped, spilled,
discharged, released or leaked onto public or private property:
§ 137-9. Notification and cleanup.
In the event there is a spill of any materials covered under this article within
the Borough of Allendale, the generator, transporter, owner or the person
or persons responsible therefor shall immediately notify the Borough of
the spill and shall immediately, unless directed otherwise by the Borough,
clean up or arrange for the cleanup of the spill. The cleanup shall be
undertaken in accordance with all applicable federal and state regulations
and procedures.
§ 137-10. Cleanup costs.
In the event the Borough of Allendale determines that it is within the
interest of the citizens of the Borough of Allendale that the Borough of
Allendale or its agents or contractors clean up a spill, the persons or entities
responsible shall reimburse the Borough of Allendale for all of the costs and
A. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any vehicle
for any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous material, whether
stationary or in transit, whether accidental or intentional.
B. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any vessel
responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous
material, whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or
intentional.
C. The owner, operator, lessee or other party responsible for any property
from which any leak, discharge, spill or release of hazardous material
emanates, whether public or private, whether accidental or intentional.
D. Any person or entity responsible for any leak, discharge, spill or release
of any hazardous material on public or private property, whether
accidental or intentional.
56.Editor's Note: This article was originally enacted as Ch. 143 but was renumbered to fit the
organizational structure of the Code.
§ 137-7 MUTUAL AID § 137-10
46:297
expenses incurred for, and related to, said cleanup, including but not limited
to the following:
§ 137-11. Time limit for reimbursement.
Any party responsible for costs as described herein shall reimburse the
Borough of Allendale the full amount of said costs within 45 days after a
receipt of a bill for the costs.
§ 137-12. Violations and penalties.
Any responsible parties as described herein who fail to reimburse the
Borough of Allendale for obligations described in this article within 45 days
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both. Upon failure
to reimburse the Borough of Allendale for the cost of said items within
the forty-five day period, in addition to any penalties described herein, the
Borough of Allendale may take such action as may be provided by law to
recover costs from the responsible party, including legal fees and any other
costs of collection.
A. Any and all items or materials or equipment utilized to control
contamination or to clean up the materials.
B. Any and all labor costs incurred by the Borough of Allendale for actual
labor and/or personnel use in connection with the cleanup or
containment of any leak, discharge, spill or release of materials.
C. Any fees paid to attorneys to enforce this article and/or to collect said
fees due under this article.
D. Any and all fees paid to engineers, contractors, agents or other
individuals retained by or paid by the Borough of Allendale in
connection with the cleanup of materials.
E. Any and all medical costs incurred by personnel assisting in the cleanup
of materials.
F. Any and all fines or penalties that may be imposed upon the Borough, or
incurred by the Borough, relating to such spill.
§ 137-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 137-12
46:298
Chapter 140
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Improper disposal of waste to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 141.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Sewer use — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Stream corridor protection — See Ch. 232.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 262, Art. I.
§ 140-1. Purpose.
A chapter to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Allendale, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Allendale unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier. A municipal stormwater general permit (NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
§ 137-12 MUTUAL AID § 140-2
46:299
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Allendale or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 140-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Allendale any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 140-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Certified
Public Works Manager or his designee.
§ 140-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 140-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
§ 140-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 140-6
46:300
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 140-7. Repealer.
All other ordinance of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 140-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 141
IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Illicit connections to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 140.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Sewer use — See Ch. 220.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 262, Art. I.
§ 141-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials, other than stormwater, to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Borough of Allendale, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 141-2. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the rest of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
§ 140-6 MUTUAL AID § 141-2
46:301
§ 141-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Allendale is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 141-4. Exceptions.
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Allendale or other public body and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscaping and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted steam flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool and spa
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material application. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from the equipment and vehicle to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
§ 141-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 141-4
46:302
§ 141-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Borough
Engineers and other Code Officials of or contracted by the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 141-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 for a
first offense and up to $2,000 for a second and each subsequent offense.
§ 141-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 147
LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 40.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Fees — See Ch. 120.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Plot plan approval — See Ch. 196.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Sewer use — See Ch. 220.
Soil movement — See Ch. 225.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Stream corridor protection — See Ch. 232.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
Trees — See Ch. 244.
Water — See Ch. 262.
Zoning — See Ch. 270.
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 141-4 MUTUAL AID § 141-7
46:303

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 147-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale."
§ 147-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations and standards
to guide land subdivision and the development of land in the Borough
in order to promote its public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development,
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities and services.
§ 147-3. Administration by Planning Board.
As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, the provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by the Planning Board; provided, however, that whenever,
pursuant to law or ordinance, the Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction to
grant the plan or subdivision approval, then the applicable provisions of this
chapter shall be administered by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 147-4. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to repeal the Zoning Ordinance or
any part thereof. All other ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed superseded to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 147-5. Rules, regulations and standards minimal; variances
permissible.
The rules, regulations and standards contained in this chapter shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken
by the Planning Board under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the subdivider or site plan applicant or
his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these
regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning
Board may permit such variance or variances as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this chapter.
§ 147-1 MUTUAL AID § 147-5
46:305

ARTICLE II
Subdivision and Site Plan Approval
§ 147-6. Subdivision approval required.
No person shall sell or agree to sell any land which forms part of an
existing lot until final approval of a subdivision of such lot has been obtained
pursuant to this chapter. The provision herein shall not be construed so as
to preclude the right to contract for the sale of property contingent upon
subdivision approval.
§ 147-7. Issuance of construction permit or certificate of occupancy
contingent upon site plan approval; exception. [Amended
7-23-1998, 10-6-2008]
A. Except as may be otherwise provided for herein, no construction permit
or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a new building or for an
addition to an existing structure or building unless a site plan shall have
first been approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the terms
of this chapter.
B. Ordinary or minor repairs, renovations or alterations.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, site
plan approval shall not be required where:
(a) Ordinary or minor repairs to the exterior or interior of a
building do not involve structural changes or enlargements of
the building, as defined in the Uniform Construction Code of
the State of New Jersey.
(b) Renovations or alterations to the exterior or interior of any
building or structure do not involve any enlargement of the
building or major structural change, as defined in the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey.
(2) However, the Construction Code Official shall refer any application
for a building or construction permit, or for a certificate of
occupancy or compliance, to the Planning Board for review or site
plan approval as provided for by Chapter 147, § 147-7A, where the
construction, reconstruction, alteration or change of use may affect
circulation, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping,
signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading or other off-tract
conditions or the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental
factors and other considerations as may be specified in this
chapter.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, no site
plan approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a construction
permit and certificate of occupancy for any new building or addition to
an existing building if such building or addition is used or is to be used
solely as a single- or two-family dwelling or as an accessory thereto.
§ 147-6 MUTUAL AID § 147-7
46:307
§ 147-8. Minor subdivision procedures and plat details.
For a minor subdivision, the procedure shall be as follows:
However, in such cases a plot plan shall be submitted to the
Construction Official.
D. No construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any community residence for the developmentally disabled, community
shelter for victims of domestic violence, community residence for
persons with head injuries or community residence for the terminally ill
(as defined under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2) except upon application to the
Planning Board which shall ensure compliance with the statutes and
regulations of the State of New Jersey and the ordinances of the
Borough pertaining to such community residences.
E. No site plan approval or Land Use Board review shall be required prior
to the issuance of a construction permit in connection with the
installation, construction and/or use of light structures regulated by
§ 270-32.1. [Added 3-2-2017]
A. Fifteen copies, together with an electronic copy in PDF format, shall be
submitted to the Borough Clerk in writing on forms supplied by the
Planning Board, furnishing pertinent data such as names and addresses
of the owner, agent and engineer and identification of property
involved. [Amended 12-11-2014]
B. The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a plat of the
proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor. All design
shall be done by a licensed professional engineer. The plat shall be of a
size permitted by the New Jersey Map Filing Act and shall be in
conformity with the Title Block Law and shall contain the following:
(1) Title of development.
(2) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(3) Date; all revisions shall be noted and dated.
(4) North arrow and scale.
(5) The name and address of record owner, name and address of the
subdivider, and name, address, license number and seal of person
preparing the plat.
(6) The names, as shown on current tax records, of all adjoining
property owners and the block and lot numbers of such property.
(7) The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
(8) Acreage, to the nearest 10th of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided; the area, in square feet, of all lots to be created; and
§ 147-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-8
46:308
the area, in square feet, that may be measured in accordance with
the Zoning Ordinance.
(9) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(10) Easements, covenants, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way and drainage
easements within the boundaries of the subdivision.
(11) The location of all existing structures and wooded areas within the
subdivision and within 50 feet thereof.
(12) Any variance or variances required.
(13) If regrading of the site, other than in the foundation area of any
proposed buildings or within 10 feet, is to be done, a map showing
existing and proposed contours at contour intervals of two feet for
slopes of less than 10% and intervals of five feet for slopes of more
than 10% shall be submitted. Existing contours are to be indicated
by dashed lines and proposed contours are to be indicated by solid
lines.
(14) Signature blocks (Planning Board, County Planning Board,
Borough Clerk, etc.).
C. The Planning Board shall require receipt of an application 10 days prior
to the meeting at which action is to be taken on such application.
D. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Board shall,
within the time periods prescribed by the applicable ordinances,
approve or conditionally approve the subdivision without the necessity
of full notice and public hearing, classify the subdivision as a major
subdivision or disapprove the subdivision. The Planning Board may, in
addition to any other conditions which the Planning Board may deem
necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, require as a
condition for minor subdivision approval that the applicant install such
improvements required by Article III of this chapter as the Planning
Board, in accordance with law, shall deem necessary. Such
improvements shall be in accordance with standards set forth in Article
IV, and performance guaranties may be required in accordance with
Article VI.
E. The Borough Clerk shall return the approved minor subdivision plat to
the subdivider for filing with the County of Bergen. The required
number of copies of the filed plat shall be provided by the subdivider to
the Borough Engineer for distribution to the:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
§ 147-8 MUTUAL AID § 147-8
46:309
§ 147-8.1. Minor site plan procedures and plat details. [Added
12-26-2009]
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Borough Planning Board.
(6) County Planning Board.
(7) Tax Collector.
(8) Board of Health.
(9) Public Works Superintendent (Water and Sewer).
A. Minor site plan review by the Planning Board. Notwithstanding the
definition of "minor site plan" set forth in § 147-50, the Planning Board
may determine, in any application for a site plan or referral from the
Construction Code Official for review or site plan, that the referral or
application, while conforming to the definition of minor site plan, does
not require Planning Board approval because the literal enforcement of
the minor site plan requirements are impractical or will exact undue
hardship upon the applicant and that the proposed change of use does
not adversely affect any municipal considerations concerning the
health, safety or general welfare. In the event of such determination,
the Planning Board may refer the matter to the Construction Code
Official or other appropriate administrative officer for the issuance of
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance in accordance with
the provisions of Article XX of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough
with such conditions or recommendations as it may deem appropriate
in order to insure compliance with the Land Use Ordinances of the
Borough.
B. For a minor site plan, 15 copies, together with an electronic copy in
PDF format, shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk in writing on
forms supplied by the Borough, furnishing pertinent data such as the
names and addresses of the owner, agent and engineer and
identification of property involved. The application shall be
accompanied by 15 copies of a plat, together with an electronic copy in
PDF format, of the proposed site plan, accurately drawn to a scale of
not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a licensed land
surveyor or engineer. All designs shall be done by a licensed
professional engineer. The plat shall contain the following: [Amended
12-11-2014]
(1) Title of development.
(2) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(3) Date; all revisions shall be noted and dated.
(4) North arrow and scale.
§ 147-8 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-8.1
46:310
(5) The name and address of record owner, name and address of the
subdivider, and name, address, license number and seal of person
preparing the plat.
(6) The names, as shown on current tax records, of all adjoining
property owners and the block and lot numbers of such property.
(7) The location of the site plan in relation to the entire tract.
(8) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the entire tract, and the
area, in square feet, that may be measured in accordance with the
Zoning Ordinance.
(9) A key map showing the entire site plan and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(10) Easements, covenants, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way and drainage
easements within the boundaries of the site plan.
(11) The location of all existing structures and wooded areas within the
site plan and within 50 feet thereof.
(12) Any variance or variances required.
(13) If regrading of the site, other than in the foundation area of any
proposed buildings or within 10 feet, is to be done, a map showing
existing and proposed contours at contour intervals of two feet for
slopes of less than 10% and intervals of five feet for slopes of more
than 10% shall be submitted. Existing contours are to be indicated
by dashed lines and proposed contours are to be indicated by solid
lines.
(14) Signature blocks (Planning Board, County Planning Board,
Borough Clerk, etc.).
C. The Planning Board shall require receipt of a complete application not
less than 10 days prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be
heard.
D. Upon receipt of a complete application, as defined and provided for by
§ 40-33, Chapter 40, Land Use Procedures, the Planning Board shall,
within the time periods prescribed by § 147-9 herein, approve or
conditionally approve the site plan without the necessity of full notice
and public hearing, classify the site plan as a major site plan or
disapprove the site plan. The Planning Board may, in addition to any
other conditions which the Planning Board may deem necessary in
order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, require as a condition
for minor site plan approval that the applicant install such
improvements required by Article III of this chapter as the Planning
Board, in accordance with law, shall deem necessary. Such
improvements shall be in accordance with standards set forth in Article
§ 147-8.1 MUTUAL AID § 147-8.1
46:311
§ 147-9. Sketch plat; procedure for preliminary approval of major
subdivision or site plan.
V, and performance guaranties may be required in accordance with
Article VI.
E. If the minor site plan is approved, the Borough Clerk shall return the
approved minor site plan plat to the developer and the required number
of copies of the plat shall be distributed by the developer to the
following Borough Officials, Agencies and Departments:
(1) Borough Clerk.
(2) Borough Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Borough Planning Board.
(6) County Planning Board.
(7) Tax Collector.
(8) Board of Health.
(9) Director of Operations.
A. Sketch plat.
(1) Prior to formally seeking preliminary approval for a major
subdivision, any applicant may submit a sketch plat to the Planning
Board. The sketch plat procedure is optional to the applicant, and
the sketch plat plan shall be based on Tax Map information or some
other similarly accurate base at a scale not less than 100 feet to one
inch to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet, and shall
show or include the following information:
(a) Name of subdivision and name(s) and address(es) of owner(s).
(b) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in
relation to the entire tract.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers and zone district.
(d) All streets or roads abutting the subdivision.
(e) All streams and storm drains within 500 feet.
(f) All existing structures on the property.
(2) The time limitations set forth hereafter in this chapter shall not
apply to the sketch plat procedure nor commence until such
procedure has been concluded.
§ 147-8.1 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-9
46:312
B. For preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the
procedure shall be as follows:
(1) Fifteen copies of an application, together with an electronic copy in
PDF format, shall be submitted 10 days prior to the meeting at
which action is to be taken on such application to the Borough
Clerk in writing on forms supplied by the Planning Board,
furnishing pertinent data such as names and addresses of the
owner, agent, engineer and identification of property involved. If
the owner is a corporation, the name and address of the President
and Secretary shall be shown in the application. [Amended
12-11-2014]
(2) The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies, together with
an electronic copy in PDF format, of a preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision or of the site plan, accurate and to a scale of
not less than one inch equals 100 feet, as to boundaries, existing
features and proposed features. All distances shall be in feet and
decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10
seconds. The accuracy of the boundaries and existing features shall
be certified by a licensed land surveyor. All design shall be done by
a licensed professional engineer. The plat shall be of a size
permitted by the New Jersey Map Filing Act,57 and the details of the
plat shall be in conformity with § 147-10A and also the Title Block
Law. [Amended 12-11-2014]
(3) Simultaneously with filing the application, copies of the preliminary
plat shall be forwarded by the applicant to the following persons:
the Borough Engineer (two copies); the Board of Health; the Chief
of Police; the Board of Public Works (two copies); the Fire
Prevention Bureau; the Shade Tree Commission; and the
Construction Official. The applicant shall produce proof by affidavit
of the date such copies were sent. Said persons and Boards may
make recommendations in writing to the Planning Board within 30
days after service on them of the preliminary plat. The Planning
Board shall take said recommendations into account but shall have
the authority to proceed in the absence of such recommendations
or to disregard or modify such recommendations. Copies of all
recommendations shall be sent to the applicant by the
recommending persons and boards.
(4) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Board shall
schedule a public hearing. The applicant shall thereupon give
notice of such hearing in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. Upon submission of a
completed application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots or a site
plan which involves 10 acres of land or less and 10 dwelling units or
fewer, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such further
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26A-1 et seq.
§ 147-9 MUTUAL AID § 147-9
46:313
§ 147-10. Preliminary site plan and subdivision plat details.
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission
of a completed application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots
or a site plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for the subdivision. [Amended 9-25-1986]
A. The preliminary plat of a site plan or major subdivision shall contain the
following:
(1) Title of development.
(2) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(3) Date; all revisions shall be noted and dated.
(4) North arrow and scale.
(5) The name and address of the record owner, name and address of
the subdivider and name, address, license number and seal of the
person preparing the plat.
(6) The names, as shown on the current tax records, of all owners of
the property within 200 feet of the subdivision and the block and lot
number of such property.
(7) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel or
within 200 feet thereof.
(8) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided; the area, in square feet, of all lots to be created; and
the area, in square feet, that may be measured in accordance with
the Zoning Ordinance.58
(9) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties and existing street intersections.
(10) Existing and proposed property lines, front setback lines and lines
of existing and proposed streets, lots, reservations, easements and
areas dedicated to public use, including grants, restrictions and
rights-of-way.
(11) Location of existing buildings and all other structures, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot elevations of such
buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 147-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-10
46:314
indicated by dashed lines: structures to remain shall be indicated
by solid lines.
(12) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations of inlets, manholes or
other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other elevations. If
any existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location of
said utility lines shall be shown.
(13) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of two feet for
slopes of less than 10% and an interval of five feet for slopes of
more than 10%. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed
lines and proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(14) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depression, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
(15) All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of curb, if
any, and location and size of utility lines conforming to the
standards and specifications of the Borough.
(16) The location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of water supply
or sewage disposal and treatment.
(17) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All site plans
and major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary, and
all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any
other surface areas contributing to the calculations, and showing
methods used in the drainage calculations.
(18) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions
or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with
the application.
(19) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
(20) Open spaces, if any, to be dedicated for public parks or playgrounds
or other public use and the location and use of all property
reserved for the common use of all property owners.
§ 147-10 MUTUAL AID § 147-10
46:315
§ 147-11. Effect of preliminary approval.
(21) Soil percolation tests or soil log tests, or both, when a public
sewage system is not available, and soil log tests when required by
the Borough Engineer.
(22) Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board or the County Planning Board for determination that the
details of the subdivision are in accordance with the standards of
this chapter and all other ordinances of the Borough and all other
applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions.
(23) Signature blocks (Planning Board, County Planning Board,
Borough Clerk, etc.).
B. In addition to the requirements of § 147-10A, the preliminary plat of a
site plan shall contain the following:
(1) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together with the
floor space of all buildings and the estimated number of employees.
If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time of
application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from the
site showing in particular the size and location of driveways and
curb cuts; walkways; the proposed traffic channels, if any;
additional width, if any, and any other means of controlling
vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and the location and design of
barrier-free access where appropriate.
(3) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers and the
elevation of bays.
(4) The type, location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
(5) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(6) The location and dimensions of proposed buffer areas.
(7) The proposed screening, landscaping and planting plan and
schedule.
(8) Proposed open spaces.
C. The applicant may at his option proceed directly with a final site plan
submission.
A. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection B of this section, confer upon the
§ 147-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-11
46:316
§ 147-12. Procedure for final approval.
For final approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the procedure shall be
as follows:
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements for
preservation of existing natural resources, for safe and efficient
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, for
screening, landscaping and location of structures and for exterior
lighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the municipality from modifying by ordinance such general terms
and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health
and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) above for such period of time longer than
three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic considerations and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Planning
Board may thereafter grant, an extension to preliminary approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
§ 147-11 MUTUAL AID § 147-12
46:317
A. Fifteen copies, together with an electronic copy in PDF format, of a
major subdivision or site plan and an application for final approval (15
copies) in a form approved by the Planning Board shall be submitted to
the Borough Clerk, together with the fees required, at least 10 days
prior to the meeting at which action is to be taken upon such
application. [Amended 12-11-2014]
B. Five white prints (blue or black on white) of the plat shall accompany
the application. Two additional prints shall be provided by the applicant
to the Borough Engineer.
C. The final plat shall not differ substantially from the preliminary plat as
approved.
D. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or Mylar at a scale
of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and in compliance with all the
provisions of the Map Filing Law and Title Block Law and the plat
details contained in § 147-13A of this chapter.
E. The Borough Clerk shall make a record of the date of submission of the
application and shall forthwith transmit the application to the Planning
Board.
F. Prior to final approval, the Planning Board, upon the advice of the
Borough Engineer, shall determine:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed in accordance with this chapter.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition to final approval.
(4) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the Planning Board and
the Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal,
engineering and other consultant reports, for recording fees and
for any other costs anticipated by the Board.
(5) Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted.
G. Prior to final approval, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board:
(1) A developer's agreement, prepared by the Planning Board Attorney
setting forth the obligations of the applicant in connection with the
final approval.
(2) A performance guaranty in a form satisfactory to the Planning
Board and Borough complying with this chapter and guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
(3) Maintenance guaranties for any work completed prior to final
approval.
§ 147-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-12
46:318
(4) Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way or public lands, in a form
satisfactory to the Planning Board Attorney.
(5) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the Board for costs incurred or
to be incurred for legal, engineering and other consultant reports,
for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the
Planning Board.
(6) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
Planning Board.
H. Within 45 days after submission of a completed application to the
Borough Clerk or within such further time as may be agreed to by the
applicant, but in no event less than the thirty-day reporting period
within which the County Planning Board may act, the Planning Board
shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the final plat and
report said action, whether it is approval, conditional approval or
disapproval, to the Governing Body. In case of approval, the final plan
shall be so certified. The applicant shall be notified of the Planning
Board's action and the reasons therefor.
I. Upon final approval by the Planning Board and after all required
signatures are placed on the original tracing, the Borough Clerk shall
require the applicant to have one cloth print made to be filed with the
original tracing and 10 copies made of such final plat after filing, and to
provide said copies to the Borough Engineer for distribution to the
following:
(1) Secretary of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(2) Borough Engineer (two copies).
(3) Construction Official.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) Borough Clerk.
(6) Board of Health.
(7) Board of Public Works.
(8) Shade Tree Commission.
(9) Tax Collector.
J. Prior to final approval of any site plan for the erection of townhouses
within the A-U Zone District or garden apartments within the B-U Zone
District and for any plan and development as defined in the Municipal
Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq), the Planning Board shall find
the following facts and conclusions: [Added 2-26-1987]
§ 147-12 MUTUAL AID § 147-12
46:319
§ 147-13. Final site plan and subdivision plat details.
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the Zoning Ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
(2) The proposals for maintenance and conservation of common open
space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the
common open space are adequate.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. The final plat shall contain the following:
(1) Title of development.
(2) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(3) Date; all revisions shall be noted and dated.
(4) North arrow and scale.
(5) The name and address of record owner, the name and address of
the subdivider, the name, address, license number and seal of the
person preparing the plat.
(6) Names of owners of adjoining land.
(7) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflections, angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves.
(8) Acreage of entire tract; area, in square feet, of all lots; and area, in
square feet, that can be measured in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance.
(9) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use and the proposed use of sites other than residential.
§ 147-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-13
46:320
§ 147-14. As-built plans.
(10) The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plat boundaries within a
distance of 200 feet.
(11) Lot, block and house numbers as approved by the Borough
Engineer, including lot and block numbers of abutting property.
(12) Minimum building setback line on all lots.
(13) Location and description of all monuments.
(14) Certification by a surveyor as to the accuracy of details of the plat.
(15) Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(16) When approval of a plat is required by any other office or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been
made for such approval.
(17) Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal
on sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both
plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments
referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey level bench
marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and hundredths
of feet.
(18) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(19) Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(20)Written proof that the land set aside or shown for easement, public
use or streets is free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
(21) Signature blocks (Planning Board, County Planning Board,
Borough Clerk, etc.).
B. In addition to the requirements of § 147-13A, the final plat of a site plan
shall also contain the information required by § 147-10B.
A. After installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to be
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or land
surveyor:
(1) Plans showing:
(a) The contours, at five-foot intervals for lands having slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for lands of
lesser average slopes, of the land as finally graded; and
§ 147-13 MUTUAL AID § 147-14
46:321
(b) The location, as built, of all improvements required by this
chapter, including, without intending to limit the generality
hereof, the location of water mains, gas mains and
underground supply lines for light, power and telephone
service, and all of their appurtenances.
(2) Profiles, as built, of streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers, and
their respective appurtenances.
(3) Cross sections, as built, of streets.
B. The plans, profiles and cross sections required by this section are
hereinafter referred to as "as-built plans."
§ 147-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-14
46:322
ARTICLE III
Improvements
§ 147-15. Compliance required.
All improvements shall meet the design standards of this chapter.
§ 147-16. Required improvements for major subdivisions and site
plans.
A. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for the ultimate
installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
(1) Pavement of streets or portions thereof in accordance with the
Road Ordinance of the Borough.59
(2) Approved street signs.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil except in
accordance with the provisions of the Soil Ordinance of the
Borough.60 All replaced or redistributed topsoil shall be stabilized
by seeding, planting or such other method as may be specified in
the soil moving permit to ensure that it will remain in place and
free from erosion.
(5) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with said
statute.
(6) Utilities (including sewage disposal systems, storm drains and
culverts, water and gas mains and electrical supply lines for light,
power and telephone service), hydrants and connections thereto
with approved existing and proposed systems.
(7) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as
not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks and shall be of a type
approved by the Shade Tree Commission.61
(8) Where public water supply is not available and where a natural
pond or stream in or adjacent to the subdivision will permit, an
approved suction point for fire apparatus may be required.
(9) For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall arrange with any
serving utility for the underground installation of all utility
distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariffs as the same are then on file with
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Art. III, Street Openings and Excavations.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 225, Soil Removal and Importation.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Art. II, Shade Tree Commission, and Ch. 244, Trees.
§ 147-15 MUTUAL AID § 147-16
46:323
the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and
shall submit to the Planning Board prior to the granting of final
approval a written instrument from each serving utility which shall
evidence full compliance with the provisions of this subsection,
provided that lots in the subdivisions which abut existing streets
where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines have
theretofore been installed on any portion of the streets involved
may be supplied with electric and telephone service from such
overhead lines, but such service shall be installed underground.
The location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the
proposed subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as
part of the complete subdivision plan.
B. Water, sewer, drainage and street improvements.
(1) The subdivider or site plan applicant shall, at its own cost, provide
for the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer, drainage
and street improvements and easements therefor required by the
Planning Board in connection with the subdivision or site plan if
such off-tract improvements are wholly made necessary by the
subdivision or site plan or the improvement therein and do not
confer material benefits on any land other than the land within the
subdivision or site plan.
(2) The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for payment of
its proportionate share, allocated in accordance with this chapter,
of the cost of the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer,
drainage and street improvements and easements therefor
required by the Planning Board in connection with the subdivision
or site plan if such off-tract improvements are wholly or partially
made necessary by the subdivision or site plan or the
improvements thereon and confer benefit on lands other than those
within the subdivision or site plan.
C. Additional site plan improvements.
(1) In addition to the improvements set forth in Subsections A and B of
this section, a site plan applicant shall, upon the conditions
delineated by the Planning Board, provide for the ultimate
installation, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, of
the following:
(a) Buffer landscaping and foundation plantings.
(b) On-site paved parking areas and all appurtenant curbs, islands,
lighting and driveways.
(c) Fencing and screening.
(d) On-site lighting.
(e) On-site pedestrianways.
§ 147-16 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-16
46:324
§ 147-17. Inspection.
All of the improvements installed by a subdivider or site plan applicant shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall
be provided with final construction plans and notified by the subdivider or
site plan applicant at least 48 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(2) All such improvements shall meet the design standards of this
chapter.
D. Facilities for storage and collection of recyclables. Within any
development proposal of 50 or more single-family units, 25 multifamily
units, or commercial-industrial buildings of 1,000 square feet or more,
the proposal shall include provisions for the collection, disposition and
recycling of recyclable materials as specified under state, county and
municipal law so as to permit the storage and removal of such
containers. A plan for the location, storage area and removal of all
recyclable materials must be prepared by the developer and submitted
for approval of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator. Storage areas
must also meet all local building and fire codes. [Added 3-23-1989]
§ 147-16 MUTUAL AID § 147-17
46:325

ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Design Standards
§ 147-18. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof as
hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 147-19. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Borough. Natural features such as
trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved whenever possible in
designing any subdivision or site plan containing such features. Where
an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, has or have been adopted, the
subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon.
The streets, drainageways, school sites, flood control basins, public parks
and playgrounds and other public areas shown on an officially adopted
Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision
plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and
drainageways shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-44 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious
development of the Borough and to enhance the public welfare in
accordance with the design standards set forth in §§ 147-20 to 147-24,
inclusive.
§ 147-20. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing
streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reserve frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine to be appropriate.
D. Right-of-way widths, measured from street center line to lot line, shall
not be less than specified in the Master Plan or Official Map. All streets
shall conform in widths, directions and alignments with the Official Map
and/or Master Plan and shall connect with streets shown thereon with a
minimum of jogs and sharp angles, and no street shall in any case have
a right-of-way of less than 50 feet.
E. No subdivision that shows reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in the Council under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 147-18 MUTUAL AID § 147-20
46:327
F. Subdivisions adjoining or including existing streets that do not conform
to street widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or to the
street width requirements of this section shall be required to dedicate
additional width along one or both sides of streets of substandard
width. If the subdivision is along one side only, dedication of 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be required.
G. Grades on all streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 3/4 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and
in no case shall be less than 70°. The block corners of intersections
shall be rounded with a property line having a radius of not less than 25
feet.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Include dead-end streets only when unavoidable. A cul-de-sac shall be
no longer than four times the required lot width to create lots of
minimum area as specified in the Zoning Ordinance for the district in
which it is located.62 On each cul-de-sac, a turnaround having an
outside radius of at least 50 feet or satisfactorily equivalent turning
area shall be provided. The provisions of this subsection may be waived
by the Planning Board if the subdivider cannot feasibly develop the
tract without exceeding the length requirements of dead-end streets
under this subsection.
N. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or be likely to be
confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name.
O. Provisions of half streets, except to complete existing half streets, are
prohibited.
P. Access by streets shall be provided for all lots in the subdivision and
adjacent streets to the limits of the subdivision.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 147-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-20
46:328
§ 147-21. Blocks.
§ 147-22. Lots.
§ 147-23. Public use and service areas.
Q. Streets shall be oriented so as to permit, within the limits of
practicability and feasibility, the buildings constructed thereon to
maximize solar gain. [Added 9-25-1986]
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough and to provide for the convenient access,
circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Each walkway shall
be 10 feet wide.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and rear yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions,
inadequate soil-bearing capacity, high water table, relative
impermeability of soil which may result in unsatisfactory sewage
disposal or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Easements or rights-of-way along property lines or elsewhere for utility
installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least 20 feet
wide and shall be located in consultation with the companies or
Borough departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose, all as required by the Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources.
§ 147-20 MUTUAL AID § 147-23
46:329
§ 147-24. Utilities.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. All storm drains and culverts and all sewage disposal systems and
installations, both individual and public, shall meet the standards
prescribed by and be approved by the Borough, county and state health
and engineering authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
B. All utilities and installations connected with systems maintained and
controlled by privately owned public utilities shall meet the standards
for underground installation prescribed by, and be approved by, said
public utilities and by the Borough Engineer.
§ 147-23 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-24
46:330
ARTICLE V
Site Plan Design Standards
§ 147-25. Standards as guidelines.
In reviewing site plans, the Planning Board and all advisory boards and
professional advisers shall be guided by the standards set forth in this
article and in Article IV when applicable.
§ 147-26. Access.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking
spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet for ingress
and egress and 24 feet wide for both ingress and egress. No driveway or
access drive shall be closer than 50 feet to the street lot lines of any two
intersecting streets.
§ 147-27. Buffer strips.
The site plan shall indicate buffer strips and planting strips as required by
this chapter. In the event the Planning Board shall determine that additional
buffer strips or planting strips are required to protect public areas or
neighboring properties from adverse effects of the proposed building or
addition, the Board may require such additional buffer or planting strips.
The Shade Tree Commission may recommend landscaping and foundation
planting which will ensure the attractiveness of premises subject to this
chapter and the protection of soil thereon. The Planning Board shall
approve the landscaping planting schedule proposed by the applicant in
accordance with such recommendations.
§ 147-28. Circulation.
A. Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate circulation of
pedestrians and vehicles within the property. Parking areas and all
aisles and driveways should be in accordance with the requirements of
the Transportation and Traffic Engineering Hand Book published by the
Institute of Traffic Engineers, 1976 Edition.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle or Driveway
Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 25
§ 147-25 MUTUAL AID § 147-28
46:331
§ 147-29. Drainage.
Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate drainage of the surface
runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding and erosion of the
property and the property of others will be prevented. Unless otherwise
provided by the Planning Board, drainage facilities shall be in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Chapter 232, Laws of 1975, commonly known as
the Ninety-Day Construction Act, which requires as a basis for design the
one-hundred-year storm frequency.
§ 147-30. Fencing and screening.
Provision shall be made for the fencing and screening of such portions of
the property as the Planning Board, upon recommendation of the Shade
Tree Commission, may deem necessary for the safety and welfare of those
persons most likely to be exposed to the property.
§ 147-31. Garbage and refuse.
Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage and
refuse.
§ 147-32. Site lighting. [Amended 7-11-2002; 9-26-2002]
Illumination for streets and properties shall be designed in accordance with
the following standards:
B. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles or driveways providing
direct access to parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90°.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GENERAL PARKING AND PEDESTRIAN AREA — An area where
pedestrian conflicts with vehicles are likely to occur.
LEVEL OF ACTIVITY — Reflects both vehicular traffic and pedestrian
activity and is illustrated by, but not limited to, the following examples.
If the level of activity involves a large number of vehicles at night,
the examples given below for low and medium levels of activity belong
more properly in the next-higher level.
(1) HIGH — Major cultural or civic events, fast-food facilities.
MEDIUM — Community shopping centers, cultural, civic or
recreational events, office parks, transportation parking
(commuter lots, etc.), and residential complex parking.
(2)
LOW — Neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking,
educational facility parking, church parking.
(3)
§ 147-28 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-32
46:332
VEHICULAR USE AREA (ONLY) — An area where conflicts with
pedestrians are not likely to occur, such as service areas or access
roads.
B. General. Site lighting shall be designed to:
(1) Provide adequate illumination in appropriate locations for site
users and the general public for purposes of traffic and pedestrian
safety, security, property and building identification, and aesthetic
improvement.
(2) Prevent excessive illumination and glare.
(3) Provide proper orientation and shielding of fixtures to prevent
undue illumination of adjacent properties.
C. Site illumination levels. The following provisions set forth the required
maintained horizontal illumination for general parking and pedestrian
areas, and for other vehicle use areas:
(1) General parking and pedestrian areas.
Footcandles
Level of
Activity Average Minimum
Uniformity
Ratio
High 3.6 0.9 4:1
Medium 2.4 0.5 4:1
Low 0.8 0.2 4:1
(2) Vehicle use areas (only).
Footcandles
Level of
Activity Average Minimum
Uniformity
Ratio
(Average:
Minimum)
High 2.0 0.67 3:1
Medium 1.0 0.33 3:1
Low 0.5 0.13 4:1
D. Height of fixtures. No wall-mounted, freestanding or other lighting
fixture shall exceed the height of the principal building on the site or 25
feet above normal grade in the vicinity of the light fixture, whichever is
less. Normal grade shall be construed to be the average grade within a
fifteen-foot radius from the center of the light pole.
E. Shielding and orientation of fixtures. All lighting fixtures shall be
directed downward and shall be equipped with the necessary shielding
so as to prevent the direct source of light from being visible from
§ 147-32 MUTUAL AID § 147-32
46:333
adjacent streets, residential zones and residential buildings. The
following shall apply:
(1) Freestanding lights in parking areas shall provide for nonglare
recessed lens light focused downward.
(2) All lights shall be arranged and shielded so as to restrict the
maximum apex angle on the cone of illumination to 150°, or to such
lesser angle as may be required to shield the lights from the view to
any nearby residential properties or the traveling public. Where
lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent residents, the
lights shall be appropriately shielded and/or the mounting heights
shall be reduced.
(3) There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 0.2
footcandles measured at the property line of the lot occupied by
such use, provided that light fixtures used to illuminate the
intersection of driveways at the street are exempt from this
restriction.
(4) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings and visible to the
public shall be prohibited.
F. Duration of illumination. Duration of operation of all lighting and
maximum lumen power permitted shall be as determined by the Board
with due regard to whether any limitations imposed will deprive the
applicant of a reasonable use of his property and whether the
application will be detrimental to the public health and general welfare
or to the property and personal rights of the abutting owners. Site
illumination shall be reduced to the minimum needed for security
purposes when the facility is not in operation. Lights, other than for
security purposes, that are located along residential property lines shall
be time-controlled to be turned off at 11:00 p.m. or at the close of
business.
G. Illumination wiring. All wiring for light fixtures shall be laid
underground and not strung between poles or buildings. Intermittent
illumination and flash lights shall be prohibited.
H. Conflicts with vehicles. Freestanding lights shall be so located and
protected as to avoid being easily damaged by vehicles.
I. Required submittals. The following information shall be submitted to
and approved by the appropriate authority for all lighting designs:
(1) A point-by-point printout of footcandles at ground level on the site
every 10 feet.
(2) Designs shall use light loss factors to achieve maintained
footcandles levels. The design shall be so certified by the designer
and a copy of the certification submitted to the Planning Board.
§ 147-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-32
46:334
§ 147-33. Loading spaces.
There shall be provided on the same lot with the building for which it is
to be used loading berths in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance. Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide, 45 feet long
and 14 feet high and shall be located as nearly as may be practicable in such
a position as to cause the least hindrance to the internal circulation of traffic
and the least noise and aesthetic disturbance to the public and neighboring
property owners. No loading space shall be located in a position in which
any vehicle using the space will block the free passage of pedestrians or
vehicles on the street.
§ 147-34. Noise, vibrations, odor and pollution.
Provisions shall be made for the prohibition or elimination of all offensive
noise, vibration or other pollution to the general public emanating from the
use of the property as provided by the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 147-35. Parking.
(3) Manufacturer's data for the light fixtures used in the design shall
be submitted to the Planning Board Engineer. Substitution for any
component in an approved lighting design cannot be made without
the approval of the Planning Board Engineer. Substituted items
must meet the design criteria.
J. The provisions of this section shall not apply to lighting of athletic field
areas regulated by § 270-32.1. [Added 3-2-2017]
A. The Planning Board shall approve the most appropriate locations on the
site for the proposed parking area, in view of the size and topography of
the property, considerations of safety and aesthetics, the requirement
of adequate buffer and the elimination of glare, dust and noise caused
by traffic. There shall be provided for each building subject to this
chapter the number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Each off-street parking space shall have an area consistent with
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. If off-site off-street
parking is contemplated, the Planning Board, in addition, shall
determine what provisions, if any, are required for the safe and
adequate circulation of pedestrians between the parking area and the
property.
C. All parking areas and appurtenant maneuvering areas, passageways
and driveways serving semipublic office research, commercial and
industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the hours
between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate
shielding shall be provided by all such users to protect adjacent
residential districts from the glare of such illumination and from glare
§ 147-32 MUTUAL AID § 147-35
46:335
§ 147-36. Paving and curbs.
of automobile headlights produced by automobiles entering and leaving
the area.
D. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential district or
institutional premises by a solid, uniformly painted fence or wall not
less than four nor more than six feet in height and maintained in good
condition; provided, however, that where the adjacent owners agree in
writing, a screening hedge or natural landscaping may be substituted
for the required fence or wall. No part of any parking area shall be
closer than 10 feet to any school, hospital or other institutional building
unless properly screened in accordance with Planning Board
requirements.
E. The proximity of parking areas to any street line shall be consistent
with Zoning Ordinance provisions.
F. Off-street parking areas located in commercial districts which provide
parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a
type approved by the Shade Tree Commission. The shade trees shall be
located in a planned manner within the parking lot area as
recommended by the Borough Shade Tree Commission and approved
by the Planning Board. There shall be not fewer than one shade tree for
every 10 parking spaces.
G. The Planning Board may, upon satisfactory proof that the occupancy of
the buildings for which a community parking program is provided does
not require final grading and surfacing of the entire area, grant
permission for deferment of that portion of the final grading and
surfacing not required by the then current occupancy and use. No
person shall permit or cause to be occupied any building by more
persons than shall be permitted by Planning Board approval of the
community parking plan. In the event the Planning Board shall
determine, after notice to the owner of buildings participating in the
community parking plan and a hearing, that the partially paved and
graded parking area is inadequate, the owner shall forthwith complete
the final grading and surfacing of the entire required parking area.
A. Standard pavement specifications shall require a four-inch macadam
base course, an intermediate course of two-inch bituminous concrete
stabilized base mix No. 1 and a surface course of 1 1/2 inches of
bituminous concrete mix No. 5.
B. Standard concrete curb specifications shall require dimensions of six
inches by nine inches by 20 inches with a six-inch reveal of curb face.
The mix will yield 4,000 pounds per square inch. The finish shall be
wood troweled, steel troweled and finely brushed.
§ 147-35 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-37
46:336
§ 147-37. Retaining walls.
Nonreinforced walls will be constructed using Class C concrete. Reinforced
walls will be constructed using Class B concrete. Complete detailed
drawings with calculations will be required for approval.
§ 147-38. Sewage disposal.
Provision shall be made in accordance with applicable regulations of all
boards and bodies with jurisdiction over the collection and disposal of
sewage. No site plan approval may be granted until the Board of Public
Works has certified that a sanitary system has been designed to its
satisfaction.
§ 147-39. Sidewalks.
Standard concrete sidewalk specifications shall require a mix yielding 3,500
pounds per square inch. The finish will be finely brushed. Dimensions will
be four feet wide by four inches thick, but six inches thick across driveways.
§ 147-40. Storage. [Amended 9-25-1986]
Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas approved
by the Planning Board. Such areas shall be shielded from public view and
protected by fencing or screening deemed adequate by the Planning Board
as shown on the site plan.
§ 147-41. Utilities.
Facilities shall be provided for placing all utilities underground, including
telephone and electric power lines.
§ 147-37 MUTUAL AID § 147-41
46:337

ARTICLE VI
Performance Guaranties
§ 147-42. Amount; form; term.
§ 147-43. Procedure on completion of improvement; liability for
breach of guaranty.
A. No final plat or final site plan shall be approved by the Planning Board
until the subdivider or site plan applicant shall have:
(1) Filed with the Borough Clerk a performance guaranty in an amount
estimated by the Borough Engineer to be sufficient to cover 120%
(110% surety bond, 10% cash) of all required improvements listed
in § 147-16A and B and assuring the installation of all of such
improvements on or before an agreed date.
(2) Deposited with the Borough Treasurer a sum determined by the
Borough Engineer and the Planning Board to be equal to the
subdivider's proportionate share, determined in accordance with
Article VII of this chapter, of the cost of all off-tract improvements
required in accordance with § 147-16C.
B. The performance guaranty shall be in the Borough's prescribed form of
performance bond on which the subdivider shall be principal, and
secured either by bonding or a surety company approved by the Council
or by a certified bank or cashier's check, the proceeds of which shall be
returnable to the subdivider without interest after full compliance by
the subdivider with all of the requirements of this chapter and the
developer's agreement.
C. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the Borough Attorney
as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guaranty shall
run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board but in no case for a
term of more than three years. However, with the consent of the owner
and of the surety, if there is one, the Council may, by resolution, extend
the term of such performance guaranty for an additional period or
periods, but the extension shall not exceed, in the aggregate, three
years. The amount of the performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Council by resolution when portions of the required improvements have
been installed.
A. When all the necessary and appropriate improvements have been
completed, the obligor shall notify the Council, in writing, by certified
or registered mail, of the completion of the aforesaid improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer. The Council shall
direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of the
aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall thereupon file a
report, in writing, with the Council, which report shall be detailed and
shall indicate either approval, partial approval or rejection. If said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
§ 147-42 MUTUAL AID § 147-43
46:339
§ 147-44. Acceptance of improvements; maintenance guaranty.
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Where said report
indicates partial approval of said improvements, it shall indicate the
costs of the improvements for which approval is rejected or withheld.
B. The Council shall accept or reject the improvements, grant partial
approval or withhold approval on the basis of such report and shall
notify the obligor in writing by certified or registered mail of the
contents of said report and the action of said Council with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty bond, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure the improvements not yet approved.
C. Failure of the Council to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Council, the obligor shall cause the same to be
completed, and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as
outlined herein shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
obligor's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Council or the Borough Engineer.
F. The obligor shall be responsible for all of the inspection fees of the
Borough Engineer incurred in making the foregoing inspections.
G. Nothing herein shall affect the obligation of any person relating to the
posting of appropriate maintenance bonds, when required.
H. If the required improvements have not been completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall
be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough, either
before or after receipt of the proceeds of any performance guaranty,
shall install such improvements.
A. Upon certification by the Borough Engineer that the improvements
have been installed and completed in accordance with the performance
guaranty, and upon tender by the owner of a proper maintenance
guaranty bond, the Borough Council shall, by resolution, accept said
improvements and discharge the principal and surety from all liability
arising out of the performance guaranty.
§ 147-43 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-44
46:340
B. Said maintenance guaranty bond shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution, shall be in such
amount as the Borough Engineer shall prescribe but not to exceed 15%
of the cost of the improvements or of the original installation and shall
be conditioned upon the maintenance of all of said improvements in
good condition and repair for a period of two years next following the
date of adoption of the aforesaid resolution of acceptance.
§ 147-44 MUTUAL AID § 147-44
46:341

ARTICLE VII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 147-45. Determination and allocation of costs.
In the event the Planning Board shall determine that off-tract improvements
are required in connection with any subdivision or site plan, then prior to
granting final approval:
A. The Planning Board shall report to the Borough Council:
(1) The location, character and extent of the required off-tract
improvements.
(2) The Borough Engineer's estimate of the total cost of such off-tract
improvements.
(3) The proposed allocation of said total cost determined in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 147-46.
B. The Borough Council shall determine and report to the Planning Board
whether the off-tract improvement will be constructed:
(1) By the Borough as a general improvement, as a local improvement
or as a combination thereof; or
(2) By the subdivider or site plan applicant with a formula specified by
the Borough Council providing for partial reimbursement if the
improvement specially benefits property other than that within the
subdivision or site plan.
C. The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for approval of the final
subdivision plat or site plan, that:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
general improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall
deposit with the Borough Treasurer an amount equal to the
difference, if any, between the estimated cost of the improvement
and the estimated total amount by which all properties, including
the subdivision or site plan to be serviced by the improvement, will
be specially benefited by the improvement.
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a local
improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall deposit
with the Borough Treasurer, in addition to the amount specified in
Subsection C(1), the estimated amount by which the subdivision or
site plan will be specially benefited by the improvement.
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or site
plan applicant, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall file with
the Borough Clerk a performance guaranty meeting the
requirements of § 147-42 in the full estimated cost of the
improvement.
§ 147-45 MUTUAL AID § 147-46
46:343
§ 147-46. Standards for allocating costs.
A. In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements among
the subdivider or site plan applicant, other property owners and the
Borough, the Planning Board shall be guided by the following factors:
(1) The total estimated cost of the off-tract improvements.
(2) The increase in market values of the properties affected and any
other benefits conferred.
(3) The needs created by the application.
(4) Population and land use projections for the land within the general
area of the subdivision.
(5) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract improvements.
(6) The condition and periods of usefulness of the improvements which
may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning Board
may take into account the following specific factors:
(1) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade trees,
streetlights, street signs and traffic light improvements, the Board
may consider:
(a) Traffic counts.
(b) Existing and projected traffic patterns.
(c) Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area.
(d) Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the need created
by the subdivision or site plan.
(2) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The relationship between the area of the subdivision or site
plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which the
subdivision or site plan is a part.
(b) The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site plan
and the amount of land area to be covered by impervious
surfaces on the land within the subdivision or site plan.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in the
drainage basin.
(3) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Planning Board may consider the use requirements of
the use proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use
requirements of all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
§ 147-46 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-46
46:344
§ 147-47. Deposits.
Any money received by the Borough Treasurer for off-tract improvements
to be constructed or installed by the Borough pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be deposited in a suitable depository therefor and
shall be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements satisfying the same purpose. If construction of improvements
for which the Borough is responsible has not commenced within five years
from the date of deposit, the amount deposited with any income thereon
shall be returned to the subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in
interest.
§ 147-48. Actual costs.
Upon completion of any improvement constructed by the municipality as a
general or local improvement, the total cost of such improvement shall be
determined by the Borough Treasurer. The difference between the actual
cost as so determined and the estimated cost shall be computed. The
subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in interest shall make
remittance to the Borough if the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost or
shall receive a refund from the funds deposited with the Borough if the
estimated cost did not exceed the actual cost, in an amount which bears the
same relationship to the difference between the actual and estimated costs
as the amount deposited by the subdivider or site plan applicant for his
proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to the total estimated cost.
Any sum payable by the subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in
interest may be levied and collected by the Borough in the same manner as
is provided by law for the levy and collection of real estate taxes.
§ 147-49. Successors in interest.
In the absence of an express provision in a deed or deeds of conveyance,
it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all lots in the subdivision or
site plan at the date any deposit or portion thereof is returned or additional
charge is made pursuant to §§ 147-47 and 147-48 are the lawful successors
in interest to the subdivider or site plan applicant and that each such fee
owner shall be charged with or entitled to receive a pro rata share, based
on lot area, of any funds to be returned or additional charge to be made
pursuant to § 147-48. Upon payment of any such sums to said fee owners,
the Borough shall be released of liability to any other person.
(4) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed for
the subject or site plan and the anticipated volume of effluent
from all other properties to be benefited by the improvements.
(b) The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
§ 147-46 MUTUAL AID § 147-49
46:345

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 147-50. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person with whom applications for
development are filed pursuant to this chapter. The administrative officer
for the Board of Adjustment shall be the Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment. The administrative officer for the Planning Board shall be the
Borough Clerk.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for
development.[Amended 9-25-1986]
APPLICATION — The application form and all accompanying documents
required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan,
conditional use, zoning variance or direction for the issuance of a permit
for construction within the bed of a mapped street or for construction of a
structure not having access to or not related to a street.
CERTIFICATE AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND — A
certificate issued by the proper administrative officer of the Borough
certifying that there is in the Borough a duly established Planning Board;
that there is in the Borough an ordinance controlling the subdivision of land;
and whether a subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board for the
land designated in the application for such certificate and, if so, the date of
such approval and any extensions and terms thereof.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the
Construction Official upon completion of the construction of a new building
or addition or upon a change in the occupancy of a building (other than
a dwelling unit as defined in this chapter) which certifies that all
requirements of this chapter, or such adjustment therefrom which has been
granted by the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, have been met and
that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in conformance
with the uses permitted and all other requirements under this chapter for
the zone in which it is located.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A certificate issued by the Construction
Official for the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or
repair of a building upon approval of the submitted application and plans.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other persons having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
§ 147-50 MUTUAL AID § 147-50
46:347
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.[Amended
9-25-1986]
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 to 58:1-34.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; and in an administrative proceeding
before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without
the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may
be affected by any action taken under this chapter or whose rights to use,
acquire or enjoy property under this chapter or under any law of this state
or of the United States has been denied, violated or infringed by an action
or a failure to act hereunder.
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to the street or alley.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.[Amended 9-25-1986]
LOT AREA — The area of a lot expressed in square feet or acres. Any portion
of a lot included within the right-of-way of a street shall not be included in
calculating lot area. However, any portion of a lot or lots dedicated to the
Borough for other public use shall not be deducted from the calculation of
the lot area.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may be
accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any improvements required
by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.[Amended 9-25-1986]
§ 147-50 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-50
46:348
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
requires site plan approval and which:[Added 12-26-2009]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision that does not involve the creation
of more than three lots, a planned development, any new street or an
extension of any off-tract improvement.
Proposes new development which is limited to any or all of the
following:
Alterations to the facade or roof of an existing building or
renovations, alterations, and ordinary or minor repairs to the
exterior or interior of a building as described by § 147-7 Subsection
B.
(1)
Proposes only a change in use or occupancy to one permitted in the
zone district;
(2)
An increase and/or decrease in the floor area of (an) existing
principal building(s), provided that the change involves no more
than 5% of the existing floor area or 2,500 square feet, whichever
is less.
(3)
An increase and/or decrease in the floor area of (an) existing
principal building(s) of more than 5% of the existing floor area or
2,500 square feet, whichever is less, provided that the Planning
Board determines that the proposed development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or change in use does not affect
circulation, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping,
signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading, or other off-tract
conditions.
(4)
Construction of (an) accessory building(s) or accessory structure(s)
and/or site grading or landscaping with a combined floor area
and/or ground surface area, as applicable, of no greater than 250
square feet.
(5)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no development
plan or proposal described in Subsections (1) and (2) of this
Subsection A shall be deemed to require site plan approval under
the Land Use Ordinances of the Borough of Allendale unless the
Construction Code Official shall have first determined that the
same may affect circulation, water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading,
or other off-tract conditions.
(6)
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42; and
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
§ 147-50 MUTUAL AID § 147-50
46:349
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE ZONING — Reduction in lot sizes and lot area requirements is
permitted in major subdivisions in the AAA and AA Residence Zone Districts
in which the density requirements related to dwelling units are maintained
and where all resulting undeveloped land within said subdivision is devoted
to the public purposes as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough
of Allendale.63
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same
under this chapter or any other ordinance.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For the purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.[Amended 9-25-1986]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not require more
than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Allendale.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to this chapter
prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have
been agreed upon by the Planning Board and applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map, indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision, which is submitted to the Planning Board for
its consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements of
§ 147-10B of this chapter.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening
devices; and any other information required by this chapter that may be
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 147-50 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-50
46:350
reasonably required in order to make an informed determination pursuant
to this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION —
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those which are parallel with and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter
if no new streets are created: [Amended 9-25-1986]:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
A.
§ 147-50 MUTUAL AID § 147-50
46:351
§ 147-51. Fees. [Amended 9-25-1986; 1-26-1989]
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcel
of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated
as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the
Borough.
(5)
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
A. All applications for site plan and subdivision approval must be
accompanied by an amount sufficient to cover the filing and other fees
established by the Borough Council by ordinance.64 In addition to such
fees, amounts shall be deposited to establish escrow accounts for legal
and engineering fees as follows:
(1) Minor subdivision: $1,000.
(2) Major subdivision.
(a) Sketch plat: $100.
(b) Preliminary plat: $5,000 minimum during pendency of
application.
(c) Final plat: $500 plus $100 per lot.
(3) Minor site plan under 1/2 acre: $1,000.
(4) Major site plan over 1/2 acre: $5,000 minimum during pendency of
application.
(5) Use permit. [See § 40-26C(5).]
B. Such additional moneys must be deposited in an escrow account from
time to time during the pendency of the application, as directed by the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, in order to cover legal and
engineering fees incurred by the Borough in the processing of the
application, and such other fees and costs for other professional
consultants as the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment may from
time to time reasonably and within its sole discretion determine are
necessary for a proper review of the application and to supplement the
applicant in support thereof.
C. In making a determination as to what professional consultants shall be
required, if any, except for the services and fees of the attorney for the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment and the Borough Engineer,
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land Use Procedures, § 40-26.
§ 147-50 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-51
46:352
the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment shall review the
application and consider the adequacy and credibility of the
presentation to it in the following areas:
(1) The impact of the application upon the public water supply and
quality.
(2) The impact of the proposed development upon traffic.
(3) The impact of the proposed application upon the off-tract and ontract
environment, including but not limited to geologic, hydrologic
and ecologic conditions.
D. When the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment makes a
determination that an additional professional consultant's services are
required, it shall estimate the fees and costs therefor. Notice of such
fees and costs shall be conveyed to the applicant, who shall forthwith
deposit such funds in an escrow account with the Treasurer of the
Borough of Allendale. Any funds contained within the escrow account
not required for legal, engineering or other professional consultants
shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the improvement
involved. In the event of a failure by an applicant to comply with these
regulations or to deposit the escrow funds determined by ordinance or
by the appropriate board as set forth herein, the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment may, in its discretion, suspend or dismiss
proceedings before it or suspend or revoke such municipal permits as
may have been issued with regard to said application following
approvals by the board.
E. Payments to professionals, deposits and procedures. [Added
11-13-1997]
(1) Escrow deposits. In addition to the initial fees or charges as
elsewhere set forth, the municipal agency shall require escrow
deposits in accordance with the provision of the fee and deposit
schedule set forth in § 147-51A. (The amount of initial deposit shall
be calculated in accordance with 40:55D-53.2b.) The Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality shall make all of the payments
to professionals for services rendered to the municipality or
approving authority for review of applications for development,
review and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements
or other purposes under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
The application review and inspection charges shall be limited only
to professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments under
construction and for review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the municipality. The only costs
that shall be added to any such charges shall be actual out-ofpocket
expenses of such professionals or consultants, including
normal and typical expenses incurred in processing applications
§ 147-51 MUTUAL AID § 147-51
46:353
and inspecting improvements. No applicant shall be charged for
any municipal, clerical or administrative functions, overhead
expenses, meeting room charges or any of the municipal costs and
expenses except as provided for specifically by statute, nor shall a
municipal professional add any such charge to his bill.
(2) Scope of reimbursed services. The municipality shall be entitled to
be reimbursed for the review of applications, both as to
completeness and as to content, and for the review and preparation
of documents such as, but not limited to drafting resolutions,
developer's agreements and necessary correspondence with the
applicant or applicant's professionals.
(3) Deposit of escrow funds; refunds. Deposits received from any
applicant in excess of $5,000 shall be held by the Chief Financial
Officer in a a special interest-bearing deposit account, and upon
receipt of bills from professionals and approval of said bills as
hereinafter provided for, the Chief Financial Officer may use such
funds to pay the bills submitted by such professionals or experts.
The municipality shall not be required to refund an amount of
interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year.
If the amount of interest exceeds $100, the entire amount shall
belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the
municipality annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied
for the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be,
except that the municipality may retain for administrative expenses
a sum equivalent to no more than 3 31/3% of that entire amount,
which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial
expenses. All sums not actually so expended shall be refunded to
the applicant within 90 days after the final decision by the
appropriate municipal agency with respect to such application,
upon certification by the Board Secretary that such application has
been finally decided.
(4) Payments.
(a) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of
applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher
from the professional, which voucher shall identify the
personnel performing the service and each date the services
were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All
professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality on a monthly basis in accordance
with the schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial officer. The professional shall send an informational
copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the
applicant and the municipal agency for whom said services
were performed.
§ 147-51 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-51
46:354
(b) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the
applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of
funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and
the cumulative balance of the escrow account. This information
shall be provided on a quarterly basis if monthly charges are
$1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed
$1,000. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient
funds to enable the municipality or approving authority to
perform required application reviews or improvement
inspections, the Chief Financial Officer shall provide the
applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit
balance. In order for work to continue on the development or
the application, the applicant shall, within a reasonable time
period, post a deposit to the account in an amount to be agreed
upon by the municipality or approving authority and the
applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
(5) Payments required prior to issuance of permits. No zoning permits,
building permits, certificates of occupancy or any other types of
permits may be issued with respect to any approved application for
development until all bills for reimbursable services have been
received by the municipality from professional personnel rendering
services in connection with such application and payment has been
made.
(6) Closeout procedures.
(a) The following closeout procedures shall apply to all deposits
and escrow accounts established under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall commence after the
approving authority has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits; or after the improvements have been
approved in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in the case of
improvement inspection escrows and deposits.
(b) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality and the approving
authority and to the relevant municipal professional, that the
application or the improvements, as the case may be, are
completed. After receipt of such notice, the professional shall
render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer of the
municipality within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of
the municipality shall render a written final accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45
days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in the
deposit or escrow account, including interest in accordance
§ 147-51 MUTUAL AID § 147-51
46:355
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded to the developer
along with the final accounting.
(7) Scope of charges. All professional charges for review of an
application for development, review and preparation of documents
or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary,
given the status and progress of the application or construction.
Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the approving authority
or upon review of compliance with the conditions of approval, or
review of requests for modification or amendment made by the
applicant. A professional shall not review items which are subject
to approval by any state governmental agency and not under
municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with a state
agency is necessary due to the effect of state approvals on the
subdivision or site plan.
(8) Limitation of inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be charged only
for actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by
an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements
under construction shall charge only for inspections that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the
work, and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the
approved development plans and documents.
(9) Substitution of professionals. If the municipality retains a different
professional or consultant in the place of a professional originally
responsible for development application review or inspection of
improvements, the municipality or approving authority shall be
responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to
become familiar with the application or the project, and the
municipality or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or
charge to the deposit or the escrow account for any such services.
(10) Estimate of cost of improvements. The cost of the installation of
improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be
estimated by the Municipal Engineer based on documented
construction costs for the public improvements prevailing in the
general area of the municipality. The developer may appeal the
Municipal Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of
Appeals, established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
(11) Appeals.
(a) An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with
copies to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority
and the professional whenever the applicant disputes the
charges made by a professional for a service rendered to the
municipality in reviewing applications for development, review
and preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or
other charges made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. The
§ 147-51 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-51
46:356
governing body or its designee shall within a reasonable time
attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is
not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant
may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, any charge to
an escrow account or deposit by any municipal professional
or consultant or the cost of the installation of improvements
estimated by the Municipal Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit
the appeal in writing to the County Construction Board of
Appeals. The applicant or his authorized agent shall
simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the municipality,
approving authority and any professional whose charges are
the subject of the appeal. An applicant shall file an appeal
within 45 days from receipt of the informational copy of the
professional's voucher required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2c,
except that, if the professional has not supplied the applicant
with an informational copy of the voucher, then the applicant
shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the
municipal statement of activity against the deposit or escrow
account required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2c. An applicant may
file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a professional
during a period not exceeding six months to demonstrate that
they represent a pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges.
An applicant making use of this provision need not appeal each
charge individually.
(b) Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the rules and
procedures established by the County Construction Board of
Appeals.
(c) During the pendency of any appeal, the municipality or
approving authority shall continue to process, hear and decide
the application for development and to inspect the
development in the normal course and shall not withhold, delay
or deny reviews, inspections, signing of subdivision plats or
site plans, the reduction or the release of performance or
maintenance guaranties, the issuance of construction permits
or certificates of occupancy or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this
subsection. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality may
pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit
for which an appeal has been filed. If a charge is disallowed
after payment, the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of
any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the
applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a
professional or consultant who is not an employee of a
municipality, the professional or consultant shall reimburse the
municipality in the amount of any such disallowed charge.
§ 147-51 MUTUAL AID § 147-52
46:357
§ 147-52. Violations and penalties; civil remedies.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditional on final subdivision approval, as owner
or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
Borough approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
B. Any owner, tenant or other occupant, agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any other workman or any other person who shall commit,
take part or assist in any violation, other than a violation set forth in
Subsection A above, or who shall knowingly maintain any building or
premises in which any violation of this chapter shall exist may, upon
conviction thereof, for each and every violation, be fined not exceeding
$500 or be imprisoned in the Bergen County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day that
a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Civil remedy for unlawful building. In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or
any building, structure or land issued in violation of this chapter, the
Borough Council, the Building Inspector or an interested party, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
D. Civil remedy for unlawful sale of land.
(1) In addition to the other remedies set forth in this chapter, the
Borough Council or Borough Inspector may, in the event of a sale,
transfer or agreement which violates § 147-52A of this chapter,
institute and maintain an action for injunctive relief and to set aside
and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of
sale if a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land shall not
have been issued for such conveyance.
(2) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
developer or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 147-52 ALLENDALE CODE § 147-52
46:358
§ 147-53. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on December 1, 1977, and upon passage and
publication as required by law.
§ 147-54. Pending applications.
All applications for subdivision and site plan review filed prior to the
effective date of this chapter may be continued.
§ 147-55. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
E. Conditional approvals; enforcement; civil remedies. No person, firm,
corporation, owner, developer, tenant or other occupant shall
knowingly violate any condition of any resolution approving any site
plan, subdivision or variance, or any condition contained within any
developer’s agreement pertaining thereto. Such violation shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. In addition to any other remedies
provided by law, the Borough or Zoning Official may institute and
maintain an action in the Municipal Court. A violation of this section
shall subject the offender to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or to both, in
the discretion of the Court. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense. [Added 1-22-2009]
§ 147-52 MUTUAL AID § 147-55
46:359
Chapter 152
LIBRARY
§ 152-1. Prohibited activities.
The following behavior or activities are hereby prohibited in the Lee
Memorial Library:
§ 152-2. Appearance.
All persons using the library must be fully attired including footwear and
shirts.
§ 152-3. Library privileges.
Library privileges may be limited for the following reasons:
§ 152-4. Procedures for suspension to be on file.
Procedures that govern the suspension of library privileges will be on file
for public inspection at the library circulation desk.
A. Eating or drinking.
B. Playing of audio equipment so that other persons can hear it.
C. Smoking.
D. Carrying a weapon into the library unless authorized by law. Any patron
authorized to carry a weapon must notify the library staff that he/she is
carrying a weapon in the library.
E. Bringing animals into the library except those needed to assist a patron
with a disability.
F. Misusing the library rest rooms.
G. Leaving a child under the age of seven unattended in the library
without the supervision of an adult.
H. Talking loudly, making noise or engaging in other disruptive or
disorderly conduct.
I. Interfering with another person's use of the library or with the library
personnel's performance of their duties.
A. Damaging library property.
B. Stealing library materials.
C. Threatening or physically harming library staff or patrons.
D. Outstanding fines and overdue materials.
§ 147-55 ALLENDALE CODE § 152-5
152:360
§ 152-5. Enforcement.
The Library Director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to file a
complaint for violation of the provisions of this chapter in the Municipal
Court.
§ 152-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon the
first conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not to exceed $100 plus court
costs. Persons convicted of a subsequent violation hereof shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a term not more than 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
Chapter 155
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 152-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 152-6
155:361

ARTICLE I
Revocation or Suspension for Nonpayment of Real Property Taxes
[Adopted 11-8-1990]
§ 155-1. Issuance or renewal procedures.
A new article is hereby established providing procedures for issuance or
renewal of licenses or permits in the manner following:
§ 155-2. Suspension or revocation procedures.
§ 155-3. Restoration.
Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessment, the license or permit
shall be restored.
A. An "applicant," "licensee" or "permittee" is hereby defined as any
person, partnership, corporation or other entity to whom a license or
permit is issued by the Borough of Allendale or any agency or
department thereof.
B. Any applicant who requests the issuance, reissuance or renewal of any
license or permit issued by or requiring the approval of the Borough
Council or of any agency or department of the borough shall be
required to pay any delinquent property taxes or assessments if he is
the owner of the property where the business or activity is located prior
to the issuance, reissuance or renewal of any license or permit.
C. Any license or permit issued by the Borough Council or any permit
issued by any agency or department of the borough may be revoked or
suspended by the Borough Council when any licensee or permittee, who
is an owner of the property upon which the licensed business or activity
is conducted, has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least
three consecutive quarters.
A. The Tax Collector shall advise the Borough Council, in writing, 30 days
after any property owner, who is also a licensee or permittee, has failed
to pay real property taxes for three consecutive quarters and serve
notice upon the owner of the deficiency, by certified mail, with a request
for payment and a copy of this article.
B. In the event that the owner does not pay the delinquent taxes entirely,
plus interest and penalties permitted by law, then the Borough Council
may, at a regular public meeting of that body, schedule a hearing to
revoke or suspend a license or permit. The Borough Council shall
provide at least 10 days' written notice to the owner of the public
hearing, including the time and place of the same. All hearings shall be
conducted in public, and the owner shall be provided an opportunity to
present his defense. The decision of the Council shall be by written
resolution and a copy served upon the owner.
§ 155-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 155-4
155:363
§ 155-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to Chapter 85 of the Code of
the Borough of Allendale or licenses or permits for dogs as provided for in
Chapter 93, Art. I of the Code.
§ 155-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 155-4
155:364
Chapter 158
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Public places — See Ch. 203.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 158-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Amended 2-28-2006]
§ 158-2. Littering prohibited. [Amended 2-28-2006]
§ 158-3. Dumping along private or public property, including
streets and roads. [Amended 5-28-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump on or along any
private or public property, including but not limited to any street or road, on
or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish,
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this chapter.
§ 155-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 158-3
155:365
refuse, junk, debris, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 158-4. Storage of bulky household waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
§ 158-5. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 158-6. Parking of vehicles on lawns.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.
§ 158-7. Inoperable vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on streets,
vacant lots and residential lawns, except in a fully enclosed structure,
any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is missing tires, wheels,
engine or any essential parts or which displays extensive body damage or
deterioration or which does not display a current, valid state license or
which is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
§ 158-8. Litter from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any
of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen
or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle or
otherwise endanger travelers or public property shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 158-9. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
§ 158-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 158-9
155:366
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 158-10. Overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 158-11. Litter on sidewalks, streets and yards.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, back yards, courts and
alleys free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep
into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 158-12. Litter in streams and ditches.
No person shall throw, put or place or cause to be thrown, put or placed in
any stream or ditch in the Borough of Allendale any litter, substance, matter
or thing whatsoever whereby the free and unobstructed use of the stream
or ditch may be in any way impeded or interfered with or whereby the same
may be rendered unsightly, unsanitary or polluted.
§ 158-13. Provision and servicing of litter receptacles.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear 0.1
mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) All street vendor locations.
(6) Self-service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gasoline service station islands.
§ 158-9 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 158-13
155:367
§ 158-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-10-1992]
§ 158-15. Severability. [Added 2-8-2006]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 158-16. Repealer. [Added 2-8-2006]
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 158-17. Effective date. [Added 2-8-2006]
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 167
NEWSRACKS
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Beaches and bathing areas.
(12) At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
A. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is
issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.
(2) For a second or any subsequent offense, by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or by both.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
each such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 158-13 ALLENDALE CODE § 167-1
155:368
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIRCULAR — An announcement, advertisement or directive typically in the
form of a printed leaflet intended to be sent to many persons or otherwise
distributed widely to the public.
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack in a public street as herein defined.
MAGAZINE — A periodical which usually contains a miscellaneous
collection of articles, stories, poems and pictures, and is directed to the
general reading public.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or circulars.
PAMPHLET — A printed publication having a format with no binding and no
cover, or with a flush paper cover, and often fastened with side or saddle
stitches.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 167-2. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter, in the interests of aesthetics,
public safety, and the general welfare of the Borough, to reasonably
regulate the placement, maintenance and operation of newsracks under
the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1(g), 40:52-2 and 40:48-2. The Borough of
Allendale has heretofore completed significant improvements to the West
Allendale Avenue business district and continues in its effort to revitalize
and beautify this district. Accordingly, it is the further intent of the Borough
to maintain the aesthetic quality of the business district by regulating the
placement of newsracks in that district in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
§ 167-3. Placement and permitting.
§ 167-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 167-3
155:369
§ 167-4. Application for permit; issuance; term; conditions; fees.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall place, maintain or operate any
newsrack within the Borough of Allendale, except in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Newsracks are prohibited from being positioned, placed or allowed to
be positioned or placed along the northerly and southerly sides of West
Allendale Avenue for the approximate length of 1,200 linear feet
commencing at Franklin Turnpike on the east and ending at the
intersection with Central Avenue on the west; further, along the
northerly side of Myrtle Avenue beginning at the intersection of said
northerly right-of-way line of Myrtle Avenue (50 feet wide) with the
northerly line of West Allendale Avenue (70 feet wide) and running
northwesterly 175.19 feet to the easterly side line of Lot 2 in Block 901,
all as shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough of Allendale;
furthermore, along the southerly side of Myrtle Avenue beginning at the
intersection of said southerly right-of-way line with the northerly side
line of West Allendale Avenue and running northwesterly 119 feet to the
easterly side line of Lot 3, Block 902. Accordingly, no person, firm,
corporation or entity shall place, position or be allowed to maintain any
newsrack in the area designated hereinabove.
C. Newspaper racks as hereinabove defined shall be permitted on
intersecting side streets at the intersecting designated areas of West
Allendale Avenue, provided that said newsracks are positioned no less
than 30 feet from the West Allendale Avenue and side street
intersection. In addition, newsracks shall be permitted in any other
location on any other street throughout the Borough of Allendale. For
purposes of measurement, the thirty-foot distance shall begin from the
intersectional curbline to the point where the curb on West Allendale
Avenue turns into the curbline on the adjoining side street. In the case
of a curb rounded at the intersection, the thirty-foot distance shall be
measured from the projection of the curblines to their point of
intersection.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street, sidewalk or other public place
in the Borough of Allendale any newsrack without first having obtained
a permit from the Allendale Construction Code Official specifying the
exact location of such newsrack or newsracks. One permit may be
issued to include any number of newsracks, which must be identified at
the time of application, and shall be signed by the applicant. Application
for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Construction Code
Official and approved by the Construction Code Official upon such form
as shall be provided by him and shall contain the name and address of
the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newsrack or
newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
B. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
without prior inspection of the location, but the permits for such
§ 167-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 167-4
155:370
§ 167-5. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon or over any public
sidewalk, roadway, or street, and which is so permitted in a location under
the terms of this chapter, shall comply with the following standards:
newsrack or newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof
shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Construction Code Official shall issue or deny a permit
within five business days of the filing of an application.
C. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year on a calendar year
basis commencing on January 1 and shall be renewable on January 1 of
any subsequent year. The annual fee shall be prorated on a daily basis if
the permit is issued effective subsequent to January 1. The permit fee
shall be in the amount of $15. The fee is intended to cover the cost of
processing the application as well as periodic inspection of newsracks.
Fees shall be refunded in full if the permit is denied or the application
withdrawn after submission.
D. If a permit shall be denied, the applicant shall be notified promptly in
writing of the specific cause of or reason of such denial by the
Construction Code Official, by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The applicant shall, upon at least 24 hours' written notice to the
Construction Code Official, be permitted to examine any evidence
relied upon, wholly or in part, to support the denial. The applicant shall
further have the right to request, in writing, addressed to the Borough
Administrator and the Construction Code Official, a hearing by the
Borough Administrator concerning the denial and reasons therefor,
which shall include right to cross-examine any witnesses and present
evidence and witnesses to support its position. This request must be
filed within seven business days of the applicant's receipt of the denial.
Such hearing, if requested, must be held within five business days of
the filing of the request, unless further time is consented to by the
applicant. Within three business days from conclusion of the hearing,
the Borough Administrator will issue his or her decision, in writing, to
the applicant.
A. No newsrack shall exceed 60 inches in height; 24 inches in width; or 20
inches in depth.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the
newspapers sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coinreturn
mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
§ 167-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 167-5
155:371
§ 167-6. Location and placement of newsracks.
Any newsrack which rests, in whole or in part, upon or on any portion of a
public street or sidewalk or projects onto, into, or over any part of a public
street or sidewalk shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the
event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Each newsrack shall be maintained to prevent
the newspapers from being scattered about the area Specifically, but
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be
serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(6) No sharp or jagged edges or other hazardous surfaces are exposed
to the general public or users of the newsrack.
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly
or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsracks shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle.
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business.
§ 167-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 167-6
155:372
§ 167-7. Suspension and revocation of permits.
Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended after a hearing
(which include the right of the permittee to cross-examine and present
witnesses) by the Borough Administrator if he shall determine that there
are any reasonable grounds to revoke or suspend such permit, such grounds
being any violation of this chapter or any grounds upon which the
Construction Code Official may refuse to approve the issuance of a permit
or deny the issuance thereof. The Construction Code Official shall cause a
notice, in writing, to be served upon the permittee or other person or party
in charge of the maintenance of the newsrack, citing him to appear before
the Borough Administrator at such time and place designated in the notice
to show cause why such permit should not be revoked or suspended. The
notice shall specify the nature of the violation(s) or other reason(s) for the
proposed action, and the nature of the evidence to support the action, and
shall be served upon the permittee or aforesaid other person or party, by
personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the permittee's address as shown on the application for a
permit, on the particular newsrack(s) which is the subject matter of said
notice. Before the hearing, the permittee shall be permitted to examine
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use or visibility of traffic signs or
signals, hydrants, or mail boxes permitted at or near said location.
(5) Unreasonably interferes with necessary site distance at street
intersections and at the intersections of driveways, parking area
access aisles and other traveled ways.
C. The newsrack or newsracks shall be placed or otherwise secured so as
to prevent their being blown down or around the public street or
sidewalk, but shall not be chained Or otherwise secured to any traffic or
street signs, signals, hydrants, or mail boxes.
D. No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within three feet of a curb or, where no curb exists, within three
feet of the edge of pavement.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant fire call box, police call box, or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) At any location whereby the newsrack would reduce the clear
space for passage of pedestrians to less than six feet.
(6) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping.
(7) Within 10 feet of any stand-by or sprinkler connection or related
safety or fire equipment.
§ 167-6 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 167-7
155:373
any evidence in the Borough's possession supporting the aforesaid specific
violation or reasons for the action upon at least three business days' written
request of the Borough Administrator's office. Upon the conclusion of but
no later than three business days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Borough Administrator shall issue his decision, with the written finding of
facts upon which his decision is based.
§ 167-8. Compliance required.
Within 30 calendar days from receipt of written notice of the passage of
this chapter, distributors shall be required to comply with the terms of this
chapter. In the event compliance is not forthcoming within the stated time
period, a distributor shall be subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 167-9. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough's Construction Code Official.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both.
Chapter 170
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 82.
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 170-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
§ 167-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 170-1
155:374
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTIDWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of: a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
activities; or a municipality with a Department-approved noise control
ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement training and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing facilities. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. This noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 170-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 170-1
155:375
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 170-2. Applicability.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multidwelling unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This noise ordinance applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multidwelling unit buildings.
B. This noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
§ 170-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 170-2
155:376
§ 170-3. Declaration of findings and policy.
Whereas, excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare,
safety, and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of science and
technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated;
and whereas the people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an
environment free from excessive sound; now, therefore, it is the policy of
the Borough of Allendale to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize
the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.
§ 170-4. Noise control officers.
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multidwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey or any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 170-5B and C of this chapter and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein..
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Borough of Allendale and cooperate with all other public bodies
and agencies to the extent practicable;
(2) Review the actions of the Borough of Allendale and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
§ 170-2 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 170-4
155:377
§ 170-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 170-6. Restricted uses and activities.
and II,65 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 170-5 below; and
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 170-2A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., televisions, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multidwelling unit building. In addition, indoor
measurement shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a
multidwelling unit building. The allowable sound level standards for
indoors are as shown in Tables I and II.66
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
A. Exceptions.
65.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 170-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 170-6
155:378
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
(2) Construction and demolition activities are exempt front the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II,67 except as provided for in
Subsection B below.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment;
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment;
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities;
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
At all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply;
67.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 170-6 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 170-6
155:379
§ 170-7. Enforcement; civil penalty.
(5) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth at Tables I and II do not apply;
(6) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
(7) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
(8) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator;
(9) Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I shall be
prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per § 170-5B
and C.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
Municipal Court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 170-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 170-7
155:380
Chapter 172
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Noise — See Ch. 170.
Unsafe structures and equipment — See Ch.
180.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
Vacant/abandoned properties — See Ch. 248.
Visual obstructions — See Ch. 256.
§ 170-7 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 170-7
155:381

ARTICLE I
Public Health Nuisance Code
[Adopted 11-3-1960 by the Board of Health (Ch. 48 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 172-1. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noise or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances, and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188 of the Laws of
1950.68 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 172-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 172-3. Filing of copies.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Allendale Board
of Health upon the introduction of this article and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 172-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-3-1986]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $500.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
§ 172-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 172-4
155:383
Chapter 175
NURSING, CONVALESCENT AND OLD-AGE HOMES
§ 175-1. License required.
No nursing, convalescent or old-age home, as defined in § 175-2 of this
chapter, including those existing at the time of adoption of this chapter,
shall be operated except under a license issued by the Fire Marshal. Such
license shall be valid for one year from the date of issue and shall be
revocable for cause after hearing. Application for license shall be made
on the form provided for the purpose and, on initial application, shall
include plans showing pertinent details of the construction, exit facilities
and fire-protection equipment.69 No Borough license shall be issued until
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws have been complied
with and approval has been obtained from the Board of Health, Fire Marshal
and Building Inspector.
§ 175-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Accepted by the enforcing official as a result of his
investigation and experience, or by reason of test, listing or approval by
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the National Bureau of Standards, the
American Gas Association Laboratories or other nationally recognized
testing agencies.
AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM — A system which automatically
detects a fire condition and actuates a fire alarm signal device.
NURSING, CONVALESCENT or OLD-AGE HOME — A building or buildings
used for the lodging, boarding or nursing care on a twenty-four-hour basis
of four or more infants of four years of age or under, or children 12 years of
age or under, convalescents or aged persons, but shall not include hospitals
and mental or correctional institutions.
PERSON — Includes a person, persons, children, infants, firm, corporation
or copartnership.
§ 175-3. Occupancy.
A. The number of persons in any room or area used as sleeping quarters
shall not exceed the proportion of one adult for each 75 square feet, one
child for each 50 square feet, one infant for each 25 square feet.
B. No occupancy not under the control of, or necessary to, the
administration of a nursing, convalescent or old-age home shall be
contained in any building used as sleeping quarters for such occupancy.
69.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 128, Fire Prevention.
§ 172-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 175-3
155:384
§ 175-4. Fireproofing.
All buildings shall be completely fireproof.
§ 175-5. Hazardous areas and combustible storage.
§ 175-6. Required exit facilities.
This section shall not apply to the owners of said nursing, convalescent
or old-age home as of the time of passage of this chapter, but shall apply
to any and all subsequent owners.
C. The basement shall be considered as a story if 1/2 or more of its clear
height is above the average elevation of the ground adjoining the
building on all sides. An unoccupied attic or roof space shall not be
considered as a story.
A. Heating apparatus and boiler or furnace rooms shall be separated from
other areas by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less
than one hour.
B. Hazardous areas such as basements or central storerooms, such as for
furniture, mattresses and miscellaneous storage, and similar
occupancies intended to contain combustible materials which will
either be easily ignited, burn with an intense flame or result in the
production of dense smoke and fumes, shall be separated from other
areas by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than
one hour and shall be protected by an approved automatic fire door and
automatic sprinkler system.
C. The use of attics or basements for the storage of combustible materials
is prohibited.
A. At least two exitways, remote from each other, shall be provided for
every occupied story of a building.
B. Exit doorways shall be of such number and so located that the distance
of travel from the door of any occupied room to an exit doorway from
that floor shall not exceed 75 feet in a sprinklered building, except
where buildings are constructed and protected to comply with all
requirements applicable to new buildings used for institutional
occupancy.
C. The aggregate width of exits, stairs and ramps shall be such as to
provide sufficient forty-eight-inch exit units at the rate of 15 persons
per exit unit for the maximum number of persons that may occupy any
floor.
D. Each occupied room shall have at least one doorway opening directly to
the outside, or to a corridor leading directly or by a stairway or ramp to
the outside. All such doorways shall be a minimum of 48 inches in
width.
§ 175-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 175-7
155:385
§ 175-7. Stairways and vertical openings.
§ 175-8. Corridors and passageway.
§ 175-9. Doorways.
§ 175-10. Division of floor openings.
A. Stairs and ramps serving in required exitways shall be not less than 36
inches wide in existing nursing, convalescent and old-age homes, and
not less than 48 inches wide in existing buildings hereafter converted to
or built for such use.
B. At least one required exit doorway from each floor above or below the
first floor shall lead directly, or through an enclosed corridor, to the
outside. A second or third required exit doorway, where a more direct
exit is impractical, may lead to a first floor lobby having ample and
direct exits to the outside.
C. In buildings hereafter converted to use as nursing, convalescent or oldage
homes, all floor openings. such as interior stairways, laundry
chutes and dumbwaiter shafts, extending to cellar or basement and
between occupied floors, shall be enclosed in partitions having a fireresistance
rating of not less than 1/2 hour, or may be wired glass in
metal framework.
D. In existing buildings used for nursing, convalescent or old-age homes,
all floor openings shall be enclosed as required by § 175-7C, except that
stairway enclosures may be either at the head or foot of each stairway
from one floor to another.
A. Corridors and passageways in a required exitway shall be at least 60
inches wide.
B. Corridors and passageways in a required exitway shall be unobstructed
and shall not lead through any room or space used for a purpose that
may obstruct free passage. Corridors and passageways which lead to
the outside from any required stairway shall be enclosed as required for
stairways.
A. Exit doorways shall be at least 48 inches wide, open out and be
equipped with panic hardware. [Amended 9-14-1972]
B. All doorways to stairways, vertical openings, passageways or hazardous
areas which are required to be enclosed shall be provided with fire
doors or self-closing smoke-resistive doors (See § 175-10B).
A. In buildings of other than fire-resistive (fireproof or semi-fireproof)
construction, all floors above the first floor occupied by persons under
care and exceeding 3,000 square feet in area shall be divided into
separate areas by smoke barriers, so located as to provide ample space
on each side of each door to accommodate the total number of beds on
§ 175-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 175-10
155:386
§ 175-11. Exit signs.
Signs bearing the word "Exit" in plain legible block letters shall be placed
at each doorway, except at doors directly from rooms to corridors or
passageways, and except at doors leading obviously to the outside from
the entrance floor. Additional signs shall be placed in corridors and
passageways wherever necessary to indicate the direction of exit. Letters of
signs shall be at least six inches high, except that the letters of internally
illuminated exit signs may not be less than 41/2 inches high. All exit and
directional signs shall be maintained clearly legible by electric illumination
or other acceptable means when natural light fails.
§ 175-12. Interior finish and decorative materials.
§ 175-13. Heating, lighting and other service equipment.
the floor. Doors provided in such smoke barriers shall be smokeresistive
doors, as described in § 175-10B, so installed that they may
normally be kept in open position, but will close automatically or may
be released manually to self-closing action. No more than five bed
patients will be allowed to occupy any floor above the first, and these
must be confined in the rooms nearest the outside fire escape. All other
patients must be in the ambulatory class on any floor above the first.
No patients will be allowed to occupy any floor above the second in
nonfireproof buildings.
B. Smoke barriers shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1/2
hour. Metal, metal-covered or one-and-three-eighths-inch-thick solidcore
flush-type wood doors, so hung as to be reasonably smoketight,
may be accepted as smoke-resistive doors. Openings in either smoke
barriers or smoke-resistive doors shall be glazed within wired glass.
A. Wall and ceiling surfaces of all occupied rooms and of all exitways
therefrom shall be of such material or so treated as not to have a flamespread
classification of more than 75 according to the method for the
"Fire Hazard Classification of Building Materials" of Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc.
B. All combustible decorative and acoustical material, including textile
floor coverings and curtains located in corridors, passageways or
stairways, enclosures and in lobbies or other rooms or spaces for use by
occupants or visitors, shall be rendered and maintained flame-resistant.
A material shall be deemed to be flame-resistant if it will not ignite and
allow flame to spread over the surface when exposed to a match-flame
test applied to a piece removed from the material and tested in a safe
place. The piece shall be held vertically and the bottom edge exposed to
a flame from a common wooden match held in a horizontal position, 1/2
inch underneath the piece, and at a constant location for a minimum of
15 seconds.
§ 175-10 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 175-13
155:387
§ 175-14. Extinguishing equipment. [Amended 9-14-1972]
Approved-type extinguishers shall be provided on each floor so located
that a person will not have to travel more than 30 feet from any point to
reach the nearest extinguisher. An additional extinguisher shall be provided
in, or adjacent to, each kitchen or basement storage room. All cooking
equipment shall have extinguishing equipment and exhaust ducts installed
in accordance with National Fire Protection Association 96 or applicable
standard.
§ 175-15. Automatic sprinkler; protection and alarm systems.
§ 175-16. Attendants. [Amended 9-14-1972]
Every nursing, convalescent or old-age home shall have at least one
attendant on duty, awake and dressed therein at all times, and in addition,
A. The heating of buildings occupied as nursing, convalescent or old-age
homes shall be restricted to steam, hot-water or warm-air systems
employing central heating plants, with installation such as to safeguard
against the inherent fire hazard. The use of portable heaters of any kind
is hereby prohibited.
B. Installation of heating and ventilating systems and equipment in
accordance with the Code for the Installation of Heat Producing
Appliances, Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, Blower and Exhaust
Systems, recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters,
shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with the
requirement that installation be such as to safeguard the inherent fire
hazard.
C. Lighting shall be restricted to electricity. Electric wiring, motors and
other electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with
nationally recognized safe practice. Compliance with the standards of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters known as the National
Electrical Code shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance
with nationally recognized safe practice. All wiring shall be installed or
repaired by authorized personnel as described in the applicable
statutes of the State of New Jersey. [Amended 9-14-1972]
A. Buildings hereafter converted to or constructed for nursing,
convalescent or old-age homes, or increased in such use, shall be
protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
B. Sprinkler systems shall be provided with an approved water-flow alarm.
C. All systems now installed or to be installed shall be connected to a
Borough central fire alarm system or police headquarters.70 [Amended
9-14-1972]
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Automatic fire-detention systems, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 9-14-1972.
§ 175-13 ALLENDALE CODE § 175-16
155:388
one standby attendant within hearing distance and available for emergency
service. These attendants shall be at least 18 years of age and capable of
performing the required duties of evacuation. No person other than the
management or a person under management control shall be considered as
an attendant. The number of said attendants shall be one for each wing,
floor or section of home or one for every 25 patients, whichever is greater.
§ 175-17. Written evacuation plan and safeguards.
§ 175-18. Enforcement.
A. Every nursing, convalescent or old-age home shall formulate a written
plan for the protection of all persons in the event of fire, and for their
evacuation to areas of refuge and from the building when necessary. All
employees shall be instructed and kept informed respecting their duties
under the plan. The plan shall be approved by the Fire Marshal every
six months.
B. Every mattress shall be provided with strong canvas or leather handles
so that it may serve as a stretcher when necessary for evacuation.
C. Smoking may be permitted in nursing, convalescent or old-age homes
only where proper facilities are provided. Smoking shall not be
permitted in sleeping quarters except at such times as supervision is
provided.
D. Every building coming within the scope of this chapter shall be
inspected every six months by representatives of the agencies named in
§ 175-1, in order to ensure proper compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Fire Marshal, who shall in no
case, except under written order of the Board of Adjustment or the
Borough Council, issue a permit for the erection, alteration or addition
to any building for use as a nursing, convalescent or old-age home, nor
grant any occupancy permit for any building for use for the proposed
erection, alteration, addition to or use thereof which would be in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance
of the Borough of Allendale.
B. In the case of buildings used as convalescent or nursing homes as of the
date of adoption of this chapter, the Council may, on the
recommendation of the Fire Marshal, waive any provision of this
chapter.
§ 175-16 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 175-18
155:389
Chapter 180
OCCUPANCY LIMITS; UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND
EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Vacant/abandoned properties — See Ch. 248.
§ 180-1. Policy and purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 180-2. Occupancy limitations.
A. Provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Avoid, prevent and eliminate the maintenance, continuation or creation
of hazards to the public health or safety.
C. Avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to continue
or exist, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties.
A. Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be
arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
B. Sleeping rooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other
sleeping rooms or habitable spaces.
C. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet (6.5m) of floor area, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain
at least 50 square feet (4.6m) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
D. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one
lavatory without passing through another bedroom.
E. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted
by the minimum area requirements of the following table:
§ 175-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 180-2
155:390
§ 180-3. Unsafe structures and equipment.
Minimum Area Requirements
(minimum area in square feet)
Space 1 to 2 occupants 3 to 5
occupants
6 or more
Living room No requirements 120 150
Dining room No requirements 80 100
Kitchen 50 50 60
Bedrooms Shall comply with
Subsection C
above
F. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of the aforesaid table if the total area is equal to that
required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
G. Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior public areas shall not be
occupied for sleeping purposes.
H. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet
rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of
not less than seven feet (2,134 mm).
I. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet
(2,134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear
passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm) between counterfronts
and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
J. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a
sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities, and services for the
sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
A. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be
unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure
by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in
the event of fire or because such structure contains unsafe equipment
or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such
faulty construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete
collapse is likely.
§ 180-2 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 180-3
155:391
C. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator,
moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid
containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard
to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.
D. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the Code Official
finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to
which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary,
vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks
ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential
equipment required by this chapter, or because the location of the
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to
the public.
E. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part, to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was erected,
altered or occupied contrary to law.
F. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy,
and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Construction Code
Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises
and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance.
Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Construction Code Official shall cause the
premises to be closed through any available public agency or by
contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located
and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
G. Whenever the Construction Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice
and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment.
H. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the
notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official shall post on
the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
"Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupancy
of the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
I. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate
placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the
premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate
placarded equipment, shall be liable for the penalties provided by this
chapter.
J. The Construction Code Official shall remove the condemnation placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who
§ 180-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 180-3
155:392
§ 180-4. Emergency measures.
§ 180-5. Demolition.
defaces or remove a condemnation placard without the approval of the
Code Official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter.
A. When, in the opinion of the Construction Code Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there
is actual or potential danger to the building or occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or
vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation
of defective or dangerous equipment, the Code Official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to
vacate the premises forthwith. The Construction Code Official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading
as follows: "This structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been
prohibited by the Construction Code Official." It shall be unlawful for
any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing
the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the
opinion of the Construction Code Official, there is imminent danger due
to an unsafe condition, the Construction Code Official shall order the
necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to
render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted and shall cause such
other action to be taken as the Construction Code Official deems
necessary to meet such emergency.
C. When necessary for the public safety, the Code Official shall temporarily
close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to
close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe
structures and prohibit the same from being utilized.
D. For the purposes of this section, the Construction Code Official shall
employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work
as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid
from the funds of the Borough on approval of the Construction Code
Official. The Borough Attorney shall institute appropriate action against
the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located
for the recovery of such costs.
F. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with
such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition
directed to the Mayor and Council, be afforded a hearing.
§ 180-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 180-5
155:393
§ 180-6. Enforcement.
The Construction Code Official of the Borough is hereby designated as the
person charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 180-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The Construction Code Official shall order the owner of any premises
upon which is located any structure which, in the Construction Code
Official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair
as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the
structure, to raze and remove such structure; or if such structure is
capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and
sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option, or where there
has been a cessation of normal construction of any structures for a
period of more than two years, to raze and remove such structure.
B. All notices and orders shall comply with the following service
requirements: personal service or service by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
C. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the Construction Code Official shall cause the
structure to be razed and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
costs of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
D. When any structure has been ordered and razed and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and
valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The next proceeds of
such sale, after deducting the expenses of such razing and removal,
shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction,
including the items of expense and the amounts deducted to the person
who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus
does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter or any direction or order promulgated hereunder shall,
after summonses is issued under the terms hereof and upon conviction,
be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
(2) For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $200.
(3) For a third offense or any subsequent offenses, by a fine not to
exceed $500, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 180-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 180-7
155:394
Chapter 185
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 85.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
Zoning — See Ch. 270.
§ 185-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the C-1 and
C-2 Central Business Districts of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 185-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-23-2006]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served outside of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place
of business where food and/or other refreshments are served; provided,
however, that in no event shall the outdoor seating capacity be greater than
45% of the indoor seating capacity and that the outdoor dining area must
be contiguous to the building housing such eating establishment.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public or private right-of-way reserved for
pedestrian traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an
eating establishment.
§ 185-3. License required. [Amended 3-23-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred
to as “person”) to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be
engaged in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe within the Borough
of Allendale unless such person shall hold a currently valid license issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 185-4. Application procedure.
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and each day that
each such violation shall continue, shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 180-7 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 185-4
155:395
§ 185-5. Review by Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business days
after the application becomes complete. If the application is not complete,
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
10% or greater interest in the corporation and the chief operating
executive of the corporation and, if a non-domestic corporation, the
name, residence address and telephone number of the managing officer
for service of process within the State of New Jersey and a copy of the
qualification of said nondomestic corporation to conduct business in the
State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. A sketch of the proposed cafe which will reasonably identify all tables,
chairs, umbrellas, furnishings and fixtures intended to be located at the
cafe site. The sketch will also provide the following information:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be obstructed in any manner.
(2) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor
cafe. There shall be a minimum of four feet of unobstructed paved
surface of the sidewalk available for pedestrian traffic. There shall
be a physical separation between the outdoor cafe and
unobstructed space permitting free passage of pedestrian traffic.
[Amended 4-11-2019]
(3) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to be
prepared.
(4) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps or any other fixtures permanently located
on the sidewalk in front of the eating establishment or within 10
feet thereof on either or any side.
F. An application fee of $100.
§ 185-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 185-5
155:396
the Construction Code Official will so notify the applicant within 10 business
days of the submission and specifically detail the areas in which the
application lacks compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 185-6. License issuance.
If the application complies with the chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 185-7. Transfer prohibited.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 185-8. Consent to inspection.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Borough to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, chapter or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 185-9. Indemnification. [Amended 3-23-2006]
In addition to the requirements heretofore set forth, no license required by
this chapter shall be granted to any person to operate an outdoor cafe until
such person shall have filed with the Construction Code Official a statement
agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of Allendale, its
agents, servants, representatives or employees from any or all claims,
damages, judgment costs or expenses, including attorney’s fees, which
they or any of them may incur or be required to pay because of any
personal injury, including death, or property damage suffered by any person
or persons as a result of or related in any way to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is issued.
§ 185-10. Liability insurance requirement.
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Construction Code Official a comprehensive general liability policy
issued to such person by a public liability insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the
coverages set forth below in the amounts specified. Such insurance
policy shall name the Borough of Allendale, 500 West Crescent Avenue,
Allendale, New Jersey, its agents, servants, officers, representatives
and employees as additional insureds with respect to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following amounts: [Amended
3-23-2006]
§ 185-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 185-10
155:397
§ 185-11. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license which
shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Borough Administrator
for failure of any licensee to comply with this chapter or for violation of
any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation or
chapter. Such revocation or suspension by the Borough Administrator shall
be upon written notice personally delivered to the licensee, which notice
shall set forth the grounds for such revocation or suspension. If the licensee
wishes to contest or appeal such suspension or revocation, the licensee
shall file a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for the appeal,
which written appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk no later than
10 days prior to the public meeting of the Mayor and Council at which the
matter will be heard and considered. At the public hearing before the Mayor
and Council, the Borough Administrator will present evidence supporting
the grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee will
then be permitted to present evidence and witnesses in support of its
case. At the hearing, the licensee may be represented by an attorney.
At the conclusion of the hearing, or as soon thereafter as is reasonable,
the Mayor and Council may determine whether or not the suspension
or revocation imposed was appropriate, whether or not such suspension
should be continued or whether or not sufficient grounds exist to
permanently revoke the license. The operation of an outdoor cafe after any
suspension or revocation of the license is unlawful, and every day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1) Bodily injury, each person: $300,000.
(2) Bodily accident, each accident: $1,000,000.
(3) Property damage, each person: $300,000.
(4) Property damage, each accident: $1,000,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Construction Code Official shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30
days' written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not
relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any injury or
claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The
cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate effect of
suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of this
section is filed with the Construction Code Official, and a letter in
writing confirming the new effective date of the license is issued by the
Construction Code Official.
§ 185-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 185-12
155:398
§ 185-12. Clear sidewalks.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business
is closed.
§ 185-13. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except those
signs authorized under the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.71 Outdoor
umbrellas located in the outdoor cafe shall be exempt from the Sign
Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 185-14. Alcoholic beverages.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcohol beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 185-15. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 8:00 a.m. nor remain open
for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor cafe shall
vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
§ 185-16. Months of operation.
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31 in
any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one season.
The application fee set forth herein shall be paid annually.
§ 185-17. Attachment prohibited.
No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or
sidewalk or property of the Borough of Allendale within or near the licensed
area.
§ 185-18. Duty of licensee.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will, at his own cost and expense, vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the Borough the right to remove any property
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
§ 185-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 185-18
155:399
on the sidewalk and the licensee agrees to reimburse the Borough for the
cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 185-19. Table service.
Table service is required.
§ 185-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court
imposing sentence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. Each day a violation occurs
or is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 191
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 85.
Amusement games — See Ch. 89.
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Demonstrations — See Ch. 112.
Firearms — See Ch. 125.
Public places — See Ch. 203.
§ 191-1. Enumeration of offenses.
The several acts and offenses hereinafter enumerated are hereby
prohibited, and any person, persons or corporation offending against any of
them shall be, upon conviction thereof, subject to the penalty or penalties
hereinafter provided.
A. Permitting or allowing any house, shop, store or other place connected
therewith to be used, frequented or resorted to by riotous or disorderly
persons or by vagrants, gamblers or common mendicants.
B. Making any threatening, offensive or profane remarks to any member
of the Police Department, Fire Department or any Borough employee or
municipal official while in the performance of his duties or otherwise
interfering with said person while in the performance of his duties.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause or allow to
be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any
noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the
Borough. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said
§ 185-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 191-1
155:400
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: [Amended
5-9-2002 by Ord. No. 02-15]
(1) Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other
vehicle on any street or public place of the Borough, except as a
danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling
device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding
of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand
or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated
by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.
(2) Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated, outdoors or indoors, any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at
any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle,
chamber or immediate vicinity in which such machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of
any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure
or vehicle in which it is located or from the source itself if located
outside a building or vehicle, shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
(3) Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in
the vicinity.
D. Throwing, spilling, placing or sweeping or otherwise causing to be
placed any glass, stones, sticks, papers, meat, vegetables, snow, ice or
any other debris of any kind whatsoever or causing water or other
liquid to be discharged into or upon any street or public place within
the Borough or into or upon any property adjacent to any street or
public place within the Borough or in any way obstructing any public
street, road, driveway, sidewalk or other passageway.
E. Conducting or participating in any parade or similar demonstration on
any street or public place within the Borough without first obtaining the
permission of the Borough Council.
§ 191-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 191-1
155:401
§ 191-2. Definitions. [Added 5-25-1995]
The following terms shall have the following meanings as used in this
chapter:
LOITERING (whether on foot or in a motor vehicle) — Remaining idle or
prowling in essentially one location.
MINOR — Includes any person under the age of 18 years of age.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or custody
of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court
or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any public or private street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall
also include the areas appurtenant to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern,
place of amusement or entertainment or other place of business; and public
grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking lots or other vacant private
property not owned by or under the control of the person charged with
violating this chapter or, in the case of a minor, not owned or under the
control of his parent or guardian.
§ 191-3. (Reserved)74
F. Distributing handbills or other advertising matter or canvassing or
soliciting orders in or along any street or public or private place without
first obtaining the permission of the Police Department.72
G. Allowing any dog to bark or any other animal to make such noise as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling
or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. [Added
5-9-2002]
H. The use, operation or riding of any skateboard on any public street,
sidewalk or other public property or on any private property to which
the public is invited, namely sidewalks, driveways, entrances and exits
to and from parking lots and parking places. The area of prohibition is
described on Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof.73 The
term "skateboard" is intended to mean and include a platform or board
with roller-skate wheels or other similar wheels affixed to the underside
designed to be ridden by person or persons. The board has no steering
device or mechanism to steer or control the direction thereof while
being used or ridden even though the direction may be controlled by
the rider by shifting the feet or weight during the use or operation.
[Added 9-26-2002]
72.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 194, Peddling and Soliciting.
73.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 191-3, Loitering prohibited; enforcement, added 5-25-1995, was
repealed 2-27-2003.
§ 191-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 191-4
155:402
§ 191-4. Parental responsibility; violations and penalties. [Added
5-25-1995]
Chapter 194
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Donation clothing bins — See Ch. 115.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Political contributions — See Ch. 197.
Concession facilities — See Ch. 203, Art. II.
A. Responsibility of parent(s) or guardian(s). No parent or guardian of a
minor shall knowingly permit that minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter. Whenever any minor is charged with a violation of this chapter,
his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) shall be notified by the Chief of
Police or any other person designated by the Chief of Police to give such
notice. It at any time within 30 days following the giving of the notice as
provided in this section, the minor, the parents of whom have received
the notice referred to in the previous sentence, again violated this
chapter, it shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of
his or her parent(s) or guardian(s).
B. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days. Any minor who violates this chapter
shall be treated as a juvenile offender in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 191-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 191-4
155:403

ARTICLE I
Hawking, Peddling and Vending
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 27 of the 1967 Code]
§ 194-1. License required; fees. [Amended 9-25-1986]
It shall be unlawful for any person to hawk, peddle or, as an itinerant
vendor, sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or produce of
any kind or description or any articles whatsoever without first obtaining a
license from the Clerk of the Borough for such purpose and paying therefor
a license fee of $50. Such license shall permit the holder thereof to use one
cart, automobile or wagon; for every additional cart, automobile or wagon
used by the holder of such license, he shall pay an additional fee of $25.
§ 194-2. Applications; license issuance.
§ 194-3. License term.
All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December next after the granting
of the same.
§ 194-4. Exclusions for merchants and farmers. [Amended
9-25-1986]
This article shall not apply to any person or persons selling at wholesale to
merchants transacting business in the Borough.
§ 194-5. Disposition of fees.
The license fees imposed under this article shall be for revenue.
§ 194-6. Suspension and revocation.
Every license granted under the provisions of this article may be suspended
or revoked by the Mayor and Council of the Borough on satisfactory cause
appearing to the Mayor and Council for so doing, and during such
suspension or after such license shall be revoked, such license shall be
inoperative and of no effect.
A. Every application for a license shall be made, in writing, on a form
provided and approved by this Council, signed by the applicant, giving
his residence and business address and a description of each cart,
automobile or wagon to be used by him in said business.
B. Upon the payment of such license fee or fees, the Borough Clerk is
hereby authorized to issue the license applied for, and, if application for
an additional cart, automobile or wagon is applied for, a description of
any and all such vehicles to be used by the licensee shall be set forth in
the license.
§ 194-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 194-7
155:405
§ 194-7. Limited-term licenses; proportional fees. [Amended
9-25-1986]
If an applicant for one or more licenses shall desire the same for a limited
period only, the Mayor and Council to whom the application may be made
for such license may grant the same for such limited time and require
the person or persons to whom the same shall be granted to pay such
proportionate part of the license fee hereinbefore fixed by the Mayor and
Council in each particular case as shall be deemed equitable, just and
proper, but in no case shall a license be granted for a fee of less than $25.
§ 194-8. Methods of operation.
It shall be unlawful to hawk, peddle, sell or vend or offer for sale any goods,
wares, merchandise, produce or any other article whatsoever on any public
street or sidewalk, except from a cart, automobile or wagon.
§ 194-9. Use of streets and sidewalks. [Amended 9-25-1986]
No person or persons shall walk, ride or stand on the public streets or
sidewalks exhibiting their goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 194-10. License display.
Every person holding a license as above provided shall produce the same
for inspection whenever requested to do so.
§ 194-11. Record of licenses; fees collected.
The Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him and report
the same at the regular meeting of the Council following the date of the
issuing of the license and shall promptly pay all moneys collected by him for
licenses to the Borough Collector.
§ 194-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 194-11
155:406
ARTICLE II
Soliciting
[Adopted 4-9-201575]
§ 194-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR — Any person engaged in or undertaking any act of solicitation.
SOLICIT or SOLICITATION — Any act of going from house to house, person
to person, place to place, or otherwise moving or travelling about this
Borough for any of the following purposes: to sell or procure orders,
pledges, subscriptions, commitments or promises of any nature whatsoever
for property, real or personal, or services of any kind, regardless of the
description or nature, whether for profit or nonprofit; to collect money
or procure pledges or promises, regardless of the reason or purpose for
which such money shall be intended or applied; to collect material, goods
or property of any kind or to procure pledges or promises, regardless of the
purpose; to otherwise entreat, importune or approach other persons in this
Borough with requests or pleas of any nature.
§ 194-13. Registration.
No person shall solicit or act as a solicitor from door to door within this
Borough without first registering with the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Allendale and paying any license fee, as provided in this article. The Chief of
Police or his/her designee may elect to waive the requirements set forth in
this article for groups soliciting for Borough-sponsored events or for special
causes.
§ 194-14. Information, photographs and fingerprints required.
Each such registrant shall, at the time of registering, give to the Chief
of Police, in writing, his name, address and such other personal data as
is required to identify him, descriptions of the vehicle to be used at the
time of solicitation, together with two recent photographs of his face,
approximately 2 1/2 inches by 2 1/2 inches in size, together with the
purpose of his proposed canvassing or solicitation, the route, date and
approximate hours of his itinerary in this Borough (which shall be between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday), and any
prior convictions of a crime, felony, misdemeanor or disorderly persons'
offense ever entered against such registrant. Registrant fingerprints are
required and shall be conducted at a New Jersey State Police designated
facility. At the time of registration submission, the registrant shall be
provided with an appropriate form with instructions on scheduling a
fingerprint appointment and associated fees. If the registrant has fulfilled
75.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, Soliciting, adopted 12-28-1967 as
Ch. 60 of the 1967 Code, as amended.
§ 194-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 194-14
155:407
the above fingerprinting requirement within six months prior to making
application with the Borough of Allendale, the Borough may use discretion
in requiring the registrant to be re-fingerprinted. It is the registrant's
responsibility to provide documentation of acceptable fingerprint
processing and subsequent response.
§ 194-15. Investigation; issuance of certificate.
§ 194-16. Carrying and exhibiting certificate.
Each registrant shall carry the registration certificate at all times and shall
exhibit it to any person upon request. The identification card shall be worn
at all times on an outer garment, in order that it is apparent and visible and
that it may provide a ready means of identification.
A. The Chief of Police shall cause such investigation to be made of each
registrant's business and moral character as is deemed necessary for
the protection of the public welfare. The Chief of Police shall be
governed by, but not necessarily be limited to, the following criteria:
(1) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application;
(2) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor/disorderly persons'
offense involving moral turpitude;
(3) A judgment of liability in a civil action involving any solicitation,
transaction, or enterprise found to be fraudulent within the last 10
years;
(4) Evidence that the registrant's activities will likely cause a breach of
the peace or unethical or dishonest business practices or be a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the registrant's character or
business responsibility is found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall issue a registration certificate to which shall be affixed one
photograph of the registrant and which shall be signed by the Chief of
Police and shall also show the kind of goods or services to be sold or
performed by the registrant, the date of issuance of the certificate and
the date on which such certificate shall expire, which shall be
December 31 of the year in which issued. Licenses shall not be
transferable. The issuance of said registration certificate or
identification card does not constitute an endorsement or approval of
the purposes of such solicitation by the Borough of Allendale or any
officer or employee thereof. The certificate of registration shall have
printed predominantly thereon in red: "This identification card is not an
endorsement by the Borough of Allendale or its officers and
employees."
§ 194-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 194-17
155:408
§ 194-17. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary pertaining to
the permitted hours of solicitation and fingerprinting, such provisions shall
not apply to political solicitation and canvassing or to groups soliciting or
canvassing on behalf of political persons or political groups or public service
groups. Such solicitation shall be permissible between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and no fingerprinting shall
be required, provided that the Chief of Police is provided with the names
of the persons soliciting on behalf of the group/organization and the dates,
hours, and areas where the solicitations will occur. All other provisions
herein set forth as to solicitation or solicitors as defined in this article shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 194-18. Compliance with other laws.
No such registration certificate shall be issued to any person who has
not complied with any law of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of
this Borough regulating soliciting, canvassing or itinerant vendors of
merchandise.
§ 194-19. Time and manner of peddling or soliciting restricted.
No person, whether registered or not, shall visit or call at any private
residence for the purpose of solicitation, as defined in this article, when
banned by the householder by a sign bearing words to the effect that
solicitors or peddlers are not invited or are prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to peddle or solicit from the back doors or side entrances
to any premises within the Borough or to peddle or solicit before 9:00 a.m.
or after 5:00 p.m. on any day Monday through Saturday or at any time on
Sunday.
§ 194-20. Revocation of registration; appeals.
A. A license may be revoked by the Borough Council, Borough Clerk or
Borough Police Chief by reason of the violation of the terms hereof, the
violation of any municipal ordinance, state or federal statute, or false
statement made in applying for a license. In the event of such
revocation, the licensed person must be granted a hearing by the
Borough Council upon his/her request to challenge such revocation as
hereinafter provided.
B. Any person aggrieved by the revocation action of the Chief of Police,
Borough Council, or Borough Clerk in the denial or revocation of a
license as provided in this article shall have the right of appeal to the
Mayor and Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Borough Clerk, within 14 days after notice of action complained of has
been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Borough Council shall
set a time and place for hearing on such appeal, to be held within 14
days of the date of the filing of the appeal, and written notice of such
§ 194-17 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 194-20
155:409
§ 194-21. (Reserved)
§ 194-22. License fee.
The license fee shall be paid to the Chief of Police as follows:
hearing shall be given to the appellant. The decision and order of the
Borough Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
A. A charge of $30 shall be paid with the submission of the application to
cover the cost of processing each application and issuance of the
license. This shall apply to each individual who makes application for
said license. The fee is nonrefundable. The registrant shall pay any and
all fees required by the New Jersey State Police and/or the designated
fingerprint processing vendor.
B. No license fee shall be prorated for any portion of the year.
§ 194-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 194-22
155:410
ARTICLE III
No-Knock Registry
[Adopted 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-18]
§ 194-23. No-Knock Registry established.
A. The Borough Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises
where the owner and/or occupant has notified the Clerk that soliciting,
canvassing, peddling, itinerant vending, and door-to-door sales
enterprises are not permitted on the premises (hereinafter referred to
as the "Borough of Allendale No-Knock Registry"). Such notification to
the Clerk shall be made by completion of a form available at the
Borough Clerk's office during normal business hours. The list shall be
updated monthly.
B. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the
Borough of Allendale No-Knock Registry pursuant to Subsection A
herein shall be able to procure from the Clerk's office a sticker for
display at his/her/its premises indicating enlistment on the Borough of
Allendale No-Knock Registry. The first sticker shall be provided free of
charge and may be picked up in person during regular business hours.
If a replacement sticker is required, the individual may pick up a
replacement at the Clerk's office at no charge.
C. The Borough Clerk shall distribute to the Allendale Chief of Police the
current Borough of Allendale No-Knock Registry on a monthly basis.
The Allendale Police Department will provide the list to a licensee at the
time of issuance of a license to solicit, peddle, canvass, itinerant vendor
otherwise door-to-door sell, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The licensee shall not solicit, peddle, canvass, itinerant vend or conduct
door-to-door sales at any premises identified on the then-current
Borough of Allendale No-Knock Registry.
D. Although the most current list of registrants on the Borough of
Allendale No-Knock Registry shall be provided by the Allendale Police
Department, it is the responsibility of the canvasser, peddler, itinerant
vendor, or solicitor to have the most up-to-date list prior to performing
their business.
E. Any solicitor, canvasser, peddler, itinerant vendor, or owner or
employee of a door-to-door sales enterprise who violates any provision
of this section, if convicted, shall be:
(1) Subject to a maximum ordinance violation fine of $1,250 for the
first offense;
(2) Subject to 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not
exceeding 90 days for any offense thereafter; and
§ 194-23 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 194-23
155:411
(3) Subject to a permanent revocation of any license issued under the
within chapter.
F. As used in this article, the terms "solicitor", "solicit" and "solicitation"
shall have the meanings indicated in Borough Code § 194-12.
§ 194-23 ALLENDALE CODE § 194-23
155:412
Chapter 195
PET WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Improper disposal of waste to storm
sewer — See Ch. 141.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
§ 195-1. Purpose.
A chapter to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough of Allendale, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 195-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 194-23 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 195-3
155:413
§ 195-3. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 195-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 195-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Health
Officer of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 195-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 195-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 195-8. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the terms
of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 195-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 196
PLOT PLAN APPROVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 40.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Zoning — See Ch. 270.
§ 195-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 195-9
155:414
§ 196-1. Plot plan required.
A. Before a construction permit is issued for any proposed new singlefamily
dwelling, dwelling unit, multiple dwelling or townhouse (all as
defined in § 270-8), the Construction Code Official shall forward to the
Borough Engineer for approval a plot plan provided by the owner or his
designee drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet,
prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, showing
the following:
(1) Actual location of the proposed dwelling, with ground floor and
garage floor elevations and building heights.
(2) Proposed front, rear and side yard setbacks.
(3) Means of foundation drainage and any subsurface drainage
structures, drainage inlets or seepage fields.
(4) All existing trees over six inches in diameter and trees to be
removed.
(5) All existing and proposed utility and sanitary sewer connections.
(6) All easements, with purpose and/or owner.
(7) Dimensions and locations of proposed curb opening for driveways.
(8) All existing and proposed contours for the subject lot and existing
contours for adjacent lots to adequately demonstrate proposed
surface water flows.
(9) All existing and/or proposed on- and off-site improvements in close
proximity to the subject lot.
(10) Percolation test locations and rates. Percolation test must be
witnessed by Borough Engineer.
(11)New Jersey flood hazard areas, floodway and freshwater wetlands
limits.
(12) Septic system approval from Health Department.
B. Within 45 days of receipt of the plot plan, the Borough Engineer shall
issue a report to the Construction Code Official with his/her
recommendations. The Borough Engineer shall include, but not be
limited to, the following factors in evaluating such plot plans:
(1) Surface and subsurface drainage.
(2) Preservation of trees and landscaping.
(3) Suitability of proposed utility connections.
§ 195-9 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 196-1
155:415
(4) Soil erosion control.
(5) Any other factor relating to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(6) Suitability of existing streets, storm drainage and emergency
access to the subject or surrounding sites affected by proposed
construction.
C. Upon completion of the construction of a building or structure
foundation, an as-built foundation location plan prepared by a licensed
land surveyor shall be submitted to the Construction Code Official and
Borough Engineer for review and approval. The location plan shall
indicate foundation setbacks from property and building lines and
indicate finished floor elevators.
D. Upon completion of construction approved on the plot plan, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an as-built plan of the site shall
be submitted to the Borough Engineer which provides the following
information and details (except for the provision of an as-built
foundation location survey):
(1) All topographic information provided on the approved plot plan.
(2) Final utility connections with reference ties to building corners.
(3) Final surface contours at two-foot intervals.
(4) Location of all underground structures with reference ties to
building corners.
(5) Finished floor elevations.
(6) Spot elevations at all building corners, drainage structures,
sewers, driveways, property limits, walls and/or other structures.
(7) Topographical information within the public right-of-way
surrounding the site.
(8) Property survey boundary data.
(9) All other information deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer
or Construction Code Official to determine consistency with the
approved development application or building permit
E. The initial deposit for engineering review and inspection costs in
connection with a plot plan approval shall be in the amount of $500. Any
unused portion of the escrow shall be refunded to the owner. In the
event that the initial engineering escrow is exhausted, the owner shall
replenish the escrow in an amount reasonably determined by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 196-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 196-1
155:416
§ 196-2. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 196-3. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 196-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 197
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracts for county services — See Ch. 18.
§ 197-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — For purposes of this chapter, a business entity whose
contributions are regulated by this chapter means:
F. This chapter shall not apply to additions or alterations to existing
structures except if such addition or alteration increases the footprint
by 500 square feet or greater.
A. An individual, including the individual's spouse, and any child/children;
A firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership; limited
liability company; organization; association; and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and
B above and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
§ 196-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-1
155:417
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE —
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable
services" as such terms are used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — The meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By way of
illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans, and
in-kind contributions.
§ 197-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who has received
or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described
in Subsection A above, more than $100,000 in compensation or income
of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation, wages,
salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends,
profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock,
stock options or gifts), in any twelve-month period prior to the award
of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this chapter; and
E.
All persons who are an "affiliate" of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and E above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C. 101(2).
F.
A. Every candidate for Borough of Allendale elective municipal office;
Every candidate committee established by or for the benefit of a
candidate for Borough of Allendale elective municipal office;
B.
Every joint candidate committee established in whole or in part by
or for the benefit of a candidate for Borough of Allendale elective
municipal office;
C.
D. Every political committee of the Borough of Allendale;
E. Every political committee of Bergen County; and
Every political committee, continuing political committee, or other form
of association or organization that regularly engages in the support of
candidates for the Borough of Allendale municipal or Bergen County
elective offices.
F.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Borough
of Allendale or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure professional, banking,
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services, including
those awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, from any
professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Borough of Allendale municipal candidate or
§ 197-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 197-2
155:418
holder of the public office having ultimate responsibility for the award
of the contract, or campaign committee supporting such candidate or
officeholder, or to any Borough of Allendale or Bergen County party
committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) that regularly
engages in the support of Allendale municipal elections and/or
municipal parties in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection
C within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement.
B. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the Borough of
Allendale or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the
rendition of professional services or extraordinary unspecified services
shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution, to:
(1) A candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the Borough of
Allendale, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract; or
(2) To any Borough of Allendale or Bergen County political committee
that regularly engages in the support of Borough of Allendale
municipal elections between the time of first communication
between that business entity and the municipality regarding a
specific agreement for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services, and the later of the termination of
negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the
performance or specified time period of that contract or
agreement.
C. Monetary thresholds.
(1) The monetary thresholds of this chapter are:
(a) A maximum of $300 per calendar year each for any purpose to
any candidate or candidate committee for Borough of Allendale
Mayor or Borough of Allendale Governing Body, or $500 per
calendar year to any joint candidates committee for Borough of
Allendale Mayor or Borough of Allendale Governing Body, or
$300 per calendar year to a party committee of the Borough of
Allendale;
(b) Maximum of $500 per calendar year to a Bergen County party
committee; and
(c) Maximum of $500 per calendar year to any political action
committee.
(2) However, for each business entity party to a contract for
professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection A, or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in
Subsection A, when such business entity's contribution is
§ 197-2 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-2
155:419
§ 197-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this
chapter.
§ 197-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this chapter may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this chapter if it were an initial contract.
§ 197-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
aggregated with all "persons" defined in § 197-1, Definitions,
above, by virtue of their affiliation to that business entity party,
a maximum of $2,500 to all Borough of Allendale candidates,
candidate committees, joint candidate committees, and holders
of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of
a contract, all Borough of Allendale or Bergen County political
committees as described herein combined, without violating
Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Borough of Allendale Mayor or Governing Body, if the contract
requires approval or appropriation from the Mayor or Governing
Body; or
(2) The Mayor of the Borough of Allendale if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this chapter, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of the obligations described in a
contract for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this
chapter.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or extraordinary unspecified services from any business entity,
the Borough of Allendale or its purchasing agents and departments, as
the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business
entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has
not made a contribution in violation of § 197-2 of this chapter. The
Borough of Allendale, its purchasing agents and departments shall be
responsible for informing the Council of the Borough of Allendale that
§ 197-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 197-5
155:420
§ 197-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services
or extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 197-2 of
this chapter if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable
ELEC report is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the
recipient of such contribution.
§ 197-7. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 197-2A
do not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the
meaning of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4; or are awarded in the case of emergency
under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary
herein contained, the provisions of § 197-2A through E shall not apply to bar
an Allendale professional or extraordinary unspecifiable services contract
for contributions made to a political committee, municipal committee or
organization, municipal candidate, municipal candidate committee or
municipal joint candidate committee in any municipality other than the
Borough of Allendale and which does not regularly engage in the support
of Borough of Allendale municipal candidates. There is no exemption for
contracts awarded pursuant to a fair and open process under N.J.S.A.
19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 197-8. Violations and penalties.
the aforementioned sworn statement has been received and that the
business entity is not in violation of this chapter, prior to awarding the
contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the Borough
of Allendale any contributions that constitute a violation of this chapter
that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration
of a contract. The Borough of Allendale, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body
within 10 business days after receipt of said report from the business
entity, or at the next Council meeting following receipt of said report
from the business entity, or whichever comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the Borough of Allendale or
prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall
be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any
other provision of law.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a Borough of Allendale
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
§ 197-5 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-8
155:421
§ 197-9. Citizens' private right of action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge
violations of this chapter, every person aggrieved by a violation of this
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in Borough of Allendale or a holder of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or any Borough of Allendale or Bergen County political
committee;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this chapter.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates § 197-8A(1) through (8)
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Borough of Allendale
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this chapter, or who conspires with another person to
violate any provision of this chapter, or who, with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating a violation of this chapter, solicits another
person to commit it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person
in planning or committing it, shall be subject to punishment, including
fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the
ordinances of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 197-8 ALLENDALE CODE § 197-9
155:422
chapter, or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough of Allendale has the
right, consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of
this chapter in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain
declaratory, injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not
limited to, attorneys' fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of
this chapter.
§ 197-10. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any such provision
to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of
this chapter to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such
provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this
chapter are severable.
§ 197-11. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 197-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective upon passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 199
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Occupancy limits; unsafe structures — See
Ch. 180.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Solid waste — See Ch. 228.
Sidewalk area maintenance — See Ch. 233,
Art. II.
Trees — See Ch. 244.
Vacant/abandoned properties — See Ch. 248.
Visual obstructions — See Ch. 256.
§ 197-9 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 197-12
155:423

ARTICLE I
Title, Policy and Purposes
§ 199-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Allendale" and may be referred to in this chapter as the
"Property Maintenance Code" or as "this code."
§ 199-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter shall be to:
A. Provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Avoid, prevent and eliminate the maintenance or creation of hazards to
the public health or safety.
C. Avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or
continue, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties.
D. Prevent the creation, continuation, extension or aggravation of blight.
E. Preserve property values in the Borough.
F. Prevent the physical deterioration or progressive downgrading of the
quality of housing facilities in the Borough.
G. Maintain the value and economic health of the commercial properties
and businesses that serve and help to support the Borough and its
citizens.
H. Prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which
constitute nuisances and are thereby potentially dangerous or
hazardous to the life, health or safety of persons on or near the
premises where such conditions exist.
I. Establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition
of land, buildings, structures and premises in the Borough.
J. Fix responsibilities and duties therefor upon owners, lessees, operators
and occupants of property.
K. Provide for administration and enforcement.
L. Fix penalties for the violation of this code.
§ 199-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-2
155:425

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 199-3. Terms defined.
For the specific purposes of this code, the following terms, whenever used
herein or referred to in this code, shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them hereunder unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure which
are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto; and the open land
space of any premises outside of any building or structure erected thereon.
NUISANCE: —
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession, use or occupancy of a
dwelling premises or rooming unit, or any person or entity in possession of
or using any premises, or part thereof, whether or not the owner thereof
and regardless of the duration of time of such possession, use or occupancy.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity, not the owner, who has charge,
care or control of a dwelling or premises, or a part thereof, with or without
the knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises, or part thereof, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge,
care or control of any lot, premises, building or structure, or part thereof, as
owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, trustee, receiver, guardian,
lessee or mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
obtained. Any person, group of persons or entity who is a lessee, sublessee
or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building, structure or land
shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes of this
chapter and shall have responsibility over the portion of the premises so
sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples thereof,
including the building or structures thereon.
REFUSE or RUBBISH — All discarded, useless, unusable, unused or
worthless solid waste matter or materials, combustible or noncombustible,
including but not limited to garbage, trash, ashes, paper, paper goods
and products, wrappings, cans, bottles, containers, yard clippings, garden
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Borough.
A.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises
which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life,
health or safety of persons on, near or passing within the proximity of
the premises where such condition exists.
B.
§ 199-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-3
155:427
waste, debris, junk, glass, boxes, crockery, wood, mineral matter, plastic,
rubber, leather, furniture, household goods, appliances, bedding, scrap
lumber, scrap metal, construction material, inoperable machinery or parts
thereof, garden or farming implements and supplies, dead or rotting
vegetation, tires, abandoned, inoperative or unusable automobiles and
vehicles and solid commercial or industrial waste.
§ 199-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-3
155:428
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 199-4. Residential and nonresidential structures and premises to
comply.
Every residential and nonresidential building or structure and the premises
or part of the premises on which it is situated, including vacant lots, are
required to comply with the provisions of this code.
§ 199-5. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher or stricter
standard than set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of the Borough,
or under the laws or regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its
agencies, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the
provisions of this code impose a lower or lesser standard than any other
regulation or ordinance of the Borough or of the laws and regulations of
the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail.
§ 199-6. Effect of compliance.
Compliance with this code shall not constitute a defense against any
violation of any other ordinance of the Borough applicable to any structure
or premises, nor shall any one act of compliance constitute a defense
against any subsequent or other violation of this code.
§ 199-7. Responsibility for violations.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this code, and no such person or entity shall
be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility hereunder, nor
be entitled to assert as a defense against any charge made against him
or them for violation of this code the fact that another owner, operator or
occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible therefor and
in violation thereof.
§ 199-8. Work to comply with Building Code.76
Any alterations to buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto, or
changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this code shall be done in accordance with all applicable
sections of the applicable Building Code.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Building Construction.
§ 199-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-9
155:429
§ 199-9. Applicability of Zoning Ordinance.77
Nothing contained in this code or any requirement of compliance herewith
shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of the Zoning
Ordinance or zoning laws of the municipality.
§ 199-10. Effect on existing remedies.
Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies
of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.78
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Zoning.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Occupancy Limits; Unsafe Structures and Equipment.
§ 199-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-10
155:430
ARTICLE IV
Duties and Responsibilities of Owners, Operators and Occupants
§ 199-11. Premises to comply with standards.
In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, operator or occupant of premises to comply
with any or all of the requirements and standards of this chapter, to keep
the premises free of conditions which constitute violations hereof and to
promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions.
§ 199-11 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-11
155:431

ARTICLE V
Maintenance Standards
§ 199-12. Exterior conditions.
The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following matter,
materials or conditions:
A. Refuse or rubbish as hereinbefore defined.
B. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts, towers,
exterior cellar openings, basement hatchways, foundations or
excavations.
C. Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, heaters, television sets and other
similar major appliances.
D. Structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, structures or fences.
E. Rodents, vermin, pest infestations or rodent harborages.
F. Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such as holes, sudden
depressions, sharp or jagged projections or obstructions.
G. Buried rubble, refuse or rubbish.
H. Stagnant surface or ground water accumulations which create or are
likely to create mosquito or other insect breeding areas.
I. Nuisances as hereinbefore defined.
J. Vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers, motorized or not,
licensed or unlicensed, registered or unregistered, which vehicles or
parts thereof are or have been junked, abandoned, or dismantled, have
been inoperable for 30 days or more, or are in a state of visible
disrepair. [Amended 3-23-2017]
K. Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited to
dead trees or tree limbs, accumulations of ice or any object, natural or
man-made, which would threaten the health and safety of persons if
caused to fall, or other similar dangerously loose and overhanging
objects which, by reason of their location above ground level, constitute
an actual hazard to persons or vehicles in the vicinity thereof.
L. Inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, retaining walls, piers and
columns and other similar structurally unsound, damaged or defective
load-bearing components which are incapable of bearing imposed loads
safely at all points.
M. Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing, broken,
rotted or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or structures, including
but not limited to porches, landings, balconies, stairways, handrails,
steps, sidewalks, walls, overhangs, roofs, fences, retaining walls,
§ 199-12 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-12
155:433
§ 199-13. Exterior premises areas. [Added 5-28-1998]
The exterior of all premises shall comply with the following standards:
§ 199-14. Exterior structure. [Added 5-28-1998]
The exterior of all structures shall comply with the following standards:
supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes and signs, and
loose, crumbling or falling bricks, stones, mortar or plaster.
N. All fire hydrants shall have a minimum of a three-foot radius clearance
from any plantings, snow, mailboxes and fencing, and there shall be no
obstructions from the front of the hydrant to the street or right-of-way.
Such clearance of snow must be accomplished within 24 hours of
daylight after the snow shall have fallen. [Added 11-24-2008;
amended 4-9-2015]
A. All exterior premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior premises
which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or
within any structure located thereon.
C. The exterior of all premises shall be maintained free from weeds or
plant growth in excess of 10 inches (254 millimeters). All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual
plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however,
that this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
D. All structures and exterior of all premises shall be kept free from rat
infestation. Where rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health.
After examination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
E. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases,
steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke odors or other gaseous or
particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenants.
F. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
A. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
B. All wood and metal surfaces, including but not limited to window
frames, doors, doorframes, cornices, porches and trim shall be
§ 199-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-14
155:434
maintained in good condition. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall
be eliminated and surfaces repaired.
C. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
D. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent
the entry of rats.
E. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting
materials and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated
where required to prevent deterioration.
F. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof
drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and
free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner
that creates a public nuisance.
G. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound
condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall
be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatments.
H. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
I. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements
and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatments.
J. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition.
K. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good
repair and weathertight. All glazing materials shall be maintained free
from cracks and holes. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily opened and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
L. All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good condition.
Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guest rooms
shall tightly secure the door.
§ 199-14 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-14
155:435
§ 199-15. Responsibility of owners, operators and occupants.
[Amended 5-28-1998]
Without limitation by the foregoing, it shall also be the duty and
responsibility of owners, occupants or operators to keep the exterior of
all premises structurally sound, in good general repair and sufficiently
maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements of
§§ 199-12, 199-13 and 199-14, to an extent so as to prevent and avoid
conditions that violate the purposes of this chapter, as set forth above.
M. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance
of rats, rain and surface drainage water.
N. Every basement window that is operable shall be supplied with ratproof
shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry
of rats, where appropriate.
§ 199-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-15
155:436
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 199-16. Enforcement officer designated. [Amended 4-25-2002]
The Property Maintenance Officer of the Borough is hereby designated as
the officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter and is hereinafter
referred to as the "enforcement officer."
§ 199-17. Notice of violation; issuance of summons.
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is or has been
a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person, persons or entities responsible therefor under this
chapter. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to
be properly and sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent by registered
or certified mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon
which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the
municipality, or a copy thereof handed to such person or persons, or a copy
thereof left at the usual place of abode or office of such persons or entities.
Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without the municipality. The
notice shall also state that unless the violation is abated, removed, cured,
prevented or desisted from within 10 days of the date of service of such
notice (exclusive of the date of service) a summons shall be issued for
such violation. The enforcement officer may, at the time he issues the
notice, extend the period for compliance with the violation stated in the
notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his judgment,
the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of the condition
violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period. In such
cases the enforcement officer shall state such reasonably required extended
period in the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid
10 days. In the event that the violation is not abated, removed, cured,
prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully remedied within the ten-day
period or within such period as set forth in the notice, pursuant to the
foregoing, a summons shall then issue against the person, persons, entity or
entities so notified.
§ 199-18. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency condition in
violation of this chapter exists, which condition requires immediate
attention in order to protect the public health or safety, he may issue an
order by service of notice as set forth in § 199-17 reciting the existence
of such an emergency condition and requiring that such action be taken
by the violator as soon as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but, upon objection in writing to the
enforcement officer, any such persons shall be afforded a hearing before
§ 199-16 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-18
155:437
the Governing Body of the Borough as soon as is reasonably possible. After
such a hearing and decision by the Governing Body as to the existence or
nonexistence of the emergency condition, the Governing Body may continue
such order in effect, or modify or withdraw it, subject to issuance of a
summons for violation thereof, if such order is continued.
§ 199-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-18
155:438
ARTICLE VII
Violations
§ 199-19. Violations, penalties and additional remedies.
A. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is
issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense: by a fine not to exceed $50.
(2) For a second offense: by a fine not to exceed $200.
(3) For a third offense or any subsequent offenses: by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
each such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
C. In the event that any person or entity refuses or neglects to abate,
remove or resolve any violation set forth in this chapter after notice
thereof as provided under § 199-17, the Governing Body, by resolution,
may abate a nuisance as defined herein, correct a defect or put the
premises in proper condition so as to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, any other municipal ordinance or state law applicable
thereto at the cost of the owner or lessor and may expend municipal
funds for such purpose and charge the same against the premises, and
the amount thereof as determined by the Governing Body of the
Municipality shall be a lien against the premises and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such premises, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the
same manner as taxes. [Added 4-12-201079]
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of § 199-19 to include "additional
remedies."
§ 199-19 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 199-19
155:439
Chapter 203
PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 85.
Animals — See Ch. 93.
Demonstrations — See Ch. 112.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
§ 199-19 ALLENDALE CODE § 199-19
155:440
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 49, Art. I of the 1967 Code]
§ 203-1. Compliance required.
No person, other than a municipal employee or official, shall enter upon any
portion of any municipal park, municipal parking Borough of Allendale at
such times as the same is prohibited by a sign thereon or contrary to the
oral or visual directions of a municipal employee or member of the Police
Department of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 203-2. Park hours. [Amended 8-23-1979]
§ 203-3. No-parking times in municipal parks or parking areas.
No person shall leave any motor vehicle in any municipal park or municipal
parking area between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. The presence
of any such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the act of the registered
owner thereof, though such presumption may be rebutted.
§ 203-4. Waste disposal.
No person shall leave or deposit any paper or other waste material in
any public park or parking area other than in such receptacle as may be
provided therefor.
§ 203-5. Participation in recreational activities.
No unauthorized person, other than residents of the Borough of Allendale,
shall participate in any game or form of recreation, except as a spectator,
in any public park; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council may
promulgate regulations governing such participation by nonresidents of the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 203-6. Sales and solicitation.80 [Amended 7-26-2007]
No person shall place any booth, stand, structure, motor vehicle or trailer
for the sale of any commodities, merchandise or for the solicitation of any
funds in any public park, municipal property or Board of Education property
A. No unauthorized person shall be or remain in any municipal park
between dark and the hour of 6:00 a.m. unless such person shall have
obtained a duly authorized permit from the Borough Administrator.
[Amended 2-27-2003]
B. The word "dark" shall be defined herein as meaning 1/2 hour after
sunset.
80.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 194, Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 203-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-6
155:441
in the Borough of Allendale without the written permission first obtained
from the Mayor and Council or Board of Education, as the case may be.
§ 203-7. Permits to sell; hours.
No person, except nonprofit organizations with the approval of the Mayor
and Council, shall sell or offer for sale any object or goods without having
obtained a permit for such sale, the cost of such permit to be established
annually by the Mayor and Council. Any such person may, having obtained
such permit aforesaid, sell or offer for sale such object or goods between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on all days except those specifically
excluded prior to issuance of the permit by the Mayor and Council.
§ 203-8. Permit to erect wires in public park.
No person or corporation shall install or erect any wire or wires through
any public park without a written permit from the Mayor and Council first
obtained.
§ 203-9. Vehicle regulations.
No motor vehicle shall be operated in any public park or parking area
except on those areas paved or otherwise provided for such vehicular use,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 203-10. Vehicle speed limit.
No motor vehicle shall be operated in any public park or parking area at
speeds in excess of 15 miles per hour, or in a careless or reckless manner.
§ 203-11. Yielding right-of-way.
The operator of any motor vehicle must give the right-of-way to pedestrians
in any public park.
§ 203-12. Reservation privileges.
Any organization or group of individuals who have obtained permission from
the appropriate Borough officials for the use of specified Borough property
at specified times shall use said specified property to the exclusion of others
for the time said permission is granted. Third parties interfering with such
authorized use shall be deemed to be in violation hereof.
§ 203-13. Glass containers prohibited. [Added 7-10-1980]
Glass beverage and food containers and similar glass objects of all types are
prohibited in all public parks, swimming facilities, beach areas and public
parking areas.
§ 203-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 203-13.1
155:442
§ 203-13.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-26-2007]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both. Each
violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
§ 203-13.1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-13.1
155:443

ARTICLE II
Concession Facilities
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 16 of the 1967 Code]
§ 203-14. Determination to lease.
On or after the effective date of this article, the Borough Council may let
out and lease any privilege for the dispensing of ice cream, soft drinks
and food refreshments and similar foods and beverages to any individual,
firm, copartnership or corporation desiring such a concession in any of the
parks, swimming pools, public resorts or recreation places owned by the
Borough of Allendale, providing there is compliance with the procedure and
conditions hereinafter provided.
§ 203-15. Renting and leasing of concessions by bidding.
The renting or leasing of concessions shall be to the highest responsible
bidder therefor, after advertisement of the time and place of the receipt of
bids for the same at least 10 days prior to the time set for such receipt of
bids, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, and upon such terms
and conditions as may be prescribed. No concession may be operated nor
the right to operate a concession granted to more than one concessionaire
for each public park or other recreational place. No more than one
concession facility may at any time be operated in any such public park or
other recreational facility.
§ 203-16. Operating regulations.
Concession facilities shall be operated at all times in accordance with the
following regulations:
§ 203-17. Forfeiture of lease.
Violation of the terms upon which any lease or privilege is granted will
render the lease void, and, after reasonable notice to the concessionaire,
the Borough may re-enter any place so leased and thereafter prevent the
exercise of the privilege so forfeited and may, after advertisement and
receipt of additional bids, release to the highest responsible bidder therefor.
A. Days of operation. All days, excluding only those set aside by resolution
of the Governing Body permitting the exclusive use of the public parks,
resorts and recreational places by a specific organization.
B. Prices. The prices charged for any items sold by the concessionaire
shall be no greater than the prices charged for the same or similar
items in other locations operated by the concessionaire.
§ 203-14 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-18
155:445
§ 203-18. Inspections; enforcement.
Inspection and enforcement as provided for by the terms of this article shall
be vested in the Building Inspector and the Sanitary Officer of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 203-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 203-18
155:446
ARTICLE III
Recreational Facilities
[Adopted 3-26-1981]
§ 203-19. Definitions. [Amended 6-23-1983]
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
CELERY FARM — NATURE PRESERVE -- The name of the premises in
the Borough of Allendale known and designated as "Lots 1.09, 14, 18,
22.01, Conservation Easement on Lot 31.01 and 42 in Block 801, Lot
16 in Block 605 and Lot 8 in Block 702, Assessment Map, Borough of
Allendale."[Amended 2-27-1997; 11-23-1998]
CRESTWOOD PARK — The name of the premises in the Borough of
Allendale known and designated as "Lots 9 and 10 in Block 201 and part
of Lot 6, Block 1003, Assessment Map, Borough of Allendale," as shown
on the map entitled "Minor Subdivision of Property, Borough of Allendale,
Bergen County, New Jersey, as prepared by Azzolina Engineering Company,
Consulting Engineers, Paramus, New Jersey," dated October 1971.
MEMORIAL PARK — The name of the premises now officially designated
by the name and located at the corner of Park and Brookside Avenues and
known and designated as "Lot 1 in Block 1704, Assessment Map, Borough
of Allendale."
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes all facilities owned and operated
by the Borough of Allendale for recreational purposes, including swimming
and other athletic facilities, beach, lake and picnic areas, playgrounds,
parks and nature preserves and all areas for parking of vehicles adjoining
such recreational facilities.
RECREATION PARK — The name of the premises now officially designated
by that name and located at the corner of West Crescent Avenue and West
Allendale Avenue and known and designated as "Lot 2 in Block 1608 and
Lots 1 and 9 in Block 1708, Assessment Map, Borough of Allendale."
§ 203-20. Use of recreational facilities; fees; rules and regulations.
The Borough Council shall, with the assistance and recommendations of the
Borough Administrator and the Council Park and Recreation Committee,
operate, maintain and improve the recreational facilities and plan and
coordinate all recreational programs conducted by the Borough. In
furtherance of these purposes, the Borough Council shall:
A. Annually, by resolution, establish fees to be charged for the use of
recreational facilities and participation in recreation programs.
B. By resolution, establish rules and regulations governing the operation
of recreation activities and the conduct of persons entering park
premises, using recreational facilities and participating in recreational
activities.
§ 203-19 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-20
155:447
§ 203-21. Use of Crestwood Park.
The provisions of this article, or any other ordinance, shall not preclude the
use of the premises known as "Crestwood Park" and as defined in § 203-19
hereof, in its entirety or any portion thereof, for other municipal purposes
and facilities as enumerated in Ordinance No. 374, adopted on the 12th
day of August 1971, which authorized the acquisition of said premises and
appropriated the funds therefor.
§ 203-22. Continuance of rules and regulations.
All rules and regulations presently in force and effect pertaining to
recreational activities, conduct of persons using the recreational facilities,
membership policies and fees, or other regulations pertaining to
recreational facilities, shall continue in full force and effect under this
article until further order of the Borough Council by appropriate resolution.
§ 203-23. Violations and penalties.
Rules and regulations governing the conduct of persons entering park
premises, using recreational facilities and participating in recreational
activities, upon adoption by resolution of the Borough Council, shall become
a part of this article, and any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of Allendale.
C. Establish a membership policy for participation in and use of
recreational facilities and activities.
D. Establish a policy for the use of parks and recreation facilities by
groups applying for reserved spaces for such recreation activities as
swimming, picnics and other activities.
E. Establish a policy for the selection and hiring of required personnel for
the operation of Borough recreation facilities and programs and
determine the wage and salary scales for such personnel.
§ 203-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 203-23
155:448
ARTICLE IV
Designated Park and Playground Use
[Adopted 9-27-1990; amended in its entirety 4-28-2016]
§ 203-24. Prohibited acts.
No persons in any public park, or on a playground, lands or municipal
property of the Borough of Allendale, as designated in Schedule 1, attached
to and made a part of this article,81 shall:
A. Drive, park, use, store or haul any motorized vehicle, truck, van,
automobile, boat, watercraft or recreational vehicle upon, across or
over any of said properties, except those vehicles and watercraft owned
and operated by the Borough of Allendale or under the direction,
supervision or control of the Borough Administrator.
B. Camp; picnic; hunt, trap, fish or molest, harm, frighten, kill, chase,
tease, shoot or throw any objects at any animal, fish, reptile or bird; or
remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or
young of any reptile or bird.
C. Use said lands, except between the hours of one hour before sunrise
and one hour after sunset or as part of a wildlife management program
adopted by the Borough Council by resolution or ordinance. [Amended
12-14-2017]
D. Build or attempt to build a fire or drop, throw or otherwise scatter
lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other
inflammable material.
E. Bring any alcoholic beverages into or drink any alcoholic beverages in
said parks, playgrounds and lands, except for alcoholic beverages
brought in by or consumed by persons using the Red Barn at Crestwood
Park pursuant to a permit issued by the Borough.
F. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any pond or stream on or adjacent to any park, playground or lands of
any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such water, any
substances, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may or will result in
the pollution of said water.
G. Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any broken glass, ashes, paper
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, trash, building
materials, grass clippings, wood chips or any other inappropriate
matter.
H. Bring or have in said person's possession or set off or otherwise cause
to explode or discharge or burn any firearms, guns, firecrackers,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives or inflammable
material or discharge them or throw them into said park, playground or
81.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 203-24 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-24
155:449
§ 203-24.1. Exceptions. [Added 12-14-2017]
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of sporting arms legal in
New Jersey for regulated hunting according to state laws and regulations,
provided, however that any such use of such sporting arms is:
§ 203-25. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of no less than
$200 and not to exceed $500 or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
lands. The prohibition in this Subsection H shall not be applicable to
any fireworks show conducted or sponsored by the Borough for the
Fourth of July holiday.
I. Permit, allow or bring any pets on said park, playground or lands. As
used in this Subsection I, "pets" shall include but not be limited to dogs
(except for those dogs whose presence is permitted under Borough
Ordinance § 93-4), cats, house rabbits, ferrets, all rodents, including
but not limited to, gerbils, hamsters, chinchillas, fancy rats, and guinea
pigs; avian pets, including but not limited to, canaries, parakeets, and
parrots; reptile pets, including but not limited to, turtles, lizards and
snakes; aquatic pets, but not limited to, goldfish, tropical fish and frogs;
and arthropod pets, including but not limited to, tarantulas and hermit
crabs.
J. Release any animal or animals, domestic or wild, upon said lands
without the receipt of permission from the Borough Administrator or
the Borough Marsh Warden.
K. Bring in, have in said person's possession or use any weapon, including
but not limited to bows, arrows, slingshots or any other apparatus
designed to shoot projectiles.
L. Pick, remove, damage or destroy any flora, flowers, plants or
vegetation.
M. Use or operate any remote-controlled car, boat, truck, or any other
unmanned remotely controlled vehicle or device, without prior written
approval by the Borough.
N. Place or otherwise cause to be placed any glass, stones, sticks, papers,
meat, vegetables, snow, ice, animal waste, household garbage or any
other debris of any kind whatsoever into dumpsters not specifically
designated for such use.
A. On municipal lands designated by a resolution of the Borough Council
or by Borough ordinance; and
B. Is pursuant to a wildlife management program adopted by a resolution
or ordinance of the Borough Council.
§ 203-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 203-25
155:450
days, or both. The Police Department of the Borough of Allendale shall be
the enforcement agency pursuant hereto.
§ 203-25 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-25
155:451

ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 6-25-1992; amended in its entirety 2-28-2006]
§ 203-26. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park
or on any other property owned or operated by Borough of Allendale, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 203-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 203-28. Prohibited conduct.
§ 203-29. Enforcement. [Amended 12-14-2017]
A. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Allendale, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers, including the Celery Farm Nature Preserve).
B. Create any condition which results in a congregation of wildlife on
public property which:
(1) Results in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or droppings;
(2) Results in damage to flora, fauna or public property or safety or
welfare;
(3) Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or
welfare; or
(4) Results in a threat to the health, safety or welfare of said wildlife.
§ 203-26 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-29
155:453
§ 203-29.1. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 203-29.2. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 203-29.3. Repealer.
Article V, §§ 203-26 through 203-29, entitled "Feeding of Migratory
Waterfowl," to the extent inconsistent with the terms hereof, is hereby
repealed. All other ordinances of the Borough of Allendale, or parts thereof,
which are in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict.
§ 203-29.4. Effective date.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Property
Maintenance Officer of the Borough of Allendale.
B. Whenever the Borough Council, or Chief of Police, or his designee,
becomes aware that a congregation or congestion of wildlife exists on
public property, such wildlife maybe dispersed or removed by any
lawful means approved by the Borough Council or the Chief of Police, or
his designee.
C. Whenever the Borough Council, or Chief of Police, or his designee, in
his sound discretion, determines that wildlife shall be dispersed by
scare tactics or noise tactics, he may request assistance for the
implementation of the plan from the Police Department and/or Public
Works Department or from any responsible citizen or citizens. This
subsection shall not be construed to authorize any private citizen to
discharge any firearm or to use any device which launches a projectile
of any type. It shall be used in a reasonable way respecting the rights of
surrounding houses from excessive noise levels.
§ 203-29 ALLENDALE CODE § 203-29.4
155:454
ARTICLE VI
Feeding of Animals
[Adopted 3-9-1995]
§ 203-30. Feeding prohibited.
No person or persons shall feed, cause to be fed or provide food for any
dog, cat, bird, fish or any other animal in any public park, parking area,
playground, recreational facilities or public lands within the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 203-31. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the Marsh Warden, in his
reasonable discretion, from authorizing the feeding of any animal, fish,
reptile or bird on lands designated in Schedule 1 set forth in Article II,
§ 203-24.
§ 203-32. Enforcement.
The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 203-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons convicted of a violation of this article shall be
punished by one or more of the following: a fine of no less than $25 but
not to exceed $1,000; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 203-30 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 203-33
155:455
Chapter 205
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING
§ 205-1. Reference to state code; definitions.
Reference is made to Chapter IX of the Sanitary Code of the State of
New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 8:26, et seq. (entitled "Public Recreational Bathing,"
hereinafter referred to as "Chapter IX of the Code"). The definitions
contained in Chapter IX of the Code are adopted for the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 205-2. License to operate public or recreational bathing place;
fees.
§ 205-3. Violations and penalties.
A. License required. No person shall operate a public or recreational
bathing place until a license therefore shall have been issued by the
Board of Health.
B. Fees and charges.
(1) For the issuance or annual renewal of a license to operate a public
recreational bathing facility within the meaning of Chapter IX of
the Code, the fee shall be $400 each.
(2) For any inspection or reinspection of a public or recreational
bathing place subsequent or in addition to any inspection required
for the issuance of an annual license or the renewal of an annual
license required by this chapter, the fee shall be $75 each.
(3) Crestwood Lake shall be exempt from the requirement to pay the
foregoing fees and charges.
C. Terms of license; application for renewal. Licenses issued for the
operation of a public or recreational bathing place shall expire annually
on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall
be submitted together with the required fee prior to January 1 of each
year.
D. Denial or suspension of license. Licenses required by this Chapter may
be denied or suspended by the Board of Health for failure to comply
with this chapter or Chapter IX of the Code.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or Chapter IX of the Code shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $50 but not more than
$500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 203-33 ALLENDALE CODE § 205-4
155:456
§ 205-4. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and Chapter IX of the Code are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
Chapter 210
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 185. Concession facilities — See Ch. 203, Art. II.
§ 205-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 205-4
155:457

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Establishments
[Adopted 10-2-1969]
§ 210-1. License necessary. [Amended 11-2-1972]
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment as defined in and governed by Chapter XII of the State
Sanitary Code, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food
Establishments, without first having procured a license from the local Board
of Health so to do or without complying with any or all of the provisions
concerning operation and maintenance of the same as contained in the
aforementioned Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code.
§ 210-2. Fees; penalties. [Amended 11-16-1983; 4-6-1989;
12-8-1994; 10-1-1998; 10-7-2004; 10-13-2016]
A. The fees for the licensing of retail food establishments are hereby fixed
as follows:
Establishment Fee
Bakeries $300
Butcher shops $250
Confectioners $200
Delicatessens $300
Establishments that only sell prepacked or unpackaged
non-potentially-hazardous foods, coffee or prepackaged
ice cream as a supplement to the primary business
$150
Food establishment not otherwise listed $250
Home delivery food trucks $100
Home delivery milk trucks $50
Ice cream stores $200
Ice cream trucks $100
Liquor stores/taverns not serving food $200
Mobile vendors $175
Nursery school $100
Nursing homes
1 to 50 beds $200
50 to 100 beds $225
100 to 200 beds $275
200 to 300 beds $350
300 beds and over $500
§ 210-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-2
155:459
Establishment Fee
Produce markets $200
Religious, civic or nonprofit organizations No fee
Restaurants, banquet facilities or industrial/institutional
cafeterias, according to seating capacity:
0 to 25 persons $275
26 to 50 persons $300
51 to 100 persons $350
101 persons and over $500
Seasonal food operators (nonmobile) $200
Snack bars located within another business for the
convenience of the patrons, providing food primarily for
on-the-premises consumption
$200
Special event food permit $50
Supermarkets, grocery, retail food warehouses and
convenience stores
Maximum dwelling area of 5,000 square feet $200
Each additional 5,000 square feet or fraction thereof $150
Maximum fee $600
Vending machines $25
Soda, snack, coffee or other non-potentially-hazardous
food
$35
Sandwiches, milk, ice cream or other potentially
hazardous food
$35
B. Penalties. There shall be charged a penalty for license fees received
after the 10th day following the expiration dates as stipulated in this
§ 210-2. Nothing herein shall be construed to extend the time in which
fees are payable.
(1) License fees of $100 or less shall be assessed a penalty of $50 for a
period not to exceed 30 days after the license expiration date.
Penalties shall be assessed at an additional $50 for each thirty-day
period, or portion thereof, after the initial penalty period.
(2) License fees of $101 or more shall be assessed a penalty of $100 for
a period not to exceed 30 days after the license expiration date.
Penalties shall be assessed at an additional $100 for each thirty-day
period, or portion thereof, after the initial penalty period.
(3) All penalty fees shall be paid inclusive with the initial license fee.
§ 210-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 210-3
155:460
§ 210-3. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 11-2-1972]
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for the
violation of the licensee of any provision of this article or Chapter XII of the
State Sanitary Code or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade,
calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation to whom
such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or
in violation of any law of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any
ordinance of this municipality or that the person or persons conducting the
retail food establishment are of an unfit character to conduct the same or
that the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for
which the license was issued.
§ 210-4. Hearing necessary before suspension or revocation;
written notice. [Amended 11-2-1972]
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not be
revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office in a
sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the
Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer
and may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation
by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the governing
body concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
§ 210-5. New licenses. [Amended 11-2-1972]
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor
any person acting for him directly or indirectly shall be entitled to another
license to carry on the same business within the city unless the application
for such license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 210-6. Application of provisions.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 210-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200
§ 210-3 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-7
155:461
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of the
provisions of this article, and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 210-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 210-7
155:462
ARTICLE II
License and Permit Requirements
[Adopted 12-8-1994]
§ 210-8. License for fixed or mobile food establishment; special
event food permits.
§ 210-9. Suspension of license or permit; hearing.
A. A license shall be obtained from the Health Department by every person
who shall conduct, operate or maintain within the Borough any fixed or
mobile food establishment.
B. Such events requiring a special event food permit shall include, but not
be limited to, bazaars, flea markets, parades, picnics, carnivals,
sidewalk sales and any other event not to exceed five days' duration.
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may at any time
during the term for which the same is so issued be suspended by the
Board or, in an emergency, by the Health Officer pending a hearing. A
hearing, pursuant to a notice to show cause why said license or permit
should not be revoked or further suspended by the Board, will be
granted to the holder thereof.
B. Failure by the license holder, or his representative, to appear for a
formal hearing before the Board, after receipt of written notification of
such hearing, shall not infringe upon the Board's right to render
judgment.
C. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be
suspended, after notice and a formal hearing as provided in this code,
for any of the following reasons:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this code.
(2) The violation of any statute of the State of New Jersey dealing with
health and sanitary practices and procedures.
(3) A knowing misrepresentation of a material fact on the retail food
establishment license application form.
(4) Failure to comply with lawful directives of the Board of Health, the
Health Officer or his authorized agent(s).
(5) Two consecutive ratings of "conditional satisfactory" by the Health
Officer or his duly authorized agent(s).
D. During the period of any such suspension, or continuance thereof, every
license or permit so suspended shall be ineffective, and the holder
thereof shall, during the entire period of such suspension, cease the
operation of any business and discontinue every activity or use
permitted under the license or permit suspended.
§ 210-8 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-10
155:463
§ 210-10. Revocation of license; revocation hearing.
§ 210-11. Notice of suspension or revocation hearing.
Notice of the time and place of any formal hearing held under this article
shall be given by the Board of Health to the holder of the license or permit,
in writing, and served either personally or sent to the applicant, by certified
or registered mail, addressed to him at the address stated in the license or
permit or by posting securely on or near the main entrance door. If there is
more than one entrance door, the notice shall be posted on the one which,
in the discretion of the Health Officer, is most used by the general public.
§ 210-12. Formal hearing protocol.
The Board of Health as a whole shall function as hearing officer. Testimony
shall be offered by the Health Officer and sanitary inspector(s) and by the
licensee or permit holder and any employee(s). An attorney may be present
to represent the licensee or permit holder and/or the Board. A verbal record
shall be taken on tape.
§ 210-13. Failure to appear at hearing.
A licensee or permittee who fails to appear at the time and place fixed for
such hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing, and, in that event,
the license or permit may, as a matter of course, be forthwith revoked.
§ 210-14. License restoration.
The Board of Health, after a formal hearing, may order the license restored
pending full compliance with all applicable codes and statutes.
§ 210-15. Informal hearings.
The Health Officer, as a result of any conditional or unsatisfactory
inspection report or other field inspection documenting serious violations
may ask the holder of a license or permit to attend an informal hearing
A. Before any license or permit may be revoked, the Health Officer shall
notify the license holder, in writing, stating the reasons for which the
license is subject to revocation and advising that the license shall be
permanently revoked, as provided in this code, for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Failure to comply with this article.
(2) Two or more retail food license suspensions within a twelve-month
period.
B. The time and place for such formal hearing shall be fixed at the
discretion of the Board; provided, however, that an unreasonable time
shall not be permitted to elapse between the date of any suspension of
license and the date fixed for revocation hearing.
§ 210-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 210-15
155:464
with the Health Officer and one or more sanitary inspectors. At the informal
hearing, the parties shall discuss the health-related problems in the
establishment, actions necessary to correct said problems and a reasonable
time schedule for completion. The Health Officer shall make a narrative
record of the hearing which shall be the basis for a proposed consent
agreement listing the deficiencies, corrections needed and time schedule
for completion. Refusal to attend an informal hearing or sign a consent
agreement may result in a notice to show cause pursuant to this article.
§ 210-15 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-15
155:465

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 4-4-1996]
§ 210-16. Authority.
A code regulating retail food-handling establishments, providing for the
inspection of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 210-17. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 12,
Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments."
§ 210-18. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said State of New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 12,
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon introduction of this article and will remain on file there until
final action is taken on this article for use and examination by the public.
§ 210-19. Food manager and food handler courses required;
inspections; remedies.
A. No retail food establishment, including restaurants, diners and any
other establishments selling or serving food to the public in the
Borough of Allendale, shall be granted a retail food establishment
license unless the owner, manager or employee in charge of other
employees serving food on each particular shift has successfully
completed a course prescribed by the Allendale Board of Health
pertaining to health, education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food
poisoning, dish washing procedures, germs, insects and rodents and
other health-related matters. There are two such courses: an eighteenhour
food manager's certification course and a three-hour food
handlers course. The certificate of satisfactory completion of the threehour
food handlers course shall be effective for two years from the date
of the issuance.
B. Completion of three-hour course; temporary license; fees.
(1) Commencing January 1, 1997, or such date as may be fixed by the
Allendale Board of Health, each owner, manager or employee in
charge of other employees serving food on each particular shift
shall complete the first available three-hour food handlers course
prior to the Board of Health issuing an annual license to the retail
food establishment. In addition, before a license shall be issued, the
§ 210-16 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-19
155:467
retail food establishment shall pay the appropriate fee in
accordance with this article.
(2) Commencing January 1, 2001, and each year thereafter, or such
other date as may be fixed by the Allendale Board of Health, where
an owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food on each particular shift has not completed the threehour
food handlers course as set forth in Subsection A of this
section, the Allendale Board of Health may issue a temporary retail
food license which shall expire on March 31, 2001. For the issuance
of such a temporary retail food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for the permit,
together with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food
license in the amount of $100. No part of the surcharge shall be
returned. The surcharge shall be used for the sole purpose of
administering this article on those retail food establishments whose
owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees serving
food on each particular shift has not successfully completed the
three-hour food handlers course. [Amended 4-9-2001]
C. Temporary licenses for new owners and managers; fees. Additionally,
commencing January 1, 1997, or such date as may be fixed by the
Allendale Board of Health, each new owner or manager of a retail food
establishment where food is prepared is required to take the first
available eighteen-hour food manager's certification course, and
employees in charge of other employees serving food on a particular
shift must take the three-hour food handlers course. The Allendale
Board of Health shall issue a temporary retail food license which shall
remain in effect for 90 days from the date of its issuance or until the
required eighteen-hour food manager's certification course and threehour
food handlers course has been given and satisfactorily completed.
For the issuance of such a temporary retail food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for the permit together
with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food license in the
amount of $25. No part of the surcharge shall be returned.
D. If there is no owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food to others on each particular shift who has satisfactorily
completed the eighteen-hour food manager's certification course or
three-hour food handlers course in accordance with this article, then
the retail food establishment shall be issued a summons to appear
before the Allendale Board of Health to answer to the violation.
E. Inspections; remedies for unsatisfactory ratings.
(1) Any retail food establishment which receives an "unsatisfactory"
rating from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall
immediately cease from serving any food or similar products until
the license has received a "satisfactory" rating from the inspector
conducting such inspections.
§ 210-19 ALLENDALE CODE § 210-19
155:468
§ 210-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Ratings. [Amended 4-9-2001]
(a) Any retail food establishment which receives two consecutive
conditional satisfactory ratings within any twelve-month
period shall have its owner or manager appear at the next
meeting of the Allendale Board of Health to show cause why its
license shall not be suspended for failing to operate its
premises in accordance with Chapter 12 of the New Jersey
Sanitary Code. The conditional satisfactory rating shall be
posted on the premises for such time as necessary for the
preservation of the public health and safety. In addition, its
owner or manager must take and satisfactorily complete the
next available eighteen-hour food manager's certification.
(b) Any retail food establishment which receives two conditional
ratings within any twelve-month period shall have its food
establishment license suspended and shall instead be issued a
thirty-day temporary food license. The fee for such a thirty-day
temporary food establishment licenses must be renewed every
30 days for an additional $100 fee until the establishment
complies with all provisions of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey
Sanitary Code and ordinances of the Borough of Allendale
Board of Health.
(3) In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting
the inspections shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for
the violation of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitation Code,
ordinance of the Borough of Allendale and applicable statutes of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 210-19 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 210-20
155:469
Chapter 217
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Sewer use — See Ch. 220.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 262, Art. I.
§ 217-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of licenses and permits to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems
and fixing penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant
to P.L. 1950, c. 188 (N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1 to 7:9-2.97), known as "Standards for
Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems."
§ 217-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Standards for Construction of Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems."
§ 217-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Standards for Construction of Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems have been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary, Clerk or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in said office for use and
examination by the public.
§ 217-4. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 217-5. Violations and penalties.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system: $20.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system: $20.
C. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system: $10.
§ 210-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 217-5
217:470
Chapter 220
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Illicit connections to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 140.
Improper disposal of waste to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 141.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
217.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
233, Art. III.
Water — See Ch. 262.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the
Standards for Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems made a part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 217-5 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 217-5
217:471

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 220-1. Terms defined.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The official described in § 53-57
et seq. and authorized to enforce this chapter.[Added 9-13-2012]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer or the person duly licensed
by the State of New Jersey and performing the duties of Health Officer
appointed by the Board of Health of the Borough of Allendale.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.82
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL — The Plumbing Subcode Official
duly appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Allendale.[Added 9-13-2012]
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Those septic tanks,
cesspools, sewage disposal devices of subsurface drainage systems in
connection with the foregoing serving or designed to serve residential,
82.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Plumbing Inspector," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 9-13-2012.
§ 220-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-1
217:473
business or commercial structures and any establishment producing
industrial wastes
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned and controlled by municipal
or public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid and intermixed solid wastes from
homes or other structures, exclusive of industrial wastes or storm and
surface waters and drainage.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sanitary sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of sanitary sewage and industrial waste
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be
present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds,
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which
carries storm- and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling waters.
SUMP PUMP — A pump used to remove water that has accumulated
in a water collector sump basin commonly found in the basement of
homes.[Added 9-13-201283]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WATER AND SEWER UTILITY SUPERINTENDENT — An individual
duly appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Allendale
with the responsibilities set forth in Article IA.[Added 9-13-2012]
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of "superintendent,"
amended 9-25-1986.
§ 220-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-1
217:474
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. The term "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 220-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-1
217:475

ARTICLE IA
Water and Sewer Utility Superintendent
[Added 9-13-2012]
§ 220-1.1. Duties and responsibilities.
The Water and Sewer Utility Superintendent shall be responsible for the
general operation and maintenance of the water and sewer systems of the
Borough and shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may
from time to time prescribe.
§ 220-1.1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-1.1
217:477

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 220-2. Unsanitary deposit of waste prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited on public or private property within the Borough of Allendale or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said Borough any sanitary sewage or
industrial waste, except as provided in this chapter.
§ 220-3. Discharge of untreated wastes prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 220-4. Construction and maintenance of private sewage disposal
systems.84
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 220-5. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner of any dwelling, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes which produce sanitary sewage
or industrial waste, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer,
is hereby required, at his expense, to connect the building sewer directly
with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so.
§ 220-6. Failure of property owner to make sewer connection.
If, after the expiration of said 90 days from the date of official notification,
the owner of any property affected by the provisions of this chapter has
failed to make such sewer connection as required by Article II hereof after
receiving official notice requiring such action as hereinbefore provided, the
Borough may cause such connection to be made under the direction and
supervision of the Board of Health or such other official or department of
the Borough as may hereafter be designated by the Borough or award one
or more contracts for the making of such improvements by a contractor
selected by the Borough on an annual basis as a result of open competitive
bidding.
84.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 217, Individual Sewage Disposal Systems.
§ 220-2 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-7
217:479
§ 220-7. Final notice; action by Borough.
Before proceeding to make any such connection, the Board of Health or
such other official or department of the Borough as may hereafter be
designated by the Borough shall cause notice of such contemplated
installation or connection to be given to the owner of any properties affected
thereby. The notice shall contain a description of the property affected,
sufficiently definite in terms to identify it, as well as a description of the
required connection and notice that, unless the connection shall be
completed within 30 days after the service thereof, the Borough will
proceed to make such connection or cause the same to be done, pursuant
to the authority of § 220-6 hereof. The notice shall be served in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:63-56, 40:63-57 and 40:63-58.85
§ 220-8. Record of Borough expenses; filing and assessment.
When any such sewer connection shall be made by the Borough, a true and
accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept and apportioned
to the property or the properties thereby connected with the sewers, and
a true statement of such costs, under oath, shall be forthwith filed by the
Board of Health, or such other official or department of the Borough as
may hereafter be designated by the Borough, with the Borough Clerk. The
Borough shall examine the same and, if properly made, shall confirm it and
file such statement with the Tax Collector of the Borough, who shall record
the cost of the installation of the sewer connection in the same book in
which he records other assessments.
§ 220-9. Charges to be lien against property.
Every such sewer connection charge shall bear interest and penalties from
the same time and at the same rate as assessments for local improvements
in the Borough and from the time of confirmation shall be a first and
paramount lien against the respective property or properties so connected
with the sewer to the same extent as assessments for local improvements
and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner.
§ 220-10. Charges not to be invalidated by informalities.
No such charge for sewer connections shall be invalid by reason of any
error or omission in stating the name of the owner or owners of properties
affected by such sewer connections, nor for any other informality, where
such property or real estate has actually been improved by such sewer
connection.
§ 220-11. Waiver of connection requirements. [Amended 9-25-1986]
A. The Mayor and Council, by resolution duly adopted, after public
hearing, with 10 days' written notice to owners within 200 feet of the
85.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-56, 40:63-57 and 40:63-58 were repealed by L.1991, c. 53, § 1,
effective 1-1-1992.
§ 220-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-11
217:480
applicant's property, may waive the provisions of this article requiring
connection with the sanitary sewer system of the Borough upon the
following grounds:
(1) Where said Mayor and Council finds evidence of substantial
hardship because of unusual physical conditions; and
(2) Where it is found that the operation of the present septic tank
system is adequate.
B. Said waiver shall be for a period to be determined by the Mayor and
Council, such period not to exceed three years.
§ 220-11 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-11
217:481

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal86
§ 220-12. When allowed.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article II, § 220-5, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 220-13. Permit required. [Amended 9-13-2012]
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Code
Enforcement Official. The application for such permit shall be made on a
form furnished by the Borough, which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by
ordinance or by the Code Enforcement Official.
§ 220-14. Inspection. [Amended 9-13-2012]
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Official. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of
construction, and, in any event the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Code Enforcement Official when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within two working days of the receipt of notice by the Code Enforcement
Official.
§ 220-15. Compliance with state public health recommendations.
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Health of
the State of New Jersey. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 220-16. Connection to public sewer required when available.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Article II, § 220-5, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this chapter, and the use of any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned within 30 days of the making
of such connection.
§ 220-17. Operation and maintenance at owner's expense.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Borough.
86.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 217, Individual Sewage Disposal Systems.
§ 220-12 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-18
217:483
§ 220-18. Health Officer may impose additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
§ 220-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-18
217:484
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 220-19. Permit required. [Amended 9-25-1986]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Mayor and Council.
§ 220-20. Classes of permits; application forms; fees.
§ 220-21. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Borough from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 220-21.1. Costs of maintenance and repairs of building sewer;
costs of Borough inspection of building sewer. [Added 9-28-2017]
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service.
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
B. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make applications on a
special form furnished by the Borough. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Mayor and Council. A
permit and inspection fee for any new residential, commercial or
industrial building shall be paid to the Borough at the time the
application is filed, in the amount of $1,500. In the event that the sewer
permit is for other than a new industrial, commercial or residential
building, there shall be paid to the Borough at the time the application
is filed, the amount of $200 for an industrial building sewer permit and
a fee of $100 for a residential sewer permit. [Amended 9-25-1986;
3-14-2002; 12-13-2007]
A. The maintenance and repair of a building sewer, and all costs and
expenses of such maintenance and repair, are the sole responsibility of
the property owner on or within which the building sewer is located.
B. In the event that the Borough, or a designated representative or agent
of the Borough, is requested by a property owner, or agent or
representative of a property owner, to repair, inspect, address or
resolve any drainage issue or backup or blockage of the sewer system
servicing a property owned by such property owner, and the cause of
such drainage issue or backup or blockage is determined by the
Borough, or its representative or agent, to be a condition within or
surrounding the building sewer, or is determined to be caused by the
§ 220-19 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-21.1
217:485
§ 220-22. Separate sewer for each building; connection of drain.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each
dwelling, building and property referred to in Article II, § 220-5, and the
building drain shall be connected thereto.
§ 220-23. Pipe materials; installation standards and specifications.
[Amended 9-11-1969; 9-13-2012]
The building sewer shall be extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe, United States
Department of Commerce Commercial Standard CS188-59; extra-strengthclay
sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C200 or C278; Class 1500 asbestoscement
pipe; ASTM C428, as manufactured by Johns Manville or the
Keasbey and Mattison Co., or other recognized, similar suitable material
approved by the Code Enforcement Official. All standards or specifications
shall be those current at the time of passage of this chapter. Joints shall be
tight and waterproof. Pipe shall be uniformly bedded on a tamped granular
material. The building sewer shall be installed in a separate trench not
less than five feet horizontally from any underground water service pipe.
Cast-iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the Code Enforcement
Official where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If
installed in filled or unstable ground or at a depth providing less than threefoot
cover under driveways or roadways, the building sewer shall be of castiron
soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on
a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Code Enforcement
Official. The inside diameter of the building sewer shall in no event be
less than four inches, and the slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be
less than 1/4 inch per foot. Under special circumstances, larger pipe with
lesser slopes that will provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second
will be permitted only on approval of the Code Enforcement Official. Pipe
shall be laid as nearly as possible in a straight line. Approved cleanouts,
set at an angle of 45° shall be used at changes of grade or line, and at
fifty-foot intervals where the building sewer is over 100 feet long. Changes
in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. The
sewer shall not be laid within three feet of and parallel to any bearing wall,
which might thereby be weakened. If the building sewer passes through the
septic tank, it shall be supported on tamped granular material as approved
by the Code Enforcement Official.
negligence of the property owner or occupant of the property in
question, then in that event the property owner shall be obligated and
responsible to reimburse the Borough for the full cost and expense
incurred by the Borough, or a designated representative or agent of the
Borough, in inspecting the condition or otherwise responding to such
request. Such reimbursement shall be made to the Borough within 14
days of written notification by the Borough to the property owner of
such charges.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed as obligating the Borough to repair,
maintain or otherwise service any building sewer.
§ 220-21.1 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-24
217:486
§ 220-24. Building sewer elevation, depth and alignment; sump
pumps. [Amended 9-11-1969]
Whenever practicable, the building sewer for new construction shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In existing
buildings where no plumbing facilities are provided in the basement, the
building sewer may be above the cellar floor. The amount of earth cover
shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. In all existing buildings
in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by a sump
pump. This pump shall be a submersible, heavy-duty, nonclog type with a
nonclog, enclosed pump impeller. The pump shall be capable of passing twoand-
one-half-inch spheres. A suction tripod shall be provided of sufficient
height to provide proper suction entrance for the liquids and solids to be
pumped. The pump casting, impeller and tripod shall be of cast iron. The
motor shall be submersible, oil-filled, totally enclosed, ball-bearing type
with adequate thrust capacity for the pump. It shall be equipped with a
stainless-steel shaft and an expansion diaphragm. Conduits and fittings
shall be attached to the motors with watertight connections. Said pump
and its installation shall be approved by the Board of Health. An overflow,
approved by the Board of Health, shall be provided to permit temporary
discharge to an approved subsurface disposal system in the event of pump
failure. A standby pump may be required, as determined by the Board of
Health. The pump (or pumps) must be enclosed in a corrosion-resistant
gastight tank which is vented outside.
§ 220-25. Discharge of surface runoff or groundwater to sanitary
sewer prohibited.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 220-26. Connection to public sewer. [Amended 9-11-1969;
9-13-2012]
A. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Borough. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Code
Enforcement Official before installation.
B. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Code
Enforcement Official when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the public sewer and shall leave the entire sewer
uncovered until such inspection is made and approval granted. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Code
Enforcement Official or his representative. The building drain and the
§ 220-24 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-26
217:487
§ 220-27. Guarding of excavations; restoration; qualifications
required to perform work. [Amended 9-11-1969; 9-25-1986;
9-13-2012]
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Code
Enforcement Official. No person shall perform any of the work set forth
in this chapter for any other person in the Borough of Allendale unless he
shall be a licensed plumber or licensed sewer contractor in said Borough.
Individual property owners may install their own building sewer only after
prior approval by the Director of Operations, based on evidence of
competence in performing such work.
§ 220-28. Location of public sewer connections. [Amended
9-11-1969; 9-13-2012]
A sewer connection shall be provided by the Borough of Allendale between
an existing fronting public sewer and the curb or curbline. The joint made
between the sewer connection provided by the Borough of Allendale and
the building sewer provided by the owner shall be secure and watertight.
Standard approved fittings with flexible joints shall be used for the
connection. The building sewer for all buildings shall be connected to
the public sewer at the curbline or easement line. A four-inch-diameter
approved cleanout shall be installed at the junction of the Borough's sewer
connection and the building sewer and shall extend to the surface of the
ground, with a brass screw cap as approved by the Code Enforcement
Official.
§ 220-29. Charges and fees. [Added 9-11-1969; amended 6-22-1972]
building sewer shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Official.
A minimum notice of two working days must be provided before
inspection. Connection to the house outlet may not be made until final
approval is given by the Code Enforcement Official.
A. Subsequent to July 15, 1972, the costs incurred by the Borough for
installation of the sewer connection between the public sewer and the
curbline and restoration of the area following installation shall be paid
by the property owner. The property owner shall be required to deposit
with the Borough Treasurer before commencement of work an amount
estimated by the Code Enforcement Official as necessary to cover the
cost of the installation. The property owner shall thereafter, upon
completion of the installation, supplement such deposit or be
reimbursed in the event of a difference between actual and estimated
cost. [Amended 3-14-2002; 9-13-2012]
B. If more than one sewer connection is required by a property owner, the
cost of the additional sewer connections shall be paid by the property
§ 220-26 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-29
217:488
§ 220-30. Septic tank covers. [Added 9-11-1969; amended
9-13-2012]
Where the cover of a septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool is considered, in
the judgment of the Code Enforcement Official, to be an unsafe permanent
support for surface loads, the septic tank, seepage pit or cesspool shall be
filled to the surface with an approved material.
owner under the same terms and conditions of payment as described
above.
C. Sewer capacity charges shall be paid by the property owner in
accordance with the following schedule: [Added 3-14-2002]
(1) Single-family dwelling: $500.
(2) One-bedroom apartment/condominium/townhouse: $500.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment/condominium/townhouse: $750.
(4) Three-or-more-bedroom apartment/condominium/townhouse:
$1,000.
(5) Multifamily dwelling (other than apartments): $1,000.
§ 220-29 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-30
217:489

ARTICLE V
Use of the Public Sewers
§ 220-31. Discharge of stormwater to sanitary sewers prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into
any sanitary sewer.
§ 220-32. Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage
controlled.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Health Officer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Health Officer, to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 220-33. Wastes or waters prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
§ 220-34. Discharge of certain substances restricted. [Amended
9-13-2012]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two milligrams
per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewers.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 220-31 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-34
217:491
of the Code Enforcement Official that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property
or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability
of these wastes, the Code Enforcement Official will give consideration to
such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F., 65° C.
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F. and 150° F., 0° and 65° C.
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Health Officer.
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron-pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Code Enforcement Official for
such materials.
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Code Enforcement Official as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the
state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge
to the receiving waters.
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Code Enforcement Official in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
I. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
§ 220-34 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-34
217:492
§ 220-35. Control by Code Enforcement Official. [Amended
9-13-2012]
§ 220-36. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Amended 9-13-2012]
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Code Enforcement Official, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Code
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 220-34 of this article,
and which in the judgment of the Code Enforcement Official may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Code Enforcement Official may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
B. If the Code Enforcement Official permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Code
Enforcement Official, and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 220-34 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-36
217:493
Enforcement Official, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 220-37. Owner to operate and maintain preliminary treatment
facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 220-38. Control manhole. [Amended 9-13-2012]
When required by the Code Enforcement Official, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Code Enforcement Official. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him, so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 220-39. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined
in accordance with the edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association, as in effect at the time of adoption of this chapter, and shall
be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite
of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended
solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls
whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.)
§ 220-36 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-39
217:494
ARTICLE VI
Protection from Damage
§ 220-40. Damaging or tampering with sewer; penalty.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to arrest as a disorderly person
and be subject to the same penalties imposed by Article VIII, §§ 220-44 and
220-45.
§ 220-40 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-40
217:495

ARTICLE VII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 220-41. General description. [Amended 9-13-2012]
The Code Enforcement Official and other duly authorized employees of
the Borough, including agents of the Northwest Bergen County Sewer
Authority, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The Code Enforcement Official or his representatives shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical
chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers
or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
§ 220-42. Entry on private properties. [Amended 9-13-2012]
The Code Enforcement Official and other duly authorized employees of
the Borough, including agents of the Northwest Bergen County Sewer
Authority, bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the Borough holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
§ 220-41 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-42
217:497

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 220-43. Written notice of violation. [Amended 9-13-2012]
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
Articles VI and X, shall be served by the Borough with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 220-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-25-1986;
9-13-2012]
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter, except Article X, shall, upon conviction, be punishable as
provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General Provisions, and each day that a
violation continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 220-45. Borough to recover expenses, losses and damages.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Borough for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
Borough by reason of such violation.
§ 220-43 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-45
217:499

ARTICLE IX
Repealer
§ 220-46. Enumeration of effective legislation.
Construction, alteration and use of sewers or sewage disposal facilities
in the Borough of Allendale are controlled and regulated collectively by
this chapter, by Board of Health Ordinance No. 101 entitled "An ordinance
establishing a code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and
control of plumbing and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
cesspools or other receptacles, regulating the practice of plumbing and
the issuance of licenses to practice plumbing and providing penalties for
violation thereof,"87 and by rules and regulations duly adopted by the
Northwest Bergen County Sewer Authority, all as may be amended from
time to time. All ordinances other than the above are hereby repealed where
in conflict therewith.
87.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Ch. 217, Individual Sewage Disposal Systems.
§ 220-46 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-46
217:501

ARTICLE X
Sump Pumps
[Added 9-13-2012]
§ 220-47. Intent and purpose.
The implementation of this article will aid the Borough by limiting and
reducing the inflow of additional water into the sanitary sewer systems.
By prohibiting the discharge of water from any roof, surface ground, sump
pump, swimming pool, other natural precipitation, and other sources of
inflow into the Borough's sanitary sewer system, the Borough is seeking
to reduce costs as well as protect against other damaging effects. The
Borough's sanitary sewer system has had clean water enter the system
which must be treated at the sewage treatment plant. Therefore, by
reducing and eliminating this inflow of clean water into the sanitary sewer
system and the subsequent unnecessary treatment, the expenses to the
Borough and its citizens will be reduced and will assist in protecting the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 220-48. Prohibited discharges; amnesty period for disconnection;
manner of disconnection.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person or entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, yard
drainage, yard fountain, swimming pool, pond overflow, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters, or any other substance other than sanitary sewage into
the sanitary sewer collection system. No person, business or other
entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged any hazardous
substances into any public sewers. No person or entity shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer.
B. Amnesty period for disconnection.
(1) On or before March 31, 2013, any person, business, or other entity
who shall have a connection described above and who shall
voluntarily report said connection to the Borough, so that said illicit
connection shall be remedied, shall have any and all permit,
connection and inspection fees waived by the Borough. This waiver
of fees applies only to Borough fees, and does not include the actual
cost of remediation.
(2) After March 31, 2013, any person, business, or other entity who
shall have a connection described above, and shall fail to
voluntarily report such connection by March 31, 2013, shall be
liable for all permit fees, inspection fees, and connection fees as
required by the Borough to remedy the illicit connection.
§ 220-47 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-48
217:503
§ 220-49. Inspections.
§ 220-50. Municipal assistance.
The Borough shall assist and provide guidance to any property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest in remedying the
situation as it involves a matter of public concern to the resident's health,
safety and welfare of the community in remedying the illicit connection.
Except as specifically set forth in this article, all costs associated to comply
with this article shall be borne by the property owner, tenant, landlord, or
other person with a property interest.
C. Manner of disconnection.
(1) Any property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a
property interest who shall have a connection in violation of this
article, or who has not obtained a waiver pursuant to § 220-51 shall
immediately remove such connection and correct such situation. If
not removed or corrected within 120 calendar days after receiving
a notice of violation which shall be personally delivered or
delivered via certified mail, the Borough may seek to impose a fine
in the amount provided for in § 220-53.
(2) All disconnections of said illicit connections shall be accomplished
by a complete and permanent method and performed in a
competent manner and approved and inspected by the Code
Enforcement Official. Any disconnection, plugging, capping,
rerouting, altering, or modifying must be done in accordance with
all applicable state and municipal building codes.
A. After the service of an initial notice of inspection, the Code
Enforcement Official or his designee, as long as he displays the proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to request entrance to
any property for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring,
testing and sampling to confirm that there is no sump pump or other
prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system in accordance with
this article.
B. Any owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest
who shall refuse entrance to the Code Enforcement Official or his
designee, shall receive a second notice of inspection. If said owner,
tenant, landlord or other person with a property interest continues to
refuse entrance for inspection, an external inspection of the said sewer
system may be undertaken by the Borough. In the event said external
investigation determines any illicit connections to the sewer system,
said owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest
will be subject to a fine as set forth herein and reimbursement to the
Borough of the costs of such external investigation.
§ 220-48 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-51
217:504
§ 220-51. Waiver.
Any person, business, or other entity, who shall by inspection or voluntary
reporting be determined to be in violation of any section of this article,
shall be permitted to file for a waiver of the fine requirement of § 220-53,
if they can prove that they have exhausted all possible remedial measures.
Remedial measures include but are not limited to, the installation of a dry
well, the connection to a storm sewer, and/or use of one's own property
for discharge of the water so long as such discharge does not adversely
affect any neighboring property owner. Upon certification of the Code
Enforcement Official, the person, business, or other entity shall be granted
such waiver, but only for such time as to when a remedy becomes available.
If such remedy is made available by the Borough, the Borough shall notify
the person, business, or other entity that they shall comply with this article
within 120 days of receiving said notice. Failure to comply will result in the
imposition of a fine as per § 220-53.
§ 220-52. Permit required.
After March 31, 2013, any property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person
with an interest in the property must apply and pay for a permit to install a
sump pump. The permit fee shall be $50.
§ 220-53. Violations and penalties.
§ 220-54. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to enforce this article and
chapter and issue summonses for violations thereof.
§ 220-55. Repealer.
All other provisions of Chapter 220 which are not affected by this
amendatory ordinance are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain
in full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances,
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this amendatory ordinance,
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
A. Any property owner, tenant, landlord or other person with an interest in
the property violating this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than $1,000 per violation and $100 per day for each day
the violation continues.
B. Any property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with an interest
in the property found in violation of this article as a result of an external
investigation under § 220-49B shall, in addition to a fine, reimburse the
Borough the actual costs of such external investigation.
§ 220-51 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-56
217:505
§ 220-56. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 220-57. Effective date.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 220-56 ALLENDALE CODE § 220-57
217:506
Chapter 223
SMOKING
§ 220-57 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 220-57
217:507

ARTICLE I
Smoke-Free Zones and Areas
[Adopted 4-9-2015]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF EDUCATION FACILITIES — Any and all property, structures
or other areas owned or leased by the Allendale Board of Education or
Northern Highlands Regional Board of Education or operated by employees
and agents of and/or persons authorized by the Allendale Board of
Education and used for official business of the Allendale Board of Education.
ENCLOSED AREAS — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — All structures, improvements, property and
enclosed areas owned, leased rented and/or operated by the Borough of
Allendale and/or occupied by employees and agents of and/or persons
authorized by the Borough of Allendale used for official business of the
Borough of Allendale. This definition shall not include any area adjacent to
the Borough Municipal Buildings that may from time to time be designated
as a Borough of Allendale staff smoking area.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks, including the
Fyke Nature Center (Celery Farm), playgrounds, sport fields publicly owned
or leased by the Borough of Allendale and all such property within the
boundaries of the Borough of Allendale upon which the public is invited
or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for
recreational activities. This definition excludes public parking lots,
sidewalks and public streets within the Borough of Allendale.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purposes of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including
but not limited to cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, e-cigarettes
and cigarettes in any form.
§ 223-2. Smoking prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any tobacco product, as
defined in this article, in or on any of the following areas:
(1) In any municipal facilities and parks and recreational facilities, as
such terms are defined herein;
(2) In or on the area between the edge of pavement of any street/
roadway line and the property boundary of any Board of Education
facility, as defined in § 223-1 of this article, inclusive of the sidewalk
and open or grass area adjacent to the property boundary.
§ 223-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 223-2
217:509
§ 223-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) observed to be in violation of this article shall be issued a
summons and may be subject to, at the discretion of the court, the following
penalties:
B. "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol may be
clearly and conspicuously posted in or on any area defined in § 223-1
above, and § 223-2 at the discretion of the Borough of Allendale, except
in or on the Board of Education facilities, which signage may be posted
at the discretion of the Board of Education. It shall not be a defense to a
violation of this section that "no smoking" signs were not conspicuously
posted as they are not required by this article.
A. A warning by the court or a fine of not less than $100 for conviction of a
first offense;
B. A fine of not less than $250 for conviction of a second offense;
C. A fine of not less than $500 for conviction of a third and/or any
subsequent offense.
D. For any conviction, the court shall assess court administration fees and
costs and may sentence the offender to community service, for a period
of time and type of service to be determined by the court.
§ 223-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 223-3
217:510
Chapter 225
SOIL MOVEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
§ 225-1. Definitions.88
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A legal or beneficial owner or owners of land or their
prescribed agents who propose to move, are moving or have moved soil
under the provisions of this chapter.
CLEAN FILL — An uncontaminated, non-water-soluble, nondecomposable,
inert solid, such as rock, soil or gravel. Clean fill shall not mean mixed
construction and demolition debris, including but not limited to wallboard,
plastic, wood or metal. The non-water-soluble, nondecomposable inert
products generated from an approved State of New Jersey Class B recycling
facility are considered clean fill.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level
or otherwise alter or change the location or contour; transport or supply.
This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or discing of soil, or any other operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock, dirt, mulch, wood
chips, grass clippings, tree stumps or any mixture thereof without regard to
the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth,
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
§ 225-2. Permit required.
A. No person shall move, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be moved, any
soil on, to or from any lot within the boundaries of the Borough in an
amount greater than 50 cubic yards, unless and until a soil removal
permit therefor shall have first been issued, as hereinafter provided.
88.NOTE: The grant of general police powers to municipalities under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2
authorizes the adoption of ordinances to license and regulate the removal of soil. See Fred
v. Mayor and Council, Old Tappan Borough, 10 N.J. 515, 92A. 2d 473 (1952).
§ 223-3 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 225-2
217:511
§ 225-3. Filing of application for permit.
All applications for soil removal permits shall be filed with the Property
Maintenance Officer who shall refer same to the Borough Engineer. The
Property Maintenance Officer shall administer the applications and permits
and act as liaison between applicants and the Borough Engineer. The
Borough Engineer may confer with Applicant's professionals during the
course of the permit process.
§ 225-4. Review of application; determination; appeals; conditions.
§ 225-5. Application procedure.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a soil removal permit shall
be as follows:
B. Persons engaged in soil movement activities working directly for the
Borough of Allendale are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any person who, within a period of 12 consecutive months, moves 50 or
more cubic yards of soil shall be subject to these regulations.
A. Within 30 days after receipt of a complete application, the Borough
Engineer shall review and consider the application and render a report
to the Property Maintenance Officer which shall state the Engineer's
approval, conditional approval or denial of the application. The
Property Maintenance Officer shall review the report and
determination of the Borough Engineer and concur or disagree with the
Engineer's ruling. Should the Property Maintenance Officer concur
with the Engineer's determination, the Engineer's determination shall
stand. Should the Property Maintenance Officer disagree with the
Engineer's determination, the matter will be referred to the Mayor and
Council for a determination. The determination shall be made within 45
days after receipt of a complete application.
B. Appeal. In the event of a disagreement with the determination, the
applicant may, not later than 30 days after such determination, appeal
to the Borough Council in writing. The Borough Council may sustain or
overrule the determination.
C. Permit form and conditions. The soil removal permit shall contain any
special conditions set forth by the Borough Engineer.
A. Form of application. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Borough,
the applicant shall set forth, in duplicate:
(1) The name, address and telephone contact information of the
applicant.
(2) The block and lot number(s) of lands in question.
§ 225-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 225-5
217:512
(3) The name, address and telephone contact information of the owner
of the lands; if the owner is a person other than the applicant, the
owner shall signify his or her consent to the application by signing
it along with the applicant.
(4) The name, address and telephone contact information of the
contractor moving the soil.
(5) The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
(6) The quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(7) In the case of removal, the place to where the soil is to be removed,
and the quantity of soil to be removed.
(8) In the case of importation of soil, the owner, address and location
from which soil is to be obtained and a brief history of the site
which is the source of the soil.
(9) In the case of importation of soil, a certification from the soil
supplier that the soil being imported is clean fill as defined in this
chapter.
(10) The anticipated duration of the work being done pursuant to this
chapter.
(11) Truck route for importing or exporting soil in excess of 200 cubic
yards.
(12) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may require.
B. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be a
topographical map, prepared by a licensed civil engineer, landscape
architect or land surveyor, in duplicate, showing:
(1) Title block, North arrow, scale, and date of map.
(2) The dimensions of the lot and the lot and block number of the lot
and each abutting lot.
(3) The present grades, through contour lines and published spot
grades.
(4) The proposed grades, through contour lines and published spot
grades.
(5) The quantity, in cubic yards, of soil involved in the work, as
computed from cross sections which shall be shown on the map.
(6) The grades of all abutting streets and lots.
(7) Present and proposed surface water drainage and any existing or
proposed appurtenances therefor.
(8) Proposed slope grades, lateral supports and retaining walls.
§ 225-5 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 225-5
217:513
(9) The location of all trees having a diameter of four inches, or more,
at 4 1/2 inches above the ground.
(10) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may require.
(11) Soil erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the
most current Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act
of 1975.
(12) The location of filter equipment and pool backwash disposal for all
applications associated with swimming pool construction.
(13) The location of existing and proposed structures with dimensions.
(14) The location of delineated floodways, floodplains, regulated
wetlands and wetland buffers.
(15) The location of existing easements and their purpose.
C. Permit fee and deposits for costs.
(1) The application shall be submitted to the Property Maintenance
Officer with a fee and escrow deposit for costs in an amount
computed as provided herein.
(2) Deposits for costs shall be used for the costs associated with the
review of the application and for field monitoring inspections and
reports to the Mayor and Council or Property Maintenance Officer
during soil movement activities. Unused portions of the
engineering escrow deposit shall be refunded to the applicant upon
approval of completion of activities by the Borough Engineer.
(3) If, prior to completion of the permit requirements, the engineering
escrow account should be depleted, the applicant shall deposit
additional funds in the escrow account as estimated by the Borough
Engineer to bring the project to completion.
(4) The Borough may require the applicant to submit an escrow
deposit for street cleaning for applications which require extended
periods of soil movement. The escrow deposit will be determined by
the Borough Engineer on a case-by-case basis. If, during the course
of construction, the applicant fails to clean streets following proper
notice by the Borough Engineer or Property Maintenance Officer,
the Borough may use funds from the street cleaning escrow
account to accomplish same.
D. Drainage calculations and observations.
(1) Drainage calculations, signed and sealed by a licensed professional
civil engineer, shall be submitted for applications which, in the
opinion of the Borough Engineer, may alter the preexisting
stormwater discharge pattern which exits from the site in question.
§ 225-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 225-5
217:514
§ 225-6. Factors to be considered in reviewing application.
In considering and reviewing the application, the Borough Engineer shall
be guided by the general purpose of municipal planning and shall take into
consideration the following factors:
The stormwater discharge rate and total volume to neighboring
properties must be maintained or reduced during or following
soil movement. The drainage calculations shall demonstrate
compliance with this section of the Code and be prepared using the
criteria set forth in the latest edition of the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (NJRSIS) Section 5:21, Subchapter 7
or Chapter 231 of the Borough Code as applicable.
(2) Applications which propose the use of groundwater infiltration
shall be accompanied by a soil log with the site's seasonal high
groundwater elevation, certified by a licensed professional civil
engineer. In lieu of a soil log, the applicant's engineer may perform
a percolation test.
(3) Percolation tests and the installation of the groundwater infiltration
system must be witnessed by the Borough Engineer or his
representative. The applicant's engineer shall contact the Borough
Engineer a minimum of 48 hours prior to the test and construction
of the infiltration system to schedule an inspection.
E. Soil testing. Prior to or during the course of soil importation, the
Borough Engineer shall determine if testing of the soil is required to
protect public health and safety. If testing is required, the applicant
shall provide soil testing results from a certified soil testing laboratory
that the material is classified as clean fill. The sole expense of soil
testing shall be borne by the applicant. If the results of the testing
indicate the presence of material which is harmful, dangerous, toxic or
hazardous to the public, all soil importation activities shall cease, and
the soil in question shall be removed in accordance with direction by
the Borough Engineer or Property Maintenance Officer.
F. Soil erosion control. The applicant is required to comply with the State
of New Jersey's Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act and is required
to obtain certification from the Bergen County Soil Conservation
District for those applications required to do so.
A. Prior development approvals;
B. Soil erosion by water and wind;
C. Surface and subsurface water drainage;
D. Soil fertility;
E. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands;
F. Public health and safety;
§ 225-5 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 225-6
217:515
§ 225-7. Topsoil restrictions.
§ 225-8. Prohibited deposits; vehicle spillage.
§ 225-9. Performance guaranty.
G. Land values and uses;
H. Preservation of trees and shrubbery;
I. Prevention of sharp declivities, pits and depressions;
J. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough;
K. Consistency with the Bergen County Soil Conservation District
standards;
L. The route that soil-moving vehicles will use, and the adequacy of the
public streets to accommodate the same;
M. Proximity to wetlands, riparian and flood hazard areas; and
N. Retention of topsoil.
A. Whenever any person moves topsoil in or upon any lot, provision shall
be made for the storage of said topsoil within the boundary lines of said
lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil removal permit, so that
the final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No person shall remove beyond the boundary lines of any lot any topsoil
unless and until topsoil not inferior in quality to that to be removed
shall first have been replaced as shown on the topographical map. In no
event shall any person remove from any lot more topsoil than that
comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of
the topsoil as aforesaid.
A. No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or create any condition
which causes soil to be deposited on any street, sidewalk or other public
place of the Borough. The prohibition in this subsection shall not apply
to the Borough or its authorized agents, employees or representatives.
B. No person shall drive a vehicle carrying soil unless such truck or other
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any soil from being
deposited on any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 225-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 225-9
217:516
§ 225-10. Approved farm plan exemption.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the soil
conservation program of the Northeastern Jersey Soil Conservation District
of the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and for which lands an approved farm plan has been
established by said agency, provided that all soil-moving operations in and
upon such lands are performed in accordance with said approved farm plan.
§ 225-11. Authorized inspections.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough, including the Borough
Engineer, shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon
which soil-moving operations are being conducted, to examine and inspect
such lands.
§ 225-12. Filing fees and engineering escrows.
The following fee schedule shall be applicable to soil movement:
Volume of Soil to be
Moved
(cubic yards) Filing Fee Engineering Escrow
50 to 200 $50 $600
Over 200 $75 $750
Over 500 $100 $1000
Over 1,000 $125 $1250
Over 5,000 $150 $1750
Over 10,000 $150 $2,500
A. When greater than 100 cubic yards of soil are to be moved, no permit
shall be issued unless the applicant posts with the Borough a
performance guaranty in form and with the surety acceptable to the
Borough, in such amount of guaranty determined at the rate of $8 per
cubic yard of the amount of soil to be moved, conditioned upon full and
faithful performance by the principal, within the time specified in the
application, of all the proposed work in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and of the soil removal permit issued pursuant hereto.
No soil movement permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
shall have posted an acceptable performance bond. A cash equivalent
sum may be deposited in lieu of a performance bond.
B. When other performance guaranties are posted for development
applications which include soil movement, no separate performance
guaranty is required.
§ 225-9 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 225-13
217:517
§ 225-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 225-14. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 225-15. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 225-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 228
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
Improper disposal of waste to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 141.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Pet waste — See Ch. 195.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-18, General penalty,
of the Code of the Borough of Allendale. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who has been found to violate any
provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to the payment of penalties,
comply with all regulations herein.
C. The Property Maintenance Officer shall enforce this chapter.
§ 225-13 ALLENDALE CODE § 225-16
217:518
ARTICLE I
Separation and Collection of Recyclables
[Adopted 10-14-1993]
§ 228-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Recyclable aluminum cans. Does not include pie
plates, ferrous metal cans or other aluminum by-products.
BIMETAL CANS — Those materials made of steel and tin and being used for
packaging of various matter.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Source-separated,
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of structures within the
Borough of Allendale. This material shall include concrete, bricks, block,
tree parts, ferrous and nonferrous scrap, asphalt, asphalt shingles,
recyclable wood scrap, corrugated cardboard and any and all other material
generated from the construction, where practical, alteration, repair,
maintenance and/or demolition of a structure or structures within the
Borough of Allendale.[Amended 3-12-2009]
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
[Added 2-28-2006]
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Cardboard of the type to make cardboard
boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and kraft paper
materials.
ELECTRONICS — Items including, but not limited to, computers, monitors,
televisions, and radios.[Added 4-12-2012]
FERROUS SCRAP — All metal scrap which contains steel or cast iron such
as pipe, radiators, etc.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter and all other materials commonly known
as "glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass commonly known as
"window glass."
GRASS — Those materials naturally formed from lawns that are suitable for
composting and mulching purposes.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white
notepad paper, copier paper, carbonless computer paper, manila tab cards
and file folders.
HOUSEHOLD-GENERATED BATTERIES — Any type of button, coin,
cylindrical, rectangular or other shaped enclosed device or sealed container
§ 228-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-1
217:519
consisting of a combination of two or more voltaic or galvanic cells,
electrically connected to produce electric energy, composed of lead, lithium,
manganese, mercury, mercury oxide, silver oxide, cadmium, zinc, copper or
other metals, or any combination thereof, and designed for household use,
including any alkaline, manganese, lithium, mercuric oxide, silver oxide,
zinc-air or zinc-carbon, battery, nickel-cadmium rechargeable battery or
sealed lead rechargeable battery.[Added 2-9-1995]
LEAVES — Those materials naturally formed from trees and shrubs that are
suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MIXED PAPER — All magazines, junk mail and other paper, excluding
newsprint and kraft paper bags.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Magazines and periodicals as well as any other
paper products are not considered "newspapers."
NONFERROUS SCRAP — All other metals which do not contain steel or iron
such as aluminum, brass, copper, lead, etc.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 2-28-2006]
PLASTICS — A hermetically sealed or airtight container with a metal or
plastic cap; plastic containers commonly referred to as "one-, two- or threeliter
bottles," "milk jugs," "laundry and dish detergent bottles," and all other
plastics with a recycling symbol with the numbers 1 through 7 within the
symbol.[Amended 4-12-2012]
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish usually disposed of by
regular scavenger service for the residential and nonresidential occupants
of the Borough of Allendale.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.[Added
2-28-2006]
WHITE GOODS — All large appliances consisting primarily of metal such as
washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings. [Added 2-28-2006]
§ 228-2. Applicability of regulations.
On and after the date fixed and promulgated by regulations issued as
hereinafter provided and in accordance with the terms hereof, it shall
be mandatory for all residential, commercial/industrial and institutional
facilities to separate the designated recyclable materials as defined in
§ 228-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-2
217:520
§ 228-1 and by the regulations and methods of disposal and collection
as defined in § 228-3 from all other solid waste produced by any such
facilities and to separately bundle such materials for pickup and collection
for recycling.
§ 228-3. Regulations and methods of disposal and collection.
A. Commercial, industrial and institutional. The owner or occupant in any
commercial/industrial or institutional building within the Borough of
Allendale who shall place for disposal, removal or collection the
following items shall do so in strict conformity within the following
regulations:
(1) High-grade office paper shall be separated and be disposed of by
private contractor, commercial recycler or by arrangement with the
Borough of Allendale through its Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Corrugated cardboard shall be separated and be disposed of by
private contractor or commercial recycler.
(3) Glass, aluminum cans, bimetal cans and newspapers shall be
disposed of by contracting privately or by arrangement with the
Borough of Allendale through its Recycling Coordinator.
(4) Leaves and grass shall be recycled by composting or mulching on
site or delivered to composting area by arrangement with the
Borough of Allendale through its Recycling Coordinator.
(5) Ferrous and nonferrous scrap shall be disposed of by private
contractor or commercial recycler.
(6) White goods shall be disposed of by private contractor, commercial
recycler or by arrangement with the Borough of Allendale through
its Recycling Coordinator.
(7) Construction and demolition debris shall be separated and
disposed of by private contractor or commercial recycler. Upon
acquiring the necessary Uniform Construction Code permit(s) for
construction or demolition, it shall be the responsibility of the
permit holder, owner, occupant or lessee of said property to recycle
said materials as defined in § 228-1, Definitions. All subsequent
records and or weight slips documenting the recycling of said
materials shall be given to the Borough of Allendale's Municipal
Recycling Coordinator before a certificate of occupancy can be
issued.
(8) Mixed paper shall be disposed of by private contractor, commercial
recycler or by arrangement with the Borough of Allendale through
its Recycling Coordinator.
(9) Household-generated batteries shall be disposed of by private
contractor, commercial recycler or by arrangement with the
§ 228-2 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-3
217:521
Borough of Allendale through its Recycling Coordinator. [Added
2-9-1995]
(10) Yard waste shall follow regulations for leaves and grass pursuant to
Subsection A(4) herein. The owner or occupant of any property or
any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to
provide lawn care or landscaping service shall not sweep, rake,
blow or otherwise place yard waste in violation of these regulations
nor place yard waste closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet.
[Added 2-28-2006]
(11) Plastic shall be disposed of by private contractor or commercial
recycler. [Added 3-12-2006; amended 4-12-2012]
B. Residential. Disposal and collection of the following recyclable
materials shall be in conformity with the rules, regulations and
schedules as authorized herein.
(1) Aluminum cans shall be placed in reusable containers for curbside
collection. The reusable container shall be placed at curbside on
the designated days to be collected by municipal employees.
(2) Clear, green and amber glass shall be placed in reusable containers
for curbside collection. The reusable containers shall be placed at
curbside on the designated days to be collected by municipal
employees. [Amended 4-12-2012]
(3) Newspapers shall be bundled separately, secured by string or
twine. Newspapers shall not be bundled in plastic or kraft-type
bags. Newspapers shall be placed curbside on the designated days.
(4) Grass shall be recycled by composting or mulching on site or
lawfully delivered to the composting area.
(5) Leaves shall be recycled by composting or mulching on site or
voluntarily delivered to the composting area. Leaves shall be
collected curbside in biodegradable paper bags for collection on
the designated days, collection to be by municipal employees.
[Amended 4-12-2012]
(6) Bimetal cans shall be placed in reusable containers for curbside
collection. The reusable container shall be placed at curbside on
the designated days, to be collected by municipal employees.
(7) Type 1 and Type 2 plastics shall be placed in reusable containers or
clear plastic bags for curbside collection. The reusable container
and or clear plastic bags (closed and tied) shall be placed at
curbside on the designated days to be collected by municipal
employees. [Amended 3-12-2009]
(8) Mixed paper shall be delivered to the designated dropoff site on the
designated days.
§ 228-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-3
217:522
(9) White goods shall be placed curbside on the designated days to be
collected by municipal employees or the designated municipal
contractor.
(10) Corrugated cardboard shall be placed curbside on the designated
days to be collected by municipal employees or the designated
municipal contractor.
(11) Ferrous and nonferrous scrap shall be placed curbside on the
designated days to be collected by municipal employees or the
designated municipal contractor.
(12) Construction and demolition debris shall be separated and
disposed of by private contractor or commercial recycler. Upon
acquiring the necessary Uniform Construction Code permit(s) for
construction or demolition, it shall be the responsibility of the
permit holder, owner, occupant or lessee of said property to recycle
said materials as defined in § 228-1, Definitions. All subsequent
records and or weight slips documenting the recycling of said
materials shall be given to the Borough of Allendale's Municipal
Recycling Coordinator before a certificate of occupancy can be
issued.
(13) Household-generated batteries shall be delivered to the designated
dropoff site on the designated days. [Added 2-9-1995]
(14) Yard waste shall follow regulations for leaves and grass set forth in
Subsections B(4) and B(5) herein. The owner or occupant of any
property or any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant
engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping service shall not
sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste in violation of
these regulations nor place yard waste closer than 10 feet from any
storm drain inlet. [Added 2-28-2006]
C. Set-out time. For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the
Borough of Allendale, all approved containers must be placed at the
curbline where easily accessible. No materials shall be set out prior to
6:00 a.m. on the day of collection and any and all containers shall be
removed by 8:00 p.m. on the collection day. When a regular collection
day falls on a holiday, materials shall not be set out until the next
scheduled collection day.
D. Washing/rinsing. All aluminum and bimetal cans, glass containers and
plastic bottles shall be reasonably rinsed or washed to be free of all food
and product residue before placing at curbside.
E. Townhouse and apartment complexes. Residents shall place recyclable
materials per Subsection B(1), (2), (3), (6) and (7) in the designated
areas within the respective complex for collection on the designated
days. Recyclable materials per Subsection B(4) shall be composted on
site or lawfully delivered to the compost site. Recyclable materials per
Subsection B(5) shall be composted on site, voluntarily delivered to the
§ 228-3 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-3
217:523
§ 228-3.1. Compost permits and fees. [Added 3-27-2014]
compost site or placed at the curb for collection on the designated
days for curbside collection. Recyclable material per Subsection B(8)
shall be dropped off at the recycling dropoff site at 300 West Crescent
Avenue (compost site) on the designated days. Recyclable material
per Subsection B(12) shall be disposed of by private contractor or
commercial recycler. Recyclable materials per Subsection B(9), (10)
and (11) shall be placed curbside for collection on the designated
collection days.
F. Procedure upon refusal to collect.
(1) Any solid waste placed for collection by a residential, commercial/
industrial or institutional user not in accordance with this section
will not be collected by the municipal collector or its designated
contractor. It shall be the responsibility of the user to remove said
solid waste from the curbline by 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection
and have it properly containerized, packaged or secured for
purposes of collection on the next scheduled date.
(2) Any and all recyclable materials found not to be in accordance with
this section will not be collected by the municipal collector or its
designated contractor. It shall be the responsibility of the user to
remove said materials from the curbline by 8:00 p.m. on the day of
collection and have it properly sorted and containerized, packaged
or secured for purposes of collection on the next scheduled date.
A. Allendale Borough residents wishing to utilize the municipal
composting facilities of the Borough pursuant to Chapter 228 of the
Borough Code shall, in person, apply and secure an annual permit to
and from the Borough Clerk, subject to the following provisions:
(1) The issuance of such permits shall be limited to legal residents of
the Borough of Allendale.
(2) Documentation and information, including but not limited to the
license plate number of the primary vehicle to be used to transport
compost and a valid driver's license or other such identification as
required for residential verification, may be requested by the
Borough prior to issuance.
(3) A fee of $30 shall be charged in exchange for said permit.
B. All permits shall be nontransferable and may not be used by anyone
except the applicant securing the permit.
C. Disposal of compost by contractors, landscapers, or any business, even
if that business is resident-owned, shall be prohibited.
§ 228-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-4
217:524
§ 228-4. Commercial/industrial and institutional user registration
and reporting requirements; registration of landscape and lawn
service contractors.
§ 228-5. Direct disposal of recyclable material by resident.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant of residential property of disposing of recyclable materials
privately through a sale or gift, provided that in no event shall such
recyclable materials be left at the curb for any private pickup, and further
provided that in no event shall any such recyclable materials be disposed of
as part of the solid waste pickup by the Borough of Allendale. Any and all
persons disposing of such materials shall be required to maintain records of
A. Registration requirements. It shall be the responsibility of all owners,
lessees and occupants of commercial/industrial or institutional
properties to register with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator on
forms provided by the Borough. New commercial/industrial and
institutional users must file within 45 days of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
B. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of owners, lessees
and occupants of commercial/industrial or institutional properties to
report annually to the Recycling Coordinator on or before February 1,
for the preceding twelve-month period of January 1 through December
31, the quantities of materials recycled.
C. Private contractor/commercial recycler contracts. If the commercial/
industrial or institutional user is either unable or unwilling to secure a
market and collector for the designated mandatory recyclable materials
as defined in § 228-3A(1) through (9), the Borough of Allendale, through
its Recycling Coordinator, may secure such markets. If the commercial/
industrial or institutional user does not comply in securing a market or
deems such markets as secured with the Recycling Coordinator as
unacceptable, said commercial/industrial or institutional user shall be
in violation and subject to § 228-8, Violations and penalties. [Amended
2-9-1995]
D. All landscape and lawn service contractors shall register each year
(prior to March 31) with the Borough of Allendale through its Recycling
Coordinator. Such contractor(s) shall report the amount of materials
recycled and the name of the facility where such materials were
recycled. Reporting shall be on an annual basis from January 1 through
December 31 of each year on forms provided by the Borough. Such
reports must be received by the Recycling Coordinator no later than
March 1 of the following year. The term "landscape and lawn service
contractor" shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation who
or which conducts a business involving the cutting, raking, collection or
removal of grass, leaves or any other similar type of vegetative waste
located on any residential, commercial or industrial premises within the
Borough of Allendale. [Added 3-23-1995]
§ 228-4 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-5
217:525
all weights and types of materials recycled. All records shall be given to the
Borough of Allendale's Recycling Coordinator.
§ 228-6. Ownership after placement at curb.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curbline by the owner,
lessee or occupant for collection by the Borough of Allendale or its
designated collector, such materials become the property of the Borough.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized to collect
or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such materials for
any purpose whatsoever once the same has been placed at the curb. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more premises
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 228-7. Enforcement.
The Recycling Coordinator, the Sanitation Officer, the Construction Code
Official and members of the Police and Public Works Departments are
hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article. The Borough
Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate by rules, regulations and schedule as to the manner, days and
times for collection or delivery of recyclable materials as defined herein and
initially, in accordance with the terms hereof. The Borough Council may,
by resolution, change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules,
regulations and schedules.
§ 228-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or neglects to comply
with any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant
thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $500.
§ 228-8.1. Severability; repealer; effective date. [Added 2-28-2006]
A. Severability: Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this article is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this article to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this article.
B. Repealer: All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which
are in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
C. Effective date: This article shall be in full force and effect from and after
its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
§ 228-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-8.1
217:526
ARTICLE II
Recycling Facilities in Multifamily Dwellings
[Adopted 12-6-1993]
§ 228-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing three or
more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
§ 228-10. Recycling area required.
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and
number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and
shall be consistent with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to
Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable
requirements of the municipal master plan adopted pursuant to Section 26
of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
§ 228-11. Location.
The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near but
clearly separated from a refuse dumpster.
§ 228-12. Recycling area standards.
The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible
by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to
access the recycling area without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area and the bins or containers placed therein against theft of recyclable
materials, bins or containers.
§ 228-13. Standards for bins or containers.
The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
§ 228-9 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-13
217:527
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. Any
bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall
be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
§ 228-14. Signs.
Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area.
Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the
materials to be placed therein.
§ 228-15. Landscaping and fencing.
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling
area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
§ 228-13 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-15
217:528
ARTICLE III
Collection and Pickup
[Adopted 11-21-1994]
§ 228-16. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to establish regulations for the
placement and pickup of residential trash and garbage, as hereinafter
defined, within the Borough of Allendale.
§ 228-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — Includes the residue from coal or any other fuel which has been
consumed.
GARBAGE — Includes waste or decayed animal and/or vegetable matter
that has been used or was intended to be used as food and the waste
therefrom, and dead animal or plant life or parts of the same.
GARBAGE CANS AND RECEPTACLES — Includes any metallic or plastic
container with a proper cover, provided that, together with its contents, it
does not weigh more than 60 pounds or measure more than 30 gallons.
REFUSE — Includes all broken crockery, household receptacles and
utensils, paper products that are not recyclable (however, kraft bags may
be used as liners for garbage containers), sweepings, old clothing and other
ordinary household refuse, and excluding newspapers, building materials,
stones, earth, lawn cuttings, hedge trimmings, leaves and garden growth,
paint, motor oil and other toxic waste materials.
RESIDENCE and RESIDENTIAL PICKUP — Any residential property,
condominium or rental residential property within the Borough of Allendale.
TRASH — Includes all readily combustible materials such as excelsior,
noncorrugated cardboard boxes, crates and materials of a similar nature,
household furnishings and appliances, including nonrecyclable white goods,
and any other rubbish which is not constituted as garbage, ashes or refuse
under the within definitions, but excluding building materials, stones, earth,
lawn cuttings, hedge trimmings, leaves and garden growth, paint, motor oil
and other toxic waste. In addition, the following recyclable items shall also
be excluded: corrugated cardboard, high grade white paper, newspapers,
magazines, shinies, catalogs and real estate multiple-listing books, ferrous
metal (bimetal/tin cans and white goods), aluminum beverage cans, glass
and plastics (containers composed of either PET or HDPE material).
§ 228-18. Trash collection.
Residential premises receiving municipal solid waste collection services
shall comply with the following regulations:
§ 228-16 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-18
217:529
§ 228-19. Garbage, ash and refuse collection.
Residential premises receiving municipal solid waste collection services
shall comply with the following regulations:
§ 228-20. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
4-12-2012]
The Recycling Coordinator, the Sanitation Officer, Code Enforcement
Officials and members of the Police and Public Works Departments of the
Borough are hereby authorized to enforce the terms of this article. Any
person, residence owner, occupant and/or tenant who violates any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not
less than $50 nor more than $500 for each violation, in the discretion of the
Municipal Judge. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
A. All trash, as defined herein, shall be placed at curbside where easily
accessible.
B. No trash or receptacles shall be set out prior to 6:00 p.m. on the night
before collection. Any and all receptacles shall be removed by 9:00 p.m.
on the day of collection. Any and all items not collected as trash shall be
removed by 9:00 p.m. on the day of said trash collection. [Amended
4-12-2012]
C. When a regular collection day falls on a holiday, trash and receptacles
shall not be set out until the next scheduled collection day and in
compliance with these regulations.
A. Residential garbage, ashes and refuse, as defined herein, shall be
collected from garbage cans and receptacles at the rear of the property
within six feet of the driveway of each residence serviced.
B. Residential garbage, ashes and refuse, including garbage cans and
receptacles, shall be placed for pickup no later than 6:30 a.m. on the
day of collection.
§ 228-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-20
217:530
ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Adopted 11-8-2010; amended in its entirety 11-30-2017]
§ 228-21. Purpose.
This article requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times, regulates
the length of time a dumpster or other bulk container may be placed on
property, regulates the type of materials that may be placed in a dumpster,
requires a permit for the use of a dumpster, and prohibits the spilling,
dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharging of liquids, semi-liquids or solids
from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Borough of Allendale and/or the waters of the state so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 228-22. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DUMPSTER — Any container, temporarily located on any private property,
whether rigid or nonrigid in nature, into which any solid waste, as defined
in § 228-1 of this chapter, is placed or deposited, including but not limited
to construction and demolition debris, as defined in § 228-1 of this chapter.
Containers within the scope of this definition shall include dumpster bags.
Such containers situated on an ongoing, continuous basis on private
commercial property shall not be included within this definition.
DUMPSTER BAG — Any dumpster which is nonrigid and/or expandable in
nature or composition.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Allendale or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
§ 228-21 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-22
217:531
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or ground water, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 228-23. Prohibited conduct.
§ 228-23.1. Use of dumpsters/duration of placement of dumpsters/
permits for dumpsters.
§ 228-24. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Allendale.
A. No garbage, refuse or trash, as such terms are defined in § 228-17 of
this chapter, recyclable materials which are subject to the provisions of
§ 228-3B(1) through (6) and (8) through (11) of this chapter, or
household waste shall be placed in any dumpster.
B. No dumpster shall remain in place or be situated on any private
property for a period in excess of 90 days from the date of the issuance
of the permit for same required in this article, provided, however, that
such period may be extended by the Construction Code Official for good
cause. This time limitation(s) in this provision shall not be applicable to
dumpster bags, which dumpster bags shall instead be governed by the
time limitation in § 228-23.1C hereinbelow.
C. No dumpster bag shall remain in place or be situated on any private
property for a period in excess of two weeks from the date of the
issuance of the permit for same required in this article, provided,
however, that such time period may be extended by the Construction
Code Official for good cause.
D. No dumpster or dumpster bag shall be placed, located or situated on
any private property unless and until a permit for same has been issued
by the Construction Code Official, or the Borough. The cost of each such
permit shall be $25.
§ 228-22 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-24
217:532
§ 228-25. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Code Official or the
Property Maintenance Officer of the Borough of Allendale.
§ 228-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 90 days or both.
§ 228-27. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 228-28. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this
amendatory ordinance89 are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain
in full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this amendatory ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 228-29. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
A. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
B. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
C. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
D. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
89.Editor's Note: "This amendatory ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 17-16, adopted 11-30-2017.
§ 228-24 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 228-29
217:533
Chapter 231
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — Ch. 132.
Illicit connections to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 140.
Improper disposal of waste to storm sewer
system — See Ch. 141.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Stream corridor protection — Ch. 232.
Water — See Ch. 262.
Zoning — Ch. 270.
§ 228-29 ALLENDALE CODE § 228-29
217:534
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[The Stormwater Control Ordinance was adopted 3-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-14 and subsequently amended 10-25-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17.
A complete copy of that ordinance, as amended, is on file and
available for inspection by the public during normal business hours
in the Borough offices.]
§ 231-1. through § 231-15. (Reserved)
§ 231-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 231-1
217:535

ARTICLE II
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 11-8-2010]
§ 231-16. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of Allendale so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 231-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Allendale or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 231-18. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 231-16 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 231-18
217:537
§ 231-19. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 231-17 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 231-18 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to
this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurb-
opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in
slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of
roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
§ 231-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 231-19
217:538
§ 231-20. Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Official of the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 231-21. Penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 90 days or both for each storm drain inlet that is not
retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 231-22. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this Ordinance.
§ 231-23. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this
amendatory Ordinance are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain
in full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 231-24. When effective date.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption
and any publication as may be required by law.
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 231-19 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 231-24
217:539
Chapter 232
STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Storm sewer system — See Chs. 140; 141; 262,
Art. I.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Soil movement — See Ch. 225.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
§ 232-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acid
producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this chapter, and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated riparian zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND, or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
§ 231-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 232-1
217:540
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water Resource
Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in
the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or
state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land Use
Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 232-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 232-1
217:541
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 232-2. Intent and Authority.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide compliance with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(g)3 which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones.
Authority is provided or limited as follows:
§ 232-3. Riparian zone protection.
A. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this chapter does
not constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer requirements
imposed under any other federal, state or local statute, regulation or
ordinance.
B. Use powers given to Allendale under the provisions of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which authorizes
each municipality to plan and regulate land use in order to protect
public health, safety, and welfare through the protection and
maintenance of native vegetation in riparian areas. Allendale is also
empowered to adopt and implement this chapter under provisions
provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of New
Jersey:
(1) Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
(2) Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
(3) Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23 et seq.90
(4) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(5) Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
A. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies as described below
in this section shall be protected from avoidable disturbance:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not identified in Subsection A above:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
90.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 10:A-1.
§ 232-1 ALLENDALE CODE § 232-3
217:542
§ 232-4. Exceptions.
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the regulated
water for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the
length of the regulated water; and
(d) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
acid-producing soils; and
(3) For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide
shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
B. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit; and
(3) Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
C. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site, and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to Allendale in conjunction
with an application for a construction permit, subdivision, land
development, or other improvement that requires plan submissions or
permits. This initial determination shall be subject to review and
approval by the municipal engineer, governing body, or its appointed
representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. The following disturbances are excepted:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
(2) New disturbance in the riparian zone necessary to protect public
health, safety or welfare; to provide an environmental benefit; to
prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the
§ 232-3 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 232-4
217:543
§ 232-5. Adjustments.
Adjustments to the riparian zones established by this chapter are allowed
to the extent they comply with the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), and
shall be subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
§ 232-6. Permits-By-Rule.
The Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), Subchapter 7.
Permits-By-Rule, establishes permits-by-rule for certain regulated activities.
This chapter hereby adopts by reference said subchapter as it exists at the
time of passage of this chapter and as it may change from time to time,
as a means of allowing regulated activities in the riparian zone without
any other permits or approvals. In addition, any permit-by-rule provision
that requires notification to the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection shall also be copied to the Allendale Municipal Engineer.
hardship was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
B. An exception to any of the disturbances listed in Subsection A(1) above
shall be granted by the Town Engineer, upon proof by virtue of
submission of appropriate maps and drawings, that the proposed
redevelopment is within the limits of impervious surfaces that existed at
the time of passage of this chapter and shall be in conformance with the
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all riparian zones, an exception to any of the disturbances listed in
Subsection A(2) above shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, upon proof by virtue of submission of appropriate maps,
drawings, reports and testimony, that the disturbance protects public
health, safety or welfare; provides an environmental benefit; prevents
extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property;
or prevents extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
D. Appeals of a determination by the Town Engineer made in accordance
with Subsection B above may be made to the Planning Board. The party
contesting the determination or decision shall have the burden of proof
in case of any such appeal.
§ 232-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 232-7
217:544
§ 232-7. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough of Allendale, of any person or entity believed to be in
violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of
this chapter is discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior
Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or
if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by
the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to preclude the right of the Borough of Allendale pursuant
to N.J.S.A 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any
other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this chapter.
Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 232-8. Repealer.
All ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local requirements that are
inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistencies and the provisions of this chapter apply.
§ 232-9. Severability.
§ 232-10. Effective Date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication as provided by law on September 24, 2009.
A. Interpretation. This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict with
any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
B. Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all remaining
provisions of the chapter shall continue to be of full force and effect.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 232-7 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 232-10
217:545
Chapter 233
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Littering — See Ch. 158.
Newsracks — See Ch. 167.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 185.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Public places — See Ch. 203.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 252.
Visual obstructions — See Ch. 256.
§ 232-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 232-10
217:546
ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 57, Art. I of the 1967 Code]
§ 233-1. Lines and grades. [Amended 9-25-1986]
The lines and grades of all sidewalks must conform to the lines and grades
as shown on the map of such street, as prepared and/or approved by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 233-2. Sidewalk widths. [Amended 9-25-1986]
The width of all sidewalks shall be four feet.
§ 233-3. Specifications. [Amended 9-25-1986; 4-12-1993]
The specifications for the laying and construction of concrete sidewalks in
the Borough of Allendale shall be as follows:
A. Grading. The sidewalks are to be graded from the curbline to the
property line, to the proper grade of 1/4 inch to one foot rise. Such
portions as are above grade shall be excavated, and such as are below
grade shall be filled in. Where the fill is more than six inches, it must be
placed in layers and thoroughly compacted. All fill shall be compacted.
Where tree roots are encountered, the Borough Engineer shall
determine the need to install a deep root control barrier system to
prevent roots from growing beneath the sidewalk.
B. Foundation.
(1) The concrete flags shall be four feet in width, accurately laid to the
proper line and grades approved by the Borough Engineer.
(2) The walks shall be excavated four inches below the finished grade
of the sidewalk for at least the full width of the concrete flag. If
unsuitable subgrade soil is present, clean, granular material
approved by the Borough Engineer shall be placed and compacted
to the level of four inches below the finished walk grade.
C. Concrete mix.
(1) Concrete mix shall have a design compressive strength of 3,500
pounds per square inch at 28 days.
(2) The concrete, when placed in the forms, shall be well rammed and
tamped until the mortar flushes to the surface and shall be four
inches in depth finished in place. Bituminous-cellular-type and
preformed-bituminous-type expansion joint material shall be
placed every 10 feet and shall extend completely through the fourinch
thickness. Score marks will be made at the five-foot spacing
between expansion joints.
§ 233-1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-3
217:547
§ 233-4. Permits and inspections for sidewalks, curbs and driveway
openings. [Added 9-25-1986]
Sidewalks, curbs and driveway openings located on a dedicated or accepted
public right-of-way shall be considered as structures and shall be subject to
all administrative requirements of the Building Code91 as regards permits
D. Finishing or wearing surface.
(1) The mortar shall be leveled off to a proper grade with a
straightedge and, when sufficiently firm, shall be rubbed down to a
true and even surface with the proper tools, in a uniform manner
satisfactory to the Borough Engineer, finished with a wooden float
to an even continuous surface and lightly brushed with a dampened
brush as a final finish. The wearing surface shall be blocked off in
sections of five feet in length.
(2) Retempering mortar or concrete, i.e., remixing with water after it
has partially set, shall not be permitted.
(3) After the addition of water to the concrete mixture, it shall be
handled rapidly to the place of final deposit, and under no
circumstances shall concrete be used which has partially set before
final placing.
(4) When completed, all walks shall be kept moist, protected from
traffic and the elements for two or three days, according to the
weather conditions. The forms will be removed with great care, and
upon their removal, the edges of the walk shall be protected in a
suitable manner, and the protection will be such as to prevent any
damage or intrusion on the work until it has hardened.
(5) The forms used in constructing sidewalks may be approved iron
sidewalk forms or wood strips. If wood strips are used, they must
be thoroughly staked, etc., and be not less than two inches by four
inches.
E. Driveway apron. If concrete driveways are required in sidewalks, they
shall be constructed of the same quality as the concrete sidewalks
already described, but the concrete shall be six inches thick. The slope
of the driveway apron shall extend in a continuous grade from the top of
the depressed curb to the profile line of the back edge of the walk as
dictated by the cross slope of one-fourth-inch rise for each horizontal
foot of width as measured from the face of the curb to the back edge of
the walk. In the event that this grade is in conflict with the level of a
preexisting driveway surface and to modify the driveway would entail
extensive reconstruction, the grade at the back of the drive apron may
then be adjusted to meet the driveway surface for the required width.
The length of transition from the normal grade at the back of the walk
to the grade required to match the driveway shall be a minimum of five
feet or as approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 233-3 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-4
217:548
and inspections. The sidewalks and curbs shall be installed in compliance
with the Revised Land Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough.92
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Building Construction.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 233-4 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-4
217:549

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Area Maintenance
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 56 of the 1967 Code]
§ 233-5. Removal of grass, weeds and other impediments.
[Amended 9-25-1986]
It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or tenant of any property
abutting or bordering any public street in the Borough of Allendale to
remove or cause to be removed or cut or cause to be cut and removed
any grass, weeds or other impediments, natural or artificial, within the
area between the curbline or edge of pavement and the nearest property
line running parallel therewith of said property, within 10 days, excluding
Sundays, of notice, in writing, served upon said owner, tenant or occupant
by the Superintendent of Public Works of the Borough of Allendale or by any
such other officer as may be designated by the Council of the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 233-6. Noncompliance procedure.
If the weeds, grass or other impediment is not removed in the time required,
as above, the Superintendent of Public Works shall have the same done by
Borough employees or by contract and shall certify the cost of any such
work performed to the governing body, which shall, under the provisions of
Chapter 152 of the Laws of 1949,93 charge the same against the property,
to be added to and become a part of the taxes assessed and levied upon
such property. For the purposes of this section, the tenant or occupant shall
be deemed to be the agent of the owner for the purpose of complying with
§§ 233-5 and 233-6 of this article.
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27.
§ 233-5 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-6
217:551

ARTICLE III
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 12-11-201494]
§ 233-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations and fees for the
opening of municipal streets within the Borough of Allendale.
§ 233-8. Definitions.
The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the
meanings here indicated:
EXTENSIVE OPENING — An opening, tearing up or excavating, for any
purpose, of 50 square feet or more of a Borough roadway, or an opening
which disturbs 20% or more of the curb-to-curb width of the pavement area.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, public utility or other entity on whose
behalf a street opening is performed by a permittee.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm, or corporation granted a permit
hereunder.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A private business organization, subject to
governmental regulation, that provides an essential commodity or service,
such as water, electricity, transportation or communication, to the public.
Such utilities include, but are not limited to, Public Service Electric and
Gas Company, Rockland Electric, United Water Company, cable television
company or any other entity having either the power of eminent domain or
subject to regulations by the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New
Jersey.
STREET — Any street, road or other public way dedicated to and accepted
by the Borough of Allendale, and shall include all of the area thereof lying
within the bounds of the dedicated right-of-way.
§ 233-9. Permit required; restrictions on excavating recently sealed
roads.
A. Permit required.
(1) No person or corporation, public or private, nor any utility
company, public or private, shall for any purpose open, tear up,
excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the
surface or subsurface within the paved or unpaved limits of any
street in the Borough of Allendale without first obtaining a road
opening permit from the Director of Operations.
94.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Street Openings and Excavations, adopted 12-28-1967 as
Ch. 65 of the 1967 Code, as amended, was repealed 12-11-2014.
§ 233-7 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-9
217:553
§ 233-10. Application requirements; review; issuance of permit.
(2) Only such persons, firms or corporations to whom or to which
permits have been granted shall be permitted to perform such work
and then only in the manner herein required and only as
specifically allowed in the permit. Assignment of rights under any
permit issued hereunder is prohibited; the permittee is always
responsible for performance under this article.
(3) Permits under this article shall expire as outlined in § 233-11A(2) of
this article following issuance of the permit. If work has not been
completed within the prescribed period, the applicant will be
required to obtain a new permit for the work and pay such fees as
may be required for a permit under this article.
B. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the
Borough of Allendale or under a contract with the Borough for the
construction of utilities/infrastructure or street improvements.
C. No permit applicant shall begin work until he/she receives the
authorization number from the Underground Location Service and the
appropriate utility. The applicant must comply with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 48:2-73, the "Underground Facility Protection Act."
D. Nonopening of road. No street, road or paved area constructed,
reconstructed or repaved within three years of the time that the road is
sealed can be excavated, built or patched except in the case of
emergency, which includes but is not limited to gas leaks.
E. No Borough street shall be excavated between November 1 and March
30 without prior approval of the Public Works Committee of the Mayor
and Council.
A. Form.
(1) Application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be
prescribed by the Borough of Allendale and issued by the Director
of Operations and shall be filed at least two weeks prior to the
commencement of any work. The application shall specify the name
and address of the applicant; the specific location of the proposed
excavation and the width, length and depth thereof; the type of
road or other surface; and the individual(s), firm or corporation for
whose benefit the excavation is to be made and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for the issuance of the permit
as hereinafter provided, together with the charges as hereinafter
set forth.
(2) Additional information.
(a) Applications for extensive openings shall require, in addition to
the above, information regarding:
§ 233-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-10
217:554
[1] All improvements;
[2] Typical details and sections of construction procedure;
[3] Plans, profiles and other details necessary to accurately
depict the work.
(b) Standard details used by public utilities and accepted and
approved by the Director of Operations or the Borough
Engineer may be used to satisfy the requirements of § 233-14.
(3) No work may commence by the permittee until the date set forth in
the issued permit.
B. Emergency road opening.
(1) In the event that an emergency condition exists requiring
immediate action by any person, firm or corporation required to
obtain a permit pursuant to this article, the person may
immediately cause the roadway to be entered and emergency
measures taken without first obtaining a permit, provided that:
(a) A true emergency exists and the person or persons doing the
work notify the Allendale Police Department prior to start of
work; the Police Department shall log the emergency.
(b) A permit is applied for within 72 hours of the road opening.
(c) All work is to be performed in accordance with the provisions
of §§ 233-11, 233-12, 233-13 and 233-14.
(d) The Director of Operations or the Borough Engineer shall be
notified within 24 hours of a road opening. If a road opening
commences on a Saturday or Sunday as a result of emergency
road work, the Police Department of the Borough of Allendale
shall be notified prior to the start of work, and the Director of
Operations or the Borough Engineer shall be notified on the
morning of the first business day thereafter.
(2) The Mayor and Council reserve the right to issue a written stopwork
order upon the advice of the Director of Operations or
Borough Engineer.
C. Review of the application. Prior to the issuance of a permit, copies of
the application therefor shall be referred to the Director of Operations
or the Borough Engineer, who shall note any objections to the issuance
of a permit or any conditions which shall be satisfied prior to or be
imposed as conditions upon the issuance of the permit, as appropriate.
D. Applicant. The applicant must be a licensed contractor or agent of a
public utility, whether corporate, individual, or partnership, who will be
actually engaged in the performance of the work to ensure the safety of
the public and that the work is done in accordance with Borough
§ 233-10 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-10
217:555
§ 233-11. Work requirements.
specifications. The application shall be made for and on the behalf
of the owner for whom such work is being done and shall be
countersigned by such owner.
E. Agreement. The owner shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of a
permit, that any facilities, pipes or poles or other object(s) to be
installed within the Borough right-of-way pursuant to the permit shall
be promptly relocated at the owner's expense, except where otherwise
provided by law, as required by the Borough of Allendale, to
accommodate the installation of Borough facilities. Such agreement
shall be in writing and contained on the face of the application form and
permit.
F. Issuance. Street opening permits shall be issued by the Director of
Operations once reviewed and approved as provided herein; provided,
however, that no permit shall be issued until an application fee and an
engineering fee, as described in § 233-16 of this article, have been paid
to the Borough Chief Financial Officer.
A. Generally. The New Jersey State Department of Transportation 2007
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with all
amendments and supplements, shall govern all of the work performed
under Borough of Allendale road opening permits, except as
supplemented below.
(1) No Borough road shall be closed to traffic without prior written
consent of the Police Department. In the event that a road is closed,
uniformed police may be required to act as traffic directors, and the
proper traffic control devices shall be erected and maintained in
accordance with standards described in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, 2009 Edition. All costs of providing
uniformed police shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the
owners. The Borough will bill the permittee for such services at the
prevailing rate specified annually by the Borough. In the event that
a detour is requested by the permittee, application shall be made to
the Chief of Police, who shall determine the necessity for such
detour and the route to be followed. In emergency situations,
notification by phone to the Police Department shall be done prior
to the start of work.
(2) Any work under an issued permit must be commenced within two
months from the date of issue and completed within 30 days from
commencement, or said permit shall be deemed void, and
reapplication shall be required. The Director of Operations or the
Borough Engineer may grant up to a single forty-five day
completion extension past the original permit expiration date.
(3) Work commenced under a permit shall be continued expediently
during normal working hours until completed.
§ 233-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-11
217:556
§ 233-12. Repair and cleaning of streets and property.
(4) The applicant shall notify the Director of Operations or the Borough
Engineer 24 hours in advance of the actual commencement of any
work on an opening.
B. Guard. The applicant shall keep the work site properly guarded both
day and night and shall have lights, barriers and adequate safety
devices as described in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
placed and maintained throughout the performance of the work and
shall interfere as little as possible with the traffic along the street or
road within the Borough, and only that part of any such street or road
as is set forth in the permit shall be opened.
C. Cover and protection. All utilities shall be constructed with adequate
depth of cover protection for the utilities in the event that further
Borough road construction, repair or modification necessitates
excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the area where
the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the utility
owner of the responsibility of relocating said utility at said utility
owner's expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of related facilities, except as otherwise
specified herein.
D. Protection of existing structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to give other notice of the proposed street opening to any
person, firm or corporation whose pipe, conduits or other structures are
laid in the portion of the street to be opened. Said notice shall be given
to all utilities by calling the Garden State Underground Plant Location
Service 72 hours before commencement of said opening, or as provided
by law, and the permittee shall restore the same, at his own expense, to
the condition it was in prior to commencement of work.
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled at the end of each
working day unless it would constitute a hardship to the permittee or
where the size of the excavation makes it impossible to backfill at the
end of each working day, in which event a waiver may be granted by the
Director of Operations or Borough Engineer. In the event that a waiver
is granted, the contractor or owner shall cover the excavation with
heavy one-inch-thick steel plates secured to existing pavement to
prevent rattles and movement and erect appropriate barriers and lights
around the entire excavation and arrange to provide appropriate
security protection, if such security is necessary, at his/her own cost,
and such other safeguards as may be needed to protect the public from
an open excavation. If steel plates are placed for over a weekend or for
an extended period, all edges are to be macadam-sealed and sloped. In
no event shall an excavation be left open for more than 72 hours unless
an emergency exists and permission has been secured from the Chief of
Police, Director of Operations and Borough Engineer or their
designated representatives.
§ 233-11 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-12
217:557
§ 233-13. Inspections.
§ 233-14. Specifications.
A. The permittee shall be liable for any damage to the roadway leading to
or adjacent to the work site.
B. The permittee shall, on a continuing basis, maintain all streets and
other property affected by the construction in a clean condition, free
from all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. Upon completion
of all work under the permit, the permittee shall again clean the
affected property and remove all debris and unused material. In the
event that the permittee fails to act as provided herein, the Borough,
upon 24 hours' notice to the permittee, may clean and remove all
rubbish, excess earth, rock, debris and unused material and charge the
permittee the cost thereof. If the permittee fails to reimburse the
Borough for the costs incurred, said costs shall be deducted from the
permittee's deposit held by the Chief Financial Officer.
A. The Director of Operations or Borough Engineer shall periodically
inspect all road openings and the repair and resurfacing thereof for the
purpose of determining compliance with the conditions imposed on the
issuance of the permit and the specifications. The Borough Mayor and
Council may, upon the recommendation of either of them:
(1) Order a temporary stop to any road paving.
(2) Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance
with the direction of the Borough.
(3) Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
Borough of Allendale shall complete the work, or cause it to be
completed, and either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or
notify the applicant's surety of an intent to file claim on the bond, or
both, to the extent necessary to complete the work.
(4) Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the
permittee and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to
make such corrections within 24 hours and, after the completion of
same, either declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the
permittee's surety of an intent to file a claim on the bond, or both,
to the extent necessary to make the necessary corrections.
(5) Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances
to protect the Borough's interests.
A. The existing pavement must be cut with a compressor, wet saw or an
approved mechanical cutting device in a straight line and to the full
depth of pavement before excavation. All storm drains and catch basins
will be protected at all times. Any damage will be repaired by the
applicant at the applicant's expense.
§ 233-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-14
217:558
B. All fill removed from the trench is to be discarded by the applicant. The
trench must be of suitable width to obtain proper mechanical
compaction. All backfill is to be done with quarry process stone Type
1-5, dense-graded aggregate, or other material as approved by the
Director of Operations or Borough for the full depth of the trench. The
first lift of fill, 12 inches above pipe, shall be compacted using a jumping
jack tamper. Successive lifts shall be compacted by mechanical means
such as tamping, vibrating or rolling. A vibra plate tamper is not
acceptable.
C. Upon completion of the proper backfill compaction, a six-inch layer of
bituminous stabilized base Mix I-2 shall be utilized in two lifts of three
inches each compacted in all trench areas. The top surface shall be
flush with the adjacent pavement and be uniformly contoured to
conform to the existing surrounding surface.
D. For installation of plastic piping, the applicant shall place a sand
cushion around the plastic piping for a minimum distance of 12 inches
from the pipe.
E. The applicant must install and maintain temporary line striping and
pavement markings.
F. The applicant further agrees to keep the trench filled to the level of
surrounding pavement until settlement has ceased. The Borough shall
be held harmless in any and all accidents arising out of trench defects.
G. After a reasonable settlement period not to exceed nine months, final
restoration will require infrared application or a two-inch compacted
surface course of bituminous surface course Mix I-5 to be placed over
the entire area of stabilized base as determined by the Director of
Operations or Borough Engineer.
(1) Infrared resurfacing shall be permitted in accordance with the
specifications set forth in Subsection H below. When using infrared
resurfacing application, all stabilized base material in the road
opening, plus a minimum of six inches surrounding the edge of the
opening, require heating and raking to a depth of one inch. All
raked material is to be discarded and replaced by fresh, hot fine
aggregate bituminous course top mix.
(2) Prior to the application of the surface course, the entire area of
stabilized base, including 12 inches surrounding the edge of the
opening, shall be milled by a milling machine (self-propelled,
power-operated planing, grinding or cutting machine) to a
minimum depth of two inches from the outside edge of the trench
to the curbline in a uniform width a minimum of 10 feet wide.
(3) The resulting milled surface shall then be swept, and tack coat
material applied, before the two-inch compacted surface course is
laid. This course shall be thoroughly compacted flush with the
§ 233-14 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-14
217:559
§ 233-15. Insurance and security.
surrounding surface by vibratory rolling and be uniformly
contoured to the adjacent pavement.
(4) All manhole frames and covers installed within the pavement area
shall be set to finished grade. Any scarring or road damage to any
other part of a roadway caused by this permit shall be repaired as
per the above conditions.
H. Specifications for infrared restoration.
(1) The purpose of this specification is to establish a consistent and
standard process for infrared paving applications and to ensure the
quality of infrared restoration for road openings.
(2) The contractor shall provide all materials, equipment and labor
required to perform a seamless, to-grade, permanent infrared
restoration.
(3) The infrared contractor shall provide fine aggregate base course at
plant temperature of 275° F. to 300° F. The infrared contractor
must guarantee that the asphalt will be transported and stored in a
thermostatically controlled storage unit. Asphalt should not be kept
in a storage unit at plant temperature for a period longer than 24
hours.
(4) Required equipment:
(a) The infrared heater must have the ability to soften asphalt to a
depth of 1 1/2 inches to two inches in eight to 10 minutes
without burning the surface. The heater must be a minimum
size of six feet by eight feet. A truck-mounted infrared heater is
the preferred equipment.
(b) A thermostatically controlled asphalt storage unit which
maintains a temperature of 275° F. to 300° F.
(c) A roller-type compactor that will generate at least one ton of
applied force per square inch.
(d) A steel asphalt rake that is strong enough to scarify to a depth
of two inches.
(e) A thirty-six-inch asphalt loot.
I. Final line striping and pavement markings must be restored
immediately to original or better condition. The standard for the
Borough for line striping and traffic markings is the application of
thermoplastic materials.
A. Insurance.
§ 233-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-15
217:560
§ 233-16. Fees.
Fees shall be as follows:
(1) The applicant shall present evidence satisfactory to the Borough
Attorney and Borough insurance agent of insurance sufficient to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough, its agents and servants
against and from all suits and costs of every kind and from all
personal injury or property damage resulting from negligence or
from any phase of operations performed under the permit. Said
insurance shall provide limits of not less than $1,000,000 of single
limit or, in the case of a public utility, may be in the form of a
certificate of self-insurance. Where there is an extensive opening,
the Director of Operations or the Borough Engineer may request
additional insurance if it is deemed necessary under the
circumstances.
(2) All certificates of insurance shall contain a provision that the same
shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one year
following the approval by the Borough of the completion of the
work under the permit.
B. Security.
(1) The Director of Operations shall not issue a permit unless the
applicant has deposited as security for faithful performance a
certified check made payable to the Borough of Allendale or filed a
bond with the surety satisfactory to the Borough Attorney, the
amount thereof to be based upon the security deposit fee schedule
as contained in § 233-16 of this article.
(2) In lieu of the security deposit required above, a public utility
applicant may file with the Chief Financial Officer a corporate
performance bond or surety bond in the amount of $20.
(3) All bonds shall contain a provision that the same shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of one year following the approval by
the Director of Operations or Borough Engineer of the completion
of the work under the permit.
A. Application fee, nonrefundable:
(1) Road opening; boring, tunneling or driving under road; curb,
gutter, apron, sidewalk or driveway: $200, except as provided
hereinbelow for an extensive opening.
(2) For an extensive opening, the fee shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer, based on an estimate prepared by the Borough
Engineer of the amount required to cover all costs of inspection
and/or other professional costs. If, at any time during the course of
the work, it appears evident to the Borough Engineer that the fee is
or will be insufficient to cover all costs of inspection and/or other
§ 233-15 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-16
217:561
§ 233-17. Return of deposit upon completion of work.
Upon the completion of any such work, the Director of Operations or
Borough Engineer shall inspect the work and shall file a report, which
report shall contain the date of completion, the cost to the Borough for
resurfacing the area so excavated or opened, if the same shall have been
necessary, and the balance, if any, due to the applicant. Following approval,
the security deposit or bond shall be held by the Borough for a period of
one year from the date of approval to guarantee proper restoration of all
paved areas, curbs, sidewalks, driveways and grass areas in the event of
settlement of the areas disturbed by the excavation. Upon expiration of the
one-year maintenance period, the Director of Operations or the Borough
Engineer shall inspect the work and shall file a report of inspection. Upon
receipt of a report approving the work, the Borough Chief Financial Officer
shall return the security deposit or bond to the applicant.
§ 233-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, company, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject for each offense to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In case of failure to restore
pavements or roads or streets as hereinabove provided, after written notice
by the Director of Operations to do so, each day that such pavement,
roads or streets remain unrestored shall constitute a separate offense. The
Director of Operations and/or Borough Engineer shall enforce this article.
§ 233-19. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
professional services, additional fees shall be estimated by the
Borough Engineer and paid to the Director of Operations.
B. Security deposit for guaranteeing restoration of paved area, curb,
sidewalk, driveway or grass area:
(1) Road opening; boring, tunneling or driving under road; curb,
gutter, apron, sidewalk or driveway: $1,000, except as provided
hereinbelow for an extensive opening.
(2) For an extensive opening, the security deposit shall be determined
by the Borough Engineer, based on an estimate prepared by the
applicant and reviewed and approved by the Borough Engineer of
the amount required to guarantee proper restoration of all paved
areas, curbs, sidewalks, driveways and grass areas.
§ 233-16 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-20
217:562
§ 233-20. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict,
including §§ 233-7 to 233-21, with this article are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict.
§ 233-21. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 233-20 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-21
217:563

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Improvements
[Adopted 4-12-1993]
§ 233-22. Responsibility of landowner for cost of construction and
repair.
Whenever the Construction Code Official of the Borough of Allendale
certifies to the municipal governing body that any sidewalks and curbs
are in need of construction, repair, alteration, relaying or maintaining, the
expense of said construction, repairing, altering, relaying or maintaining
shall be borne by the landowners abutting the improvement.
§ 233-23. Notice to owner of required improvements.
The Borough Council, upon receipt of the certification set forth in § 233-22
hereof, shall determine the necessity of said improvement; and if it deems
that said improvement is necessary, it shall, by resolution, cause a notice in
writing to be served upon said abutting owners or occupants of said lands,
requiring the necessary specified work to said curb and/or sidewalk to be
done by said owner or occupant within a period of not less than 30 days nor
more than 90 days from the date of service of such notice.
§ 233-24. Manner of serving notice.
Whenever any said abutting lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be
found within the municipality, the same may be mailed, postage prepaid,
to his or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In the
event that such owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her
post office address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted
for four weeks, once a week, in some newspaper published in the state and
circulating in said municipality.
§ 233-25. Failure to comply; work to be done by Borough; costs to
become lien.
In the event that the owner or occupant of such abutting lands shall not
comply with the requirements of said notice, it shall be lawful for the
Borough Administrator of the municipality, upon filing due proof of the
service or publication of the aforesaid notice in the appropriate department
of the municipality, to cause the work required to be done and paid for out
of municipal funds available for that purpose. The cost of such work shall
be certified by the Borough Engineer to the department or person having
charge of the collection of assessments in such municipality. Upon filing
said certificate of costs, the amount of the cost of such work shall be and
become a lien upon said abutting lands in front of which such work was
done, to the same extent that assessments for local improvements are liens
in the municipality, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law
for the collection of such other assessments and shall bear interest at the
same rate. In addition thereto, the municipality may commence, in any court
§ 233-22 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-25
217:565
having competent jurisdiction thereof, an action against the owner of said
lands to recover said amount.
§ 233-26. Sidewalk specifications.
Sidewalk construction, repair, alteration, relaying or maintaining shall be
in conformance with the requirements of Article I, Sidewalk Construction,
of this article and subject to supervision and approval of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 233-25 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-26
217:566
ARTICLE IVA
Sidewalk or Curb Damage Caused By Shade Trees
[Adopted 3-28-2013]
§ 233-26.1. Responsibility of Borough to repair.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article IV, §§ 233-22 to 233-26, whenever
the Shade Tree Commission or a designee of the Borough certifies to
the municipal governing body that any sidewalk or curb is in need of
construction, repair, alteration or relaying which is caused by a shade tree
planted or controlled by the Borough within the Borough's right-of-way, the
Borough shall be responsible for any repair work.
§ 233-26.1 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-26.1
217:567

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-9-2000]
§ 233-27. Duty of owners or tenants.
The owner of any premises abutting on any public sidewalk in the Borough
shall remove all snow and ice from the portion of the sidewalk abutting his
or her premises. The owners of premises used for business, commercial or
industrial purposes shall, in addition, remove all snow and ice from parking
lots, walkways and other areas used by their customers or employees. Ice
which is so frozen as to make removal impractical shall either be treated
with rock salt or other chemicals which will thaw it sufficiently to permit
removal or be thoroughly covered with sand, ashes or cinders. Removal or
covering shall be accomplished within 24 hours of daylight after the snow
or ice shall fall or be formed.
§ 233-28. Casting of snow or ice.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit any snow or ice upon the street. The intent of this
section is to prohibit all persons from throwing, placing or depositing snow
or ice accumulating on the private property of that person upon municipal
streets or sidewalks of the Borough.
§ 233-29. Removal by Borough.
In the event that snow or ice is not removed or is cast, deposited or placed
upon sidewalks or streets in violation of this article, the snow or ice shall
be removed by the appropriate department of the Borough, and the cost of
the removal shall be certified to the Council. The Council shall examine the
certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost to be charged against
the real estate abutting the sidewalk or street from which the snow or ice
was removed. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon the real
estate abutting the sidewalk or street and shall be added to the taxes next
assessed upon that land and shall be collected and enforced in the same
manner as other taxes. The remedy provided by this section shall be in
addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 233-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by any combination of the following: a fine not
exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 233-27 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-30
217:569

ARTICLE VI
Posting of Signs
[Adopted 4-28-2016]
§ 233-31. Unlawful acts. [Amended 10-12-2017]
It shall be unlawful to post or affix any sign, advertisement, notice, poster,
paper, devise, or other matter or material of any kind to any public utility
pole, shade tree, lamppost, curbstone, sidewalk, or upon any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee,
may authorize the temporary placement of signs or other written notices
on any such public utility pole, shade tree, lamppost, curbstone, sidewalk,
or upon any public structure or building as may, in the Chief of Police's
discretion, be necessary or desirable for purposes of public safety.
§ 233-31 INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS § 233-31
217:571
Chapter 237
TAXATION
§ 233-31 ALLENDALE CODE § 233-31
237:572
ARTICLE I
Property Tax Refunds for Disabled Veterans
[Adopted 4-8-2004]
§ 237-1. Statutory requirements.
Whereas, as per N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30, and upon proper claim made therefor,
the Borough of Allendale is required to exempt from property taxes the
dwelling house and lot of any citizen and resident of the state who has
been honorably discharged from any branch of the Armed Forces of the
United States and who has been declared by the United States Veterans
Administration to have either a specific service-connected disability as
enumerated in the above statute or to have a service-connected 100%
permanent disability; and whereas, as per N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30, the dwelling
house and lot of the surviving spouse of any veteran described above, who
at the time of death was entitled to this exemption, shall, upon proper
claim made therefor, be entitled to the same exemption during the surviving
spouse's widowhood or widowerhood while the surviving spouse is a
resident of New Jersey and is the legal owner of and occupies said dwelling
house or any later-acquired dwelling house; and whereas, as per N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.32, any municipality may, at its discretion, refund and return all taxes
already collected on property which would have been exempt had proper
claims in writing been made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30; and whereas,
taxes may be paid on property which is eligible for this exemption because
the United States Veterans Administration issued a declaration of disability
on a retroactive basis.
§ 237-2. Policy.
The Borough of Allendale shall, as a matter of policy, refund not more than
two years taxes for any property on which the above exemption has been
issued, notwithstanding the reason that proper claim had not previously
been made therefor.
§ 237-1 TAXATION § 237-2
237:573
Chapter 238
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199. Zoning — See Ch. 270.
§ 238-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create a procedure whereby individuals
may apply for a permit to allow for the use of temporary storage containers
on residential property and to provide for rules, regulations, and
restrictions with regard to the use and placement of such temporary storage
containers.
§ 238-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein:
FRONT YARD, SIDE YARD OR REAR YARD SETBACKS — Shall have the
meaning as set forth in Chapter 270, Zoning, of the Code.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Outdoor containers commonly
referred to as "pods" and/or similar containers used to store personal home
furnishings and/or personal items only on a temporary basis during a time
of home repair, construction, renovation or relocation.
§ 238-3. Restrictions.
§ 238-4. Permit procedure.
Prior to the delivery or use of any temporary storage container on
residential property, an application must be made to the Zoning Officer
A. Temporary storage containers, and other portable structures, including
temporary bathroom structures, shall not encroach into the front yard,
side yard or rear yard setbacks, but in any event shall not extend
beyond the front plane of the house and shall only be permitted on the
lot within the driveway area or rear of the dwelling.
B. Temporary storage containers, and other portable structures, including
temporary bathroom structures, shall not obstruct the public right-ofway.
C. Temporary storage containers shall be permitted in all residential
zoning districts of the Borough of Allendale.
D. Temporary storage containers shall not exceed 20 feet in length and
shall have a maximum of 1,800 cubic feet.
§ 237-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 238-4
237:574
for a permit allowing for the delivery and use of such temporary storage
container. Such application must include a survey reflecting the proposed
location of the temporary storage container on the applicant's property.
Permits issued shall allow for the use of such temporary storage container
for a period of 90 days; provided, however, that if it shall become necessary
to extend said time period beyond the initial 90 days, a property owner may
make an application to the Zoning Officer for an extension of time not to
exceed an additional 90 days and shall not exceed a total of 180 days. The
Zoning Officer is authorized to prepare an application form for use with this
section.
§ 238-5. Application fee.
There shall be a fee charged for the initial permit of $125. The fee for an
extension permit shall be $75, payable to the Borough of Allendale.
§ 238-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, Construction Code
Official or such other employee or department of the Borough as designated
in writing by the Mayor and Council. In the event adherence to the
restrictions set forth in this chapter 238 shall, in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer, Construction Code Official, or such other employee or department
as designated in writing by the Mayor and Council to enforce this chapter,
result in undue or substantial hardship to an applicant hereunder, such
officer, official, employee or department may relax such restrictions as may
be necessary.
§ 238-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation and/or entity violating or neglecting to comply
with any provision in this chapter shall be subject to a fine up to $500 for
the first offense and $750 for each and every subsequent offense. Each and
every day such violation or noncompliance exists shall constitute a separate
offense, and an additional fine shall be imposed as set forth herein.
§ 238-8. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 238-9. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 238-4 TAXATION § 238-10
237:575
§ 238-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 240
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 252.
§ 240-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A motor vehicle of a private passenger, sport utility or
station wagon type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public
or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver;
and a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van, or a
panel truck or a camper type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner(s).
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle other than that as defined as an
automobile pursuant to the definitions as contained in this chapter.
INSIDE BUILDINGS — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls, for storage and removal of
vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object, for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle even if they were caused by the
intentional acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night.
§ 238-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-1
237:576
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all other
storage facilities not defined above as inside building or outside secured.
RECOVERY — To retrieve from a location off the roadway, upright a rolledover
vehicle; if the vehicle is underneath or impaled onto another object,
then it must be recovered.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-four-hour
period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01
a.m.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator is principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
WINCHING — If a vehicle has flat tires and/or does not roll freely, then the
vehicle must be winched.
§ 240-2. Official tower to be appointed; tower's list.
A. The Allendale Police Department shall appoint persons or companies
meeting the criteria set forth in this chapter and engaged in the
business of offering the services of a motor vehicle towing or wrecker
service, whereby damaged or disabled motor vehicles are towed or
otherwise removed from the place where they are damaged or disabled
by use of a tow vehicle, as defined in this chapter. Such persons or
companies shall be known as official towers.
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license that shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Not less than 75 days prior to the beginning of each three-year term of
official towers' license, the Borough shall advertise for applications for
towing licenses for providing towing services pursuant to this chapter.
The advertisement shall be published in the legal newspapers of the
Borough.
D. All applicants shall submit their applications at least 60 days prior to
the commencement date for each three-year period and the
applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter. The award of a license to the successful applicants
shall be subject to compliance with the license requirements of the
chapter.
E. For the purposes of the licenses to be awarded, pursuant to the chapter,
in the year in which it is adopted, the initial term of the license shall be
from the date the license is issued until December 31 of that year.
Licenses issued thereafter shall be for a three-year period commencing
§ 240-1 TAXATION § 240-2
237:577
§ 240-3. Services to be furnished.
§ 240-4. Application process.
on January 1 of the year in which it was issued and terminating three
years thereafter.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter that provide for a threeyear
term of the license, official towers shall submit no later than
December 1 of each year that the towing license is in effect, a detailed
certification certifying that the official tower meets the requirements of
this chapter in regard to the issuance of licenses. Said certification shall
be submitted to the Allendale Police Department for review and
approval by the designated administrative officers. Failure to submit
the certification or failure to continue to abide by the requirements of
this chapter in regard to the issuance of a towing license shall subject
the official tower to revocation of the license in accordance with the
procedures contained herein.
A. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair services to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled within the limits of the Borough, when requested to do so by
the Chief of Police or his authorized designee.
B. No official tower shall subcontract any work to be performed pursuant
to this chapter except in an emergency situation. The Chief of Police
will, within his reasonable discretion, maintain objective guidelines on
file as to emergencies and use of subcontractors. Any official tower
shall be responsible for the services performed by the subcontractor
and shall remain liable for any violation of this chapter by the
subcontractor.
A. Applications for inclusion on the official towers' list shall be made to the
Borough Council upon a form prepared by the Police Department and
approved by the Borough Attorney and shall contain all of the following
information:
(1) The name, residence and business address, and telephone number
of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a corporation,
the application shall contain the name, residence and business
address and telephone number of every stockholder owning more
than 10% of the issued stock.
(2) Such information as may be required by the Mayor and Council
concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter provided, showing that
the applicant meets the minimum standards of performance.
(3) Policies or certificates of insurance coverage as hereinafter
provided.
§ 240-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-4
237:578
(4) The names and addresses of two business references who have
known the applicant for at least two years.
(5) Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing
services anywhere in the Borough with a maximum response time
of 20 minutes, except when extraordinary circumstances occur.
(6) Certification that the applicant will be available for service on
business premises 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and that they
will abide by the fees contained in or referred to in this section.
(7) Consent to certification that will consent to appointment of the
Borough Clerk as the applicant's true and lawful attorney for the
purpose of acknowledging service out of any court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the applicant.
(8) A sketch plan showing the location of the storage area, the number
of cars that can be stored and the total square footage area of the
storage area.
(9) Agreement to abide by the general rules and regulations
established by the Police Department in connection with towing
procedures within the Borough.
B. The applicant shall submit completed duplicate applications to the
Borough Clerk who shall forward a copy to the Chief of Police for his
review and approval. The review by the Borough of Allendale Police
Department shall consist of the following:
(1) A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their driver's licenses suspended or revoked within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of driver's
license within the past year shall be a cause for disqualification
from inclusion on the official towers' list.
(2) An inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
area proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy
of the information contained in the application and to determine,
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the standards
of performance required by this chapter.
C. An applicant may be included on the official towers' list by the Borough
Council, by resolution adopted at a regular public meeting, when, from
a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, they find that all of the following
circumstances exist:
(1) The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 240-4 TAXATION § 240-4
237:579
§ 240-5. Issuance of license.
(2) The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and has
forwarded the required hold-harmless agreement and policies or
certificates of insurance which shall be reviewed and approved by
the Borough's Risk Management Consultant.
(3) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Police
Department designee.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a criminal offense or had their driver's license
suspended within the past year.
D. The Chief of Police shall conduct a review and render a report to the
Borough Council, recommending either approval or denial of the
application, within 45 days of receipt of the application. The Borough
Council shall take action with regard to the application within 45 days
of receipt of the report of the Police Department. The applicant, or its
representative, shall be given notice of the date on which the Borough
Council will consider the application and shall be permitted to appear
and be heard at that time.
E. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application shall be
provided to the applicant within seven days of the decision of the
Borough Council.
F. If the Borough Council fails to take action within 60 days of receipt of a
complete application, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided, the Chief of Police
shall issue the applicant an official towers' license to be utilized in
providing services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Said licenses shall be in form approved by the Borough Council.
C. The licenses shall be valid for the three-year period as set forth in the
chapter, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Borough Council for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly and
with intent to deceive made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(3) Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
§ 240-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-5
237:580
§ 240-6. Minimum standards of performance.
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, applicants must meet
the following minimum standards:
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
(5) Failure to annually certify compliance with the requirements of this
chapter as required by § 240-2.
D. The license fee for the license issued under this section shall be $100
per year. The fee for the annual review of certification and inspection of
vehicles and equipment submitted by the official tower pursuant to
§ 240-2 of this chapter shall be $50.
E. Licenses shall not be transferable without the consent of the Borough
Council; provided, however, that if the licensee demonstrates that the
transferee complies with all of the requirements of this chapter, such
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall own or lease for use in performing the
services required by the license the following pieces of equipment:
(a) One regular tow vehicle.
(b) One flatbed truck.
(c) One heavy-duty hydraulic wrecker with at least 30 ton capacity
and three-stage under-reach.
(2) Vehicle classes:
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a tow sling
or wheel lift assembly at least 100 feet of either three-eighthsinch
or seven-sixteenths-inch wire rope attached to a motor
driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(3) Every official tower shall have available a heavy-duty wrecker and
under reach shall be rated at 35,000 pounds and shall be capable of
towing new-style buses and trucks with fiberglass front ends.
(4) All equipment shall comply with all state and federal regulations
and all vehicle operators shall possess a C.D.L. license for over
26,100 pounds.
(5) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership, lease or other written agreement demonstrating
§ 240-5 TAXATION § 240-6
237:581
availability as needed of the vehicles which will be utilized to
provide services pursuant to this section.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicles, visible from 360°
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night, amber-colored.
(d) Appropriate chains/wire rope/nylon straps for pulling or
securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or pry-bar,
a set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound or larger
fire extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or
similar warning devices for placement at the scene of an
accident or behind a disabled vehicle, at least 40 pounds of dry
sand or a drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled onto the
roadway and a container of sufficient size to remove the used
compound, a sufficient quantity and types of tools to enable the
tow operator to perform proper and adequate emergency
repair services for the tow.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all
state, federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining
to safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be
subject to inspection by the Police Department at any time. No
changes may be made in said vehicles or equipment unless prior
written approval is obtained from the Borough.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official towers'
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such manner and of such lettering as conforms to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
(4) All towing operators' trucks must be equipped with either two-way
radio and/or mobile telephone communications equipment with
their principal place of business including their garage and/or
office facilities to ensure the proper availability of services and
equipment on behalf of the Borough and motorists.
(5) The towing operators' wrecker(s) and all other vehicles shall be
properly licensed and registered with the New Jersey Division of
Motor Vehicles.
§ 240-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-6
237:582
(a) Towing operators' vehicles shall display New Jersey
commercial license plates.
C. Minimum personnel requirements; availability and response time.
(1) Official towers shall have available, at all times, a minimum of two
persons to provide the services required by this chapter. All
persons employed by official towers to provide the services
required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements and
be subject to the following regulations. They shall:
(a) Be competent mechanics able to provide minimum road service
for disabled vehicles;
(b) Have a valid driver's license having no restrictions or
conditional endorsements other than a condition requiring the
wearing of eyeglasses;
(c) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times;
(d) Obey all traffic laws and regulations;
(e) Be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the
Borough and be approved by the Borough prior to rendering
any services pursuant to this chapter.
(f) Not have been convicted of a crime nor had their driving
privileges suspended or revoked within the past year.
(2) Employees of the towing operator, in responding to a call, shall
request and be afforded police assistance during the course of
providing towing, emergency road services or removal of
abandoned or accident vehicles when such employees find it
necessary to turn around, back up, tow in the opposite direction of
traffic, or cross the median.
(3) A towing operator shall not permit a vehicle to be removed from the
site of a vehicular accident, the scene of a crime or any other
instance or situation without the prior approval and permission of a
police officer and/or superior at the scene.
D. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an outside secured storage area
meeting the following requirements:
(a) The storage area shall be at least 6,000 square feet and
capable of storing a minimum of 10 passenger vehicles and one
tractor and trailer. The area shall have additional storage of at
least 800 square feet of storage facilities to hold and protect
"police hold" vehicles.
(b) The location of the towing facility and storage area shall be
within a one-mile radius from any borderline of the Borough of
§ 240-6 TAXATION § 240-6
237:583
§ 240-7. Utilization of official towers' list.
Allendale. This location is established to ensure reasonable
response and towing distances.
(c) The storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use
and shall have video surveillance.
(e) The storage facility shall be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year and shall be open to the public on weekdays during
normal business hours and for four hours on Saturdays. The
applicant shall specify the hours on which the facility will be
open on Saturdays. The applicant is not required to be open on
Sundays.
(f) The official tower shall have an employee on duty during all
hours in which the storage facility is open.
(g) The hours of release for any impounded vehicles are Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. If the owner of the
vehicle is requesting that the vehicle be released after hours,
there will be a fee of $60 for after-hours release.
(h) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of
ownership or lease of the storage area.
(i) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper
and safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter.
The official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by
such vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage
areas.
A. Official towers shall be placed on the official towers' list at the
beginning of each three-year period in accordance with the procedures
as set forth in this chapter. The official towers shall rotate on the list for
one week at a time or for such a period as designated by the Chief of
Police. The one-week rotation shall commence at 12:00 a.m. Sunday
and terminate at 11:59 p.m. the following Saturday.
B. The Borough shall request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the
dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the estimated time of arrival. If
no tow vehicle is available or if, in the discretion of the Borough official
making the request, the response time is insufficient under the
circumstances to properly protect the public health, safety or welfare,
the next official tower on the list shall be called for that particular
§ 240-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-7
237:584
§ 240-8. Hold-harmless agreement.
Applicant shall agree in writing to assume the defense of and indemnify
and hold harmless the Borough, its elected officials, boards, commissions,
officers, employees and agents, from all suits, actions, damages or claims,
fees, costs, expenses, fines or penalties to which the Borough may be
subjected of any kind and nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by,
arising out of or as a consequence of the provisions of towing, wrecking,
storage and/or emergency services provided at the request of the Borough
pursuant to this chapter. Official towers shall enter into a hold-harmless
agreement in a form to be prepared by the Borough Attorney prior to being
included on the official towers' list.
§ 240-9. Insurance.
The tower shall maintain during the life of its license insurance policies
of the type and with the minimum limits indicated below and in a form
satisfactory to the Borough. The tower shall provide a certified copy of the
policies and/or certificates of insurance satisfactory to the Borough prior to
commencement of work. All policies and/or certificates shall be submitted
to the Borough Risk Management Consultant for review and approval.
towing event. For the purposes of this chapter, any response time
greater than 20 minutes is insufficient for all police service requests.
C. All requests for service shall be made by the Police Department.
D. The Police Department shall request service only from official towers;
provided, however, that if no emergency or imminent road hazard
exists, the Borough shall request such service from such other person
as the owner of the motor vehicle in need of such services may request;
and provided further that, if none of the official towers are available or
able to provide such services as are requested by the Borough, or if an
emergency exists, the Borough may request such services from any
other available source.
E. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Borough over any other requests which may be received by the
official towers.
A. Garage liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage)
per occurrence including premises operations and products/completed
operations.
B. Automobile and general property damage.
(1) Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage) per occurrence.
§ 240-7 TAXATION § 240-9
237:585
(2) General property damage and liability insurance. Limit of liability
shall not be less than $1,000,000 combined single limit.
C. Garagekeepers' insurance. Physical damage insurance policies shall be
specifically endorsed to provide direct primary insurance, where
applicable, for vehicles in tow, possession of, or storage on property
owned or controlled by the tower. Limit of said coverage shall be not
less than $100,000.
D. Excess umbrella insurance. Limit of liability shall be not less than
$1,000,000 providing protection in excess of the one-million-dollar
garage, auto liability coverage and general property damage and
liability coverage.
E. On all liability policies, the Borough shall be added as an additional
insured, and insurance policies and/or certificates shall indicate such
coverage as primary coverage notwithstanding any insurance carried
by the Borough.
F. Workers' compensation insurance. New Jersey Statutory coverage,
including employer's liability coverage.
G. The tower shall indemnify the Borough and the public against any loss
due to injuries, accident or damages of any character whatsoever where
any such damage is the result of act or omission of the tower, his agents
or employees in or due to the execution of the work called for under the
contract.
H. Certified copies of all insurance policies provided above or certificates
thereof satisfactory to the Borough of Allendale shall be furnished
forthwith. Each such policy or certificate shall contain a provision that
it is not subject to material change, cancellation or nonrenewal unless
30 days prior written notice via certified mail/return receipt shall have
been given to the Borough of Allendale by the tower's insurer. These
must be received 30 days prior to commencement of work.
I. The providing of any insurance required herein does not relieve the
tower of any of the responsibilities or obligation assumed by the tower
for which the tower may be liable by law or otherwise.
J. If any policies contain deductible or copayments, it shall be the
responsibility of the tower to pay such sums at the same time a claim is
settled by the tower's insurance company.
K. If any policies contain limits of liability with an aggregate limit, the
tower or tower's insurance company shall provide the Borough
quarterly during the policy period a statement evidencing the limits of
liability required under the contract to be in force.
L. Policies of insurance required by this section shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is cancelled,
terminated or coverage decreased in amount, same shall constitute a
§ 240-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-9
237:586
§ 240-10. Towing and storage fee schedule.
material breach of the license and the tower shall be immediately
removed from the official towers' list until such time as required
coverage is reinstated.
M. All policies shall be written in either a company licensed to do business
in the State of New Jersey or a New-Jersey-eligible surplus lines
company, with a minimum Best rating A-Vii (A minus seven). They shall
be written on an ISO (Insurance Services Office) form or better.
A. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen, may not exceed the fees
established by the New Jersey Department of Insurance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 17:33B-47.
B. The following is a fee schedule for basic automobile, motorcycles,
motorized bikes, towing services and heavy-duty recovery.
(1) Basic towing service anywhere within the Borough of Allendale or
to storage yard (two axle vehicle), under 8,000 pounds.
(a) Wheel-lift rate: $100.
(b) Flatbed rate: $125.
(c) Additional axles: $35 each.
(2) Basic towing service within the Borough of Allendale or to storage
yard (two-axle vehicle), 8,001 to 16,000 pounds.
(a) Towing rate: $250.
(b) Additional axles: $35 each.
(3) Motorcycle rate: $100.
(4) Heavy-duty towing within the Borough of Allendale or to storage
yard (over 16,001 pounds).
(a) Rate is per-hour with a one-hour minimum: $325.
(b) Driveshaft removal: $45.
(c) Brake release: $45.
(5) Air-cushion device in heavy-duty recovery: $550 per hour.
C. The following is a fee schedule for storage services of all types of
vehicles:
(1) Inside building, storage facility (per calendar day):
(a) Under 10,000 pounds: $45 per day.
§ 240-9 TAXATION § 240-10
237:587
(b) Each additional axle: $20 each, per day.
(2) Outside secured storage facility (per calendar day):
(a) Under 10,000 pounds: $35.
(b) Additional axle: $20 each per day.
(c) Over 10,000 pounds: $75 per day.
(d) Tandem axle truck: $100 per day.
(e) Tractor-trailer combo: $140 per day.
D. Emergency road service: $60, plus actual fuel costs.
(1) Emergency road service includes jump starts, bringing up to two
gallons of fuel, and tire change.
(2) Vehicle lockouts: $75.
(3) If a tow results, there will be no charge for road service, except cost
of gas if placed in the vehicle's tank.
E. Rates for vehicle recovery and winching:
(1) Light-duty:
(a) Winching (car does not roll or has flat tires): $75.
(b) Off-road recovery or up-righting vehicle: $150 per hour.
(2) Medium-duty:
(a) Winching/off-road recovery or up-righting: $250 per hour.
(3) Heavy-duty:
(a) Winching/off-road recovery or up-righting: $425, per hour.
F. Additional services:
(1) Axle/driveshaft removal: $45.
(2) Hookup air: $25.
(3) Crash wrap (if windows are broken or will not close):
(a) Per side window: $25.
(b) Front/rear window: $40.
(4) Waiting Time, to be charged in fifteen-minute increments with a
fifteen-minute minimum, beginning after the first 15 minutes on
scene: $100 per hour.
(5) Clean-up fees:
§ 240-10 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-10
237:588
§ 240-11. Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Cleanup of debris: $35.
(b) Speedy dry: $30, first bag.
[1] Each additional bag: $12.
(6) Extra personnel: $75 per hour per man.
(7) Level 3 recovery supervisor: $90 per hour.
(8) If tower is called by police and arrive on scene and owner refuses
service or no service is required, there is a fee of $60 for the tow
truck responding.
G. Heavy vehicle recovery (Over 16,000 pounds):
(1) To provide heavy vehicle recovery, the Borough of Allendale
requires that the licensee have on scene a recovery supervisor with
Level 3 certification from the Towing and Recovery Association of
America (TRAA) or another nationally recognized certification.
(2) To perform heavy vehicle recovery under this chapter the licensee
must:
(a) Visually document the recovery scene through photos or
videotape.
(b) Prepare a written report of all procedures employed, actions
taken, equipment used and manpower requirements to
complete the recovery process in the safest manner and
provide a copy to the vehicle owner with the statement of
services.
(c) Prepare an itemized billing invoice for all services rendered.
(3) If the licensee finds it necessary, due to the nature of the recovery
to contract additional recovery service to supplement its
equipment and manpower recovery, the contracted service
providers must work under the supervision of the licensee. The
licensee may not subcontract the entire recovery. In the event that
a heavy-duty operator is unable to handle the recovery then the
next heavy-duty wrecker on the rotating list shall be called.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Borough Municipal Building and Police
Department. Copies shall also be made available to the public at each
official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post in a prominent place at each storage area,
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of the fees that may be charged
for all services provided pursuant to this chapter.
§ 240-10 TAXATION § 240-11
237:589
§ 240-12. Dispute resolution and license suspension or revocation.
C. The Borough reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between an official tower and the Borough is one of an
independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any manner
whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any employee or
agent furnished by any party be construed to be an employee or agent
of the other party. Inclusion on the official towner's list shall not be
construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership, association,
contract of employment or profit-sharing agreement.
E. The municipality shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this chapter
unless those services are performed for the Borough vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
motor vehicle and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees. No licensee shall discriminate as to hiring or
employment practices. Licensees shall be required to sign a
nondiscrimination statement.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
available for inspection by the Borough at any time during normal
business hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official
tower at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as long as the
requirements of this paragraph are met.
H. The official tower shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
I. Duty wrecker services appointed and continuously serving prior to
adoption of storage location requirements under § 240-6D shall be
exempt from the one-mile storage yard distance requirement.
J. Duty wrecker services that more than double all of the minimum
equipment requirements of § 240-6 may make written application to the
Chief of Police requesting additional rotation considerations.
A. In the event a complaint is received by the Borough of Allendale
involving the improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an
official tower, in violation of this chapter, excessive charges or damage
to a motor vehicle while in custody of the tower, written notice of same
shall be provided by the Chief of Police to the official tower involved.
§ 240-11 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-12
237:590
§ 240-13. Violations and penalties.
The tower shall have the opportunity to respond in writing within seven
days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response, or within 21 days of
receipt of the complaint, if no response is received, the matter shall be
presented by the Chief of Police to the Mayor and Council.
C. The Mayor and Council shall, thereafter, consider the matter at the
regular public meeting and may request that the complainant and the
tower involved appear and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. After considering the matter and the evidence presented, the Mayor
and Council shall make certain findings and conclusions relative to the
complaint which shall constitute their decision. If the Council finds in
favor of the complainant and against the official tower, the Council may
consider and impose the following penalties.
(1) Suspension of the official towers' license;
(2) Revocation of such license for a fixed period or duration;
(3) Permanent revocation of the official towers' license;
(4) Such other penalty as the Mayor and Council deems just and
appropriate under the circumstances. In considering the imposition
of a suspension, revocation or other penalty, the Council shall take
into account factors including, but not limited to, any prior
violations of the tower, the nature and seriousness of the complaint,
the danger to the health safety and welfare of the public.
E. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000; and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
the official towers' license.
C. The Borough Police Department or any member thereof is hereby
declared to be the enforcement agency of this chapter in accordance
with due process of law.
§ 240-12 TAXATION § 240-14
237:591
§ 240-14. Severability.
Each section of this chapter and every subsection hereof shall be deemed
independent, separate and distinct from all other sections, and the holding
of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any section or part hereof.
§ 240-15. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this chapter
are repealed or otherwise modified, including §§ 240-1 to 240-18.95
§ 240-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 244
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 6, Art. II.
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Sidewalk area maintenance — See Ch. 233,
Art. II.
Visual obstructions — See Ch. 256.
95.Editor's Note: This section refers to former Ch. 240, Towing, adopted 7-23-1998.
§ 240-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 240-16
237:592
ARTICLE I
Care, Maintenance and Control
[Adopted 1-24-1963 by the Shade Tree Commission (Ch. 55, Art. II
of the 1967 Code)]
§ 244-1. Repealer.
An ordinance entitled "An amendment to an ordinance of October 1937
relating to the planting, protection, regulation and control of shade trees in
the streets and highways and of public parks in the Borough of Allendale,
New Jersey," adopted by the Shade Tree Commission, September 6, 1960,
be and the same is hereby repealed.
§ 244-2. Supplying trees; types. [Amended 6-25-1992]
Any owner, person, firm or corporation erecting or constructing or causing
to be erected or constructed a new residence or building or installing
or causing to be installed improvements in any zone of the Borough of
Allendale shall provide shade trees between nine and 10 feet from the
curb, between the curb and the property line, and the same shall be placed
at fifty-foot intervals and each shade tree shall have a diameter of not
less than two inches, as measured 18 inches above the ground, nor less
than 10 feet high. An additional five-foot easement beyond the existing
right-of-way of streets in the Borough is herein designated for shade tree
planting, in accordance with this section, when sidewalks, overhead wires
or underground cables would interfere with planting within the legal street
right-of-way, and subject to agreement of the property owner. This easement
may also be used to offset the tree line for a more aesthetic effect when
desirable, subject to the agreement of the property owner. Trees planted
within this easement will be subject to all other regulations of this article.
They must be well branched, the branches to start not less than six feet from
the crown of the root system. The type of tree shall be selected from the
following and shall be planted in accordance with regulations of the Shade
Tree Commission: white oak, red oak, sweet gum, black oak, Norway Maple,
sour gum, scarlet oak, sugar maple, ginkgo, pin oak, small- or large-leaf
lindens or any other tree approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 244-3. Exception when shade trees exist.
The Shade Tree Commission may waive the provisions of § 244-2 hereof if
there are existing shade trees growing in the areas where planting would be
required, which trees are in compliance with the requirements of the Shade
Tree Commission.
§ 244-4. Planting; approval; performance guaranty. [Amended
11-29-1973]
Shade trees must be planted and approved by the Shade Tree Commission
before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the abutting buildings and
premises, unless a performance guaranty assuring the ultimate installation
§ 244-1 TAXATION § 244-4
237:593
of shade trees has been accepted and approved by the Borough Council.
The amount of said performance guaranty in respect to shade trees shall be
calculated on the basis of $150 for each tree required.
§ 244-5. Release of guaranty; indemnification.
The owner, person, firm or corporation installing said shade trees shall,
upon acceptance of the shade trees by the Shade Tree Commission and
upon release of the performance guaranty by the Borough Council, furnish
a maintenance guaranty for a period of at least three years, in an amount
not less than 25% of the performance guaranty, to indemnify the Borough
against losses occasioned by defective workmanship or failure of trees to
survive.
§ 244-6. Tree replacements.
All shade trees which fail to survive for a period of 12 months following the
acceptance thereof by the Shade Tree Commission shall be replaced by the
owner, person, firm or corporation planting the same, at no cost or expense
to the Borough or the Shade Tree Commission. The replacement shall
be made within 60 days following written demand for such replacement
or within such time as this period may be extended by the Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 244-7. Tree permit; exception for public utility.
No owner, tenant, person, firm or corporation shall cut, break, injure or
remove any tree on a public highway, street or park of the Borough of
Allendale without a written permit from the Shade Tree Commission, except
that a duly franchised public utility need not obtain such permit in the case
of an emergency.
§ 244-8. Practices requiring permit; exception for public utility.
No owner, tenant, person, firm or corporation shall place rope, wire, sign,
poster or other fixture on a tree or a tree guard on a public highway, street
or park, or injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any tree
or plant in any highway, street or public park of the Borough of Allendale,
without a written permit from the Shade Tree Commission, provided that a
duly franchised public utility need not obtain such permit in the case of an
emergency.
§ 244-9. Animals.
No person shall fasten or attach an animal to a tree on a public highway,
street or public park, or cause an animal to stand so that the animal can
injure any tree, shrub or plant.
§ 244-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 244-10
237:594
§ 244-10. Impeding root system area.
No person, firm or corporation shall, without the written permit of the
Shade Tree Commission, place or maintain, or cause to be placed or
maintained, upon the ground in a public highway. any stone, cement or
other sidewalk, or any stone, cement or other substance, which shall
impede the free access of water and air to the roots of any tree in such
highway. The provisions of this section are not intended to supersede or
in any way conflict with the provisions of the Revised Land Subdivision
Ordinance96 relating to sidewalks, curbs and paving.
§ 244-11. Harmful chemicals, vapors and fumes.
No person, firm or corporation shall pour salt water or other chemical
upon or near any public street or highway whereon trees are planted or
growing, nor shall any person, firm or corporation build fires or station any
incinerator, tar kettle, road roller or other engine on or near a public street
or highway, in any such manner that the vapor or fumes therefrom may
injure any tree or trees.
§ 244-12. Tree guards.
Throughout the period of any construction, alteration or repair to any
building or structure, or in the improvement or repair of a street or a
highway, the one causing said construction or improvement shall place such
guards around all nearby trees on the public highway or street as may be
needed to effectually prevent injury to shade trees in abutting areas.
§ 244-13. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, tenant, person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction by the Judge, be subject to a
fine in an amount not exceeding $200 for each violation in accordance with
the provisions of Section 9 of the enabling act, N.J.S.A. 40:64-12, and the
funds so collected shall be paid over to the custodian of municipal funds.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 244-10 TAXATION § 244-13
237:595

ARTICLE II
Protection of Trees
[Adopted 5-3-1999 by the Governing Body]
§ 244-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
CLEAR-CUTTING — The removal of substantially all trees from a lot.
DRIPLINE — A line connecting the tips of the outermost branches of a tree
projected vertically onto the ground.
ENDANGERED SPECIES — Any species of tree threatened with
obstruction, including but not limited to species of trees so noted in state
and/or national registers.
HISTORIC — Any tree(s) representing or approaching in girth the largest of
its species in the state; tree(s) dedicated to or commemorating an individual
or event.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A barrier constructed to protect the root system
or trunk of a tree from damage during construction or from equipment
or soil or material deposits. Such a barrier may consist of a snow fence,
sawhorses, or other similar structures approved by the Property
Maintenance Officer and sufficient to protect the root system or trunk of a
tree from the aforementioned damage.[Amended 11-8-2005]
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.[Amended 11-8-2005]
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental or public entity, body or board.[Amended 11-8-2005]
SPECIMEN — Tree(s) which by singular nature, condition, size, location
and/or appearance impart particular value to a property or landscape.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant having a diameter greater than
four inches measured at a point 4 1/2 inches above the ground.
§ 244-15. Prohibited activities. [Amended 11-8-2005]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, corporation, or board shall
do or cause to be done by others, either purposely, carelessly or negligently,
any of the following acts upon property within the Borough:
A. Cut, destroy, remove or substantially injure any tree.
B. Place or maintain upon the ground any substance which would impede
the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree.
C. Apply any substance to any part of a tree, including roots, with the
intention to injure or destroy the tree.
§ 244-14 TAXATION § 244-15
237:597
§ 244-16. Requirement for permit; exceptions. [Amended 3-8-2001;
4-11-2002; 11-8-2005]
Except as provided for herein, no person, firm, corporation, or board shall
cut, remove, injure or damage up to six trees per year (defined as a twelvemonth
period, not January to December calendar year) with a diameter
in excess of six inches measured on said tree at a height of four feet
above the level of the ground upon any property within the Borough of
Allendale, unless he has first obtained a permit therefor, in accordance with
the regulations and provisions of this article. If a person, firm, corporation,
or board cuts, removes or damages six trees per year, he may not cut or
remove any additional trees for a period of 12 months from the date of last
tree cut or removed. The provisions of this section shall be retroactive for
a period of 12 months immediately prior to the effective date of this article.
Excepted from this shall be:
D. Clear-cutting of any land.
A. All land-clearing operations as authorized in accordance with a site
plan approval or subdivision approval and conditions imposed with
respect to tree removal and planting granted by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment of the Borough of Allendale in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-20 (exclusive authority of Planning Board
and Board of Adjustment). Under no circumstances shall clear-cutting
be permitted on any property.
B. Trees located on a commercial nursery or orchard.
C. Any tree cut or removed for purposes of logging or tree farming in
accordance with a management plan of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board and Shade Tree Commission and filed on record in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
D. The cutting, pruning or trimming of trees in a manner which is not
harmful to the health of the tree.
E. The cutting, destruction or removal of trees which are diseased or dead
or which endanger public safety, to be determined by the Property
Maintenance Officer, following advice from the Shade Tree
Commission. Alternately, the homeowner may cut up to an additional
four trees, for a total of 10 per year, only after obtaining a written
opinion from a New Jersey certified tree expert or a New Jersey
certified arborist which confirms said trees are diseased or dead or
endanger public safety, and the written opinion is presented to Borough
prior to the start of any tree work. In that event, the homeowner shall
bear all the costs associated with same. [Amended 5-26-2016]
F. The cutting, removal or destruction of a tree as necessary to construct
any structure for which a building permit has been issued by the
Borough Construction Official.
§ 244-15 ALLENDALE CODE § 244-16
237:598
§ 244-17. Application for permit.
§ 244-18. Permit required. [Amended 3-8-2001]
The Construction Code Official, except in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-20 (exclusive authority of Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment) shall not issue a building permit until a tree removal permit has
been issued and approved in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 244-19. Erection of protective barriers.
No materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within
the dripline area of any tree located an any premises for which a building
permit was issued for construction. The applicant shall protect the trees by
erecting a protective barrier around the area defined by the dripline, except
G. The cutting, removal or destruction of any tree pursuant to an order or
directive of any municipal, county or state agency or court.
H. Activities involving trees within the paved area of the public highways
and public rights-of-way. The Shade Tree Commission shall review and
approve the trees that are to be removed in the public right-of-way,
public highway or publicly owned properties in areas that are not to be
paved.97
A. Any person, firm, corporation or board desiring to destroy, cut or
remove any such tree(s) up to the aforesaid numbers and size(s) shall
apply to the Borough of Allendale Property Maintenance Officer for a
permit to remove such tree(s). The applicant shall state on the
application: [Amended 3-8-2001; 11-8-2005]
(1) Identify, by street, block and lot number, the land upon which the
tree(s) is located.
(2) Provide the name, address and telephone number of the owner or
duly authorized agent of said owner, where applicable.
(3) Identify and place on the site plan application the location of said
tree(s) sought to be cut, removed or destroyed.
(4) Mark said tree(s) on site by visible, weatherproof and reasonably
tamperproof means, said tree(s) not to be sprayed with paint or
chemicals or otherwise permanently marked, damaged or
defaced.98
B. At the time of filing an application, the applicant shall pay a fee of $20
pursuant to § 120-23. [Added 10-23-2014]
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, regarding certain developed, residential lots, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-26-2016.
98.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding payment of an application fee at time of
filing the application, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
5-10-2001.
§ 244-16 TAXATION § 244-19
237:599
that when the dripline extends to within 12 feet of a building or extends
over driveways, recreation areas or parking areas, the following shall apply:
§ 244-20. Application review. [Amended 11-8-2005]
Upon the Property Maintenance Officer’s receiving the application for the
cutting, removal, or destruction of trees, he shall review the site to
determine whether the removal or destruction of said tree(s) shall change
the drainage conditions, cause soil erosion, increase the dust, decrease
the fertility of the soil or deteriorate the property value, and shall further
determine the overall physical conditions of the land and the deleterious
effect thereon. In reviewing the aforesaid items, the Property Maintenance
Officer shall utilize the services of the Borough Engineer and the Shade
Tree Commission and request and consider a report and recommendation
from both of them with regard to same. The Borough Engineer and Shade
Tree Commission shall provide their report and recommendation to the
Property Maintenance Officer within 14 days from his request and, in the
event that no report or recommendation is provided within said fourteenday
period, the Property Maintenance Officer may render his decision
without same. In addition to the aforesaid items, the Property Maintenance
Officer shall also consider the following in making his determination to issue
or deny the permit:
A. The position of said protective barrier may be moved so as to allow a
working area of 12 feet from the base of the building.
B. Materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits may be placed within
12 feet of the building.
C. In the proximity of any impermeable surface, the protective barriers
may be placed upon the border of driveways, recreation areas and
parking areas.
D. Materials, machinery and temporary soil deposits may be placed within
the dripline upon impermeable surfaces only.
E. Where change of slope or development will cause harm to a mature,
historic, endangered species or specimen tree, and in the event that
said tree(s) would otherwise be desirable, a well or other means of
protective barrier shall be erected accordingly, said barrier not to
encroach on the area required to sustain life.
A. Whether the area where the tree is located shall be used for a building
or other structure, or a sewerage line, said tree located within 12 feet of
any of the foregoing; whether the area where the tree is located shall be
used for a patio, a driveway, a recreation area, a roadway or a drainage
right-of-way, said tree located within four feet of any of the foregoing.
B. Whether the tree or trees are likely to cause a hardship upon the
applicant or place the community in danger or affect deleteriously an
adjacent property owner.
§ 244-19 ALLENDALE CODE § 244-20
237:600
§ 244-21. Time for decision. [Amended 11-8-2005]
The Property Maintenance Officer shall, within 20 days after the filing of an
application, (weather permitting) render his decision to grant or deny the
permit, and he shall advise the applicant.
§ 244-22. Appeal to Mayor and Council. [Amended 11-8-2005]
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision regarding the tree
removal permit to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Allendale within
10 days of the issuance or denial of the tree removal permit. Said appeal
shall be by written notice of appeal to the Borough Clerk. Upon receipt of
said appeal, the Mayor and Council shall proceed to hear and decide said
appeal upon notice to the applicant within 20 days after the filing of said
notice of appeal. The Mayor and Council may, in its discretion, and upon
complete review of the application and after hearing the testimony of the
Property Maintenance Officer and the applicant, reverse, modify or affirm
the aforesaid decision.
§ 244-23. Waiver. [Amended 11-8-2005]
Upon written application to the Property Maintenance Officer, and for
good cause shown, the Property Maintenance Officer may waive any of the
requirements of this article.
§ 244-24. Enforcement. [Amended 11-8-2005]
The Property Maintenance Officer is designated as the enforcing agent for
this article.
§ 244-25. Replacement and treatment of trees.
C. Whether the cutting, removal and destruction of trees shall affect the
drainage conditions, cause or contribute to soil erosion, increase the
dust and decrease the fertility of the soil on the land under
consideration.
A. Any tree destroyed or removed in violation of this article shall be
replaced by the owner with another tree of the same species at least
two inches in diameter measured at a point four feet above the ground.
In the event that a tree which is not permitted to be removed, is injured
during building or other construction work, such tree(s) shall be
promptly treated in an approved manner.
B. The Property Maintenance Officer of the Borough may order any tree
work or other activity which is carried on in violation of any tree
removal permit or any provision of this article to be stopped forthwith.
The order shall be issued in writing and a copy served upon any person
engaged in tree work upon the subject lot. If no such person is present
upon the lot, then the order shall be served upon the applicant, but if no
permit has been issued so to such lot, then the order shall be served
§ 244-20 TAXATION § 244-25
237:601
§ 244-26. Violations and penalties.
upon the owner of the lot. Thereafter, except for work as is necessary
to remedy the violation, any further work shall comply with the terms
and conditions of any permit and the provisions of this article. [Added
11-8-2006]
A. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both,
for each and every offense. In the event of violations involving more
than one lot or more than one tree, a violation as to each such lot or tree
shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. If required replacement work is not completed within 30 days of written
notification to do so, a municipal lien shall be placed upon all affected
lots and such lien shall not be discharged from such lots until such
replacement work is completed.
§ 244-25 ALLENDALE CODE § 244-26
237:602
Chapter 248
VACANT/ABANDONED PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and debris — See Ch. 97.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Nuisances — See Ch. 172.
Unsafe structures and equipment — See Ch.
180.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
§ 244-26 TAXATION § 244-26
237:603

ARTICLE I
Registration and Maintenance
[Adopted 5-22-2014 by Ord. No. 14-09]
§ 248-1. Purpose.
Whereas, contained within the Borough of Allendale are certain structures
which are vacant in whole or large part and some of which have been
abandoned; and
Whereas, in many cases, the owners or responsible parties of those
structures are neglectful of them, are not maintaining them or securing
them to an adequate standard for the protection of the public health,
safety or welfare, nor are they preparing or restoring those structures to
productive use; and
Whereas, it has been established that those vacant and abandoned
structures cause a severe harm to the health, safety and general welfare
of the community, including diminution of neighboring property values,
increased risk of fire and potential increases in criminal activity and public
health risks; and
Whereas, the Borough of Allendale incurs disproportionate costs in order
to deal with the problems directly related to these vacant and abandoned
structures, including, but not limited to, excessive police calls, fire calls and
property maintenance inspections and violations; and
Whereas, it is in the public interest of the Borough of Allendale for the
Borough to establish minimum standards of accountability on the owners
or responsible parties of said vacant and abandoned structures in order to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and visitors
of the Borough of Allendale; and
Whereas, it is in the public interest for the Borough to impose a fee in
conjunction with registration of vacant and/or abandoned structures in light
of the disproportionate costs imposed on the Borough by the presence of
these structures.
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Allendale that Chapter 248 is created to read as follows.
§ 248-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any title holder, any agent of the title holder having authority to
act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Section 17, as amended
by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by the Borough of
Allendale to have authority to act with respect to the property.
§ 248-1 TAXATION § 248-2
237:605
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including, but not limited to, any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided, however,
that any property where all building systems are in working order, where
the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in habitable condition, and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this article.
§ 248-3. Registration requirements.
Effective June 1, 2014, the owner of any vacant property, as defined herein,
shall, within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant property
or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property with the
Property Maintenance Officer on forms provided by the Borough for such
purposes. Failure to receive notice from the municipality shall not constitute
grounds for failing to register the property.
A. Each party having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of
any applicable code; and the name, street address, telephone number,
and e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of
the firms individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the
property, who shall be available by telephone or in person on a twentyfour-
hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be
the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement
must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the
State of New Jersey.
C. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration, except for the initial registration time which shall be
prorated through December 31. The owner shall be required to renew
the registration annually as long as the building remains a vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed in this article for each vacant property registered.
D. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date, but not the escrow fee.
§ 248-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 248-3
237:606
§ 248-4. Access to vacant properties.
The owner of any vacant property registered under this article shall provide
access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, upon reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such inspections shall
be carried out on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m.
or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between the owner and
the Borough.
§ 248-5. Responsible owner or agent.
§ 248-6. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be $100. The fee for each
subsequent years renewal shall be $100. In addition to such registration
fee, the owner shall post an escrow for each and every vacant property
according to the annual fee schedule below. Said escrow shall be used for
any costs expended by the Borough in maintaining, abating, or correcting
any nuisance, property maintenance violation, or securing the premises
from unauthorized entry and any other matter that the Borough deems
appropriate for the public's health, safety and welfare.
§ 248-7. Vacant property escrow schedule.
E. The owner shall notify the Property Maintenance Officer within 30
calendar days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Property
Maintenance Officer for such purpose.
F. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
owner or owners of the building.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate him- or herself as agent or as the individual responsible
for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Borough of Allendale by regular and certified mail.
§ 248-3 TAXATION § 248-7
237:607
§ 248-8. Requirements of owners of vacant property.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant, shall, within 30 days thereof:
§ 248-9. Rights of the Borough.
A. Escrow schedule. [Amended 7-28-2016]
Type Amount
Initial registration $1,000 (year of registration)
First renewal $2,000 (2nd calendar year)
Second renewal $3,000 (3rd calendar year)
Subsequent renewal $5,000 (4th or more calendar years)
B. The initial escrow shall be deposited at the time of registration, and all
subsequent years shall be posted by January 31 of the following year. If
at any point the escrow shall become deficient, the owner shall
replenish the escrow account according to year since initial
registration. Any unused escrow amount shall be refunded to the owner
at the time the premises becomes occupied and not subject to the
requirements of this article.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Borough Code, or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes, until the building is
again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of
the building is complete; and
B. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, swimming pools, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys,
retaining walls, attached or unattached accessory structures and
driveways, are well-maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter,
and grass and weed growth.
A. If the owner is in violation of any terms and conditions of this article,
the Borough shall send notice to the owner, via certified and regular
mail, as identified on the registration, that such violation must be
remedied within 30 days. If such violation is not remedied within 30
days of such notice, the Borough shall cause a summons to be issued.
B. In addition to such summons, the Borough shall have the right to
expend public funds in order to abate the nuisance, correct or remedy
the violation, or secure the premises against unauthorized entry, and
such costs shall be paid from the escrow established pursuant to
§ 248-6.
C. If the amount of escrow posted shall be insufficient to reimburse the
municipality for such costs, then notice shall be given to the owner, and
§ 248-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 248-9
237:608
§ 248-10. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Officer shall enforce this article.
§ 248-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 248-12. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 248-13. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 248-14. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
any unpaid costs after 30 days shall become a lien upon the property in
accordance with the provisions of § 199-19C and applicable law.
D. For the purposes of obnoxious weeds or growth, the cutting of the
grass, or removal of snow and ice, the notice provided to the owner
pursuant to Subsection A above shall include such notice that, unless
the owner shall object, a regular schedule shall be established between
the contractor and the Borough to trim said obnoxious weeds or
growth, to cut the grass, or to remove the snow and ice on the property.
Said regular schedule of work shall be no more than twice a month.
A. For purposes of this article, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions
contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this article.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $2,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this article shall be recoverable from the owner.
§ 248-9 TAXATION § 248-14
237:609
Chapter 252
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 194.
Vehicles in parks — See Ch. 203.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
Towing — See Ch. 240.
§ 248-14 ALLENDALE CODE § 248-14
237:610
ARTICLE I
Left-Hand Turns
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 72, Art. I of the 1967 Code]
§ 252-1. Specific intersections.
Left-hand turns by operators of motor vehicles are hereby prohibited by
traffic moving in a southerly direction on West Crescent Avenue, and traffic
moving in a westerly direction on Park Avenue, at the intersection formed
by both of said public streets.
§ 252-2. Erection of signs.
The foregoing prohibition shall be clearly indicated by buttons, markers or
other directional signs within said intersection and as otherwise provided
for by law, and appropriate no-left-turn signs shall be installed as required
and in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways.
§ 252-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the penalties provided for by statute.
§ 252-4. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law, and upon approval in writing by the Director of Motor Vehicles of
the State of New Jersey as provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8, and by approval of
the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Bergen as evidenced by
resolution.99
99.Editor's Note: See the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-1 TAXATION § 252-4
237:611

ARTICLE II
Parking and Through Streets
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 72, Art. II of the 1967 Code]
§ 252-5. Definitions. [Added 11-14-1974]
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-6. No parking on specific streets. [Amended 9-28-1967;
11-14-1974; 3-11-1976]
It shall be deemed unlawful to park any vehicle, at any time, upon any of
the following designated public streets or portions thereof in the Borough
of Allendale:
A. North side of Brookside Avenue, from West Crescent Avenue to Ramsey
Brook.
B. Both sides of West Crescent Avenue, from Allendale Avenue to Hillside
Avenue.
C. West side of West Crescent Avenue, from Hillside Avenue to Brookside
Avenue.
D. North side of West Orchard Street, from Franklin Turnpike to Memorial
Drive.
E. Both sides of Hillside Avenue, from a point 300 feet north of the
northern curbline of Forest Avenue to a point 900 feet west of Forest
Road. [Amended 3-5-2002]
F. South side of West Allendale Avenue, from West Crescent Avenue to a
point 800 feet east of West Crescent Avenue.
G. North side of West Allendale Avenue, from Franklin Turnpike to a point
800 feet west of Franklin Turnpike.
H. Both sides of East Allendale Avenue, from a point 1,200 feet to a point
2,150 feet west of Boroline Road.
I. South side of East Allendale Avenue, from Franklin Turnpike to Powell
Road.
J. North side of West Allendale Avenue, at the corner of the easterly side
of Central Avenue for a distance of 25 feet on a curve to the right as
designated as being opposite the southwesterly corner of Lot 7 in Block
902 as set forth on the Tax Assessment Map of the Borough of
Allendale.
K. West side of Franklin Turnpike, from Orchard Street to Cottage Place.
§ 252-5 TAXATION § 252-6
237:613
§ 252-7. No parking during specific hours. [Amended 11-14-1974]
L. South side of East Orchard Street, from Franklin Turnpike to a point
300 feet east of Franklin Turnpike.
M. South side of Arcadia Road, from Franklin Turnpike to Berkshire Place.
N. Both sides of Maple Street, from West Allendale Avenue to a point 50
feet north of West Allendale Avenue.
O. West side of Park Avenue and Erie Plaza, from West Allendale Avenue to
Brookside Avenue.
P. North side of Brookside Avenue, from West Crescent Avenue to Ho-Ho-
Kus Creek.
Q. East side of Park Avenue, from a point formed by the intersection of the
southerly curbline of Park Avenue which runs westerly from the rightof-
way of the Erie Lackawanna Railroad, and the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue, and from said point running southerly 109 feet therefrom.
R. East side of the Rockland Electric right-of-way, from Park Avenue to a
point 186 feet southerly therefrom.
S. East side of West Crescent Avenue, within 250 feet of its intersection
with Brookside Avenue.
T. West side of West Crescent Avenue, for a distance of 250 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Brookside Avenue.
U. South side of Brookside Avenue, within 250 feet of its intersection with
West Crescent Avenue.
V. East side of West Crescent Avenue, for 200 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Hillside Avenue.
W. Both sides of Hillside Avenue, for 200 feet from the westerly curbline of
West Crescent Avenue.
X. West side of West Crescent Avenue, for a distance of 200 feet north and
south of the respective curblines of Myrtle Avenue.
Y. East side of West Crescent Avenue, from a point 200 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue to West Allendale Avenue.
Z. Both sides of Myrtle Avenue, for a distance of 250 feet from the easterly
curbline of West Crescent Avenue.
AA. Both sides of Thomas Avenue, from West Maple Avenue to Hillside
Avenue.
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 3:00 a.m.
and 5:00 a.m. upon any street in the Borough of Allendale.
§ 252-6 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-7
237:614
B. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 5:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. upon any of the following designated public streets or
portions thereof in the Borough of Allendale:
(1) North side of West Allendale Avenue between the area of 430 feet
and 492 feet easterly of the center line of Delta Court.
C. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 8:30 a.m.
to 9:30 a.m. from September 1 to June 30 upon any of the following
designated public streets in the Borough of Allendale: [Added
2-28-2002]
Name of Street Side Day of Week Location
Bonnie Way [Added
2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Byron Court Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Cedar Drive Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Colonial Drive Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Dogwood Drive Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Donnybrook Drive
[Added
11-11-2004]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Duffy Drive [Added
11-11-2004]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
East Elbrook Drive Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Elbrook Drive/
Elbrook Drive North
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Fairhaven Drive
[Added 2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Forest Road [Added
2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Forest Road [Added
3-5-2002; repealed
2-28-2008]
Fox Drive [Added
11-11-2004]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
§ 252-7 TAXATION § 252-7
237:615
Name of Street Side Day of Week Location
Hillside Avenue
[Added 3-5-2002;
repealed
2-28-2008]
Hillside Avenue
[Added 3-5-2002;
repealed
2-28-2008]
Hillside Avenue
[Added 2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Lake Street Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Leigh Court [Added
2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Linda Drive Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Lori Lane [Added
2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Sheri Drive [Added
2-28-2008]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Stoney Ridge Road Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Surrey Drive
[Added 3-5-2002]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Thomas Street
[Added 3-5-2002]
Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Valley Road Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
West Maple Avenue Both Monday through
Friday
Entire length
between West
Crescent
Avenue and
Thomas Street
D. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. weekdays upon any of the following designated public
streets in the Borough of Allendale: [Added 9-9-2004; amended
3-23-2006]
§ 252-7 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-7
237:616
§ 252-8. Emergency no parking.
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of
said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires
or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other
conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that the
emergency no-parking signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting
of the signs.
Name of Street Side Day of Week Location
Oak Street West Monday to
Friday
Brookside Avenue to
start of cul-de-sac
Walnut Place East/north Monday to
Friday
Entire length
E. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and the hours of 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. from September 1
to June 30 upon any of the following designated public streets in the
Borough of Allendale. [Added 8-9-2007]
Name of Street Side Day of Week Location
George Street East Monday through
Friday
From the
intersection of
Wehner Place to the
intersection of
Hillside
F. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 p.m.
and 4:00 p.m. from September 1 to June 30 upon any of the following
public streets in the Borough of Allendale. [Added 9-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-19]
Name of Street Side Day of Week Location
East Elbrook Drive North Monday through
Friday
Beginning 270
feet east of the
westerly
terminus of East
Elbrook Drive to
a point 340 feet
east of the
westerly
terminus of East
Elbrook Drive.
§ 252-7 TAXATION § 252-9
237:617
§ 252-9. Parking on designated streets and at specified times.
[Amended 11-14-1974; 6-12-1980; 8-11-1983]
A. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street
Side Day of
Week
Time
Limit
Hours Location
Central
Avenue
Both Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between
West
Allendale
Avenue and
Myrtle
Avenue
Delta Court Both Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Entire length
East
Orchard
Street
[Added
9-26-1985]
Both Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Entire
length,
except south
side from
Franklin
Turnpike
300 feet east
of Franklin
Turnpike,
where
parking is
prohibited
(see
§ 252-6L)
First Street
[Added
3-24-2016]
Both Any day
except
Saturday
and Sunday
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Entire length
Mallison
Street
Both Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between
First Street
and West
Allendale
Avenue
Myrtle
Avenue
[Added
9-25-1997]
North Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
15 mins. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
In front of
Allendale
Post Office
§ 252-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-9
237:618
Name of
Street
Side Day of
Week
Time
Limit
Hours Location
Myrtle
Avenue
West Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between
Central
Avenue and
West
Crescent
Avenue
Myrtle
Avenue
[Added
11-14-
1991]
West Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From the
southerly
curbline of
West
Crescent
Avenue
south to a
point 228
feet south of
the southerly
curbline of
Central
Avenue
Park Avenue East Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between a
point 109
feet
southerly of
the
intersection
of the
southerly
and easterly
curblines of
Park Avenue
and West
Orchard
Street
§ 252-9 TAXATION § 252-9
237:619
Name of
Street
Side Day of
Week
Time
Limit
Hours Location
Park Avenue South Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between the
area
designated
as being 56
feet and 96
feet easterly
of the point
of
intersection
of the
easterly and
southerly
curblines of
Park Avenue
West
Allendale
Avenue
[Amended
9-25-1997]
North Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
Beginning
35 feet from
the easterly
curbline of
Maple Street
to a point
100 feet east
therefrom
West
Allendale
Avenue
[Amended
9-25-1997]
North Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m
to 9:00
p.m.
Between
Central
Avenue and
Maple Street
West
Allendale
Avenue
North Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
3 hrs. 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m.
From the
center line
of Delta
Court to a
point 430
feet east
therefrom
West
Allendale
Avenue
[Added
9-25-1997]
South Any day
except
Sunday and
legal
holidays
2 hr. 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00
p.m.
Between
Franklin
Turnpike
and Central
Avenue
B. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets:
§ 252-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-9
237:620
§ 252-10. Through streets; stops. [Amended 10-9-1975; 10-14-1982;
3-24-1983]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
DeMercurio Drive Entire length
Myrtle Avenue Between West Allendale Avenue and West
Crescent Avenue
Stone Fence Road [Added
10-11-1990]
Entire length
West Allendale Avenue Between Franklin Turnpike and Myrtle
Avenue
Name of Street Side Location
DeMercurio Drive
[Added 9-26-1985]
East Between West Allendale Avenue and
West Orchard Street
DeMercurio Drive
[Added 9-26-1985]
West Beginning 250 feet south of northerly
terminus of DeMercurio Drive to the
intersection with West Allendale
Avenue and be- ginning 215 feet north
of the southerly terminus of DeMercurio
Drive and extending south to
intersection with West Orchard Street
Myrtle Avenue East From Central Avenue to West
Crescent Avenue
Myrtle Avenue
[Added
11-14-1991]
East From the southerly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 262 feet
south of the southerly curbline of High
Street
Myrtle Avenue
[Added
11-14-1991]
West From a point 228 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Central Avenue
south to the northern curbline of West
Allendale Avenue
West Allendale
Avenue
North From Franklin Turnpike to a point 135
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Maple Street
§ 252-9 TAXATION § 252-11
237:621
§ 252-11. Advertisements on vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle parked on any public street in
the Borough of Allendale to have visible thereon any sign, lettering or other
communication offering the same for sale or rental.
§ 252-12. Repairs of vehicles on streets.
It shall be unlawful to cause any repairs to be made to any vehicle while the
same is upon any public street in the Borough of Allendale, except such as
are reasonably necessary to repair a specific defect which has caused the
vehicle to become immobilized and which will remove such impediment to
permit removal of said vehicle from the public street.
§ 252-13. Parking within designated spaces.
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, in any of the municipally owned or operated parking areas or
plazas, unless said vehicle shall be parked within the spaces designated by
the marks or signs on the pavement.
§ 252-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-14-1974]
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto or amendment thereof shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both, at
the discretion of the Judge before whom such person may be convicted.
§ 252-15. When effective. [Amended 11-14-1974]
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law and upon approval in writing by the Department of Transportation of
the State of New Jersey, as provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8, and as the same
concerns the County of Bergen by certain of those streets which may, if
necessary, require the consent of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the
County of Bergen.100
100. Editor's Note: See the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-11 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-15
237:622
ARTICLE III
Gross Weight Limits for Trucks
[Adopted 2-8-1968]
§ 252-16. Streets affected; five-ton limit. [Amended 6-9-1983;
8-28-1997]
Any and all trucks, other than those referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.2,
having a registered gross vehicle weight in excess of five tons are hereby
excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets, except for
the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Chestnut Street From its intersection with Franklin
Turnpike to Waldwick Borough line
Dale Avenue Between West Orchard Street and New
Street
MacIntyre Lane Entire length
Mallinson Street Between Brookside Avenue and Park
Avenue
Park Avenue Between Brookside Avenue and West
Crescent Avenue
§ 252-17. Marking of portion affected. [Amended 6-9-1983]
Upon the adoption of this article and the approval of the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey, conspicuous markings of the
section of the streets aforesaid, limiting trucks to not more than five tons of
both vehicle and load, shall be erected in accordance with the Motor Vehicle
Act of the State of New Jersey along that portion of the streets as described
in § 252-16 hereof.
§ 252-18. Violations and penalties.
For violation of the terms of this article, the penalties as prescribed by
the Motor Vehicle Act of the State of New Jersey may be imposed upon
conviction.
§ 252-19. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law and upon approval in accordance with the provisions of § 252-17
hereof.101
101. Editor's Note: See also the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 252-16 TAXATION § 252-19
237:623

ARTICLE IV
Franklin Turnpike, East Crescent Avenue, West Crescent Avenue
Intersection: Traffic Regulations
[Adopted 7-22-1971]
§ 252-20. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-21. Left-turn prohibition.
Left turns shall be prohibited at all times as follows:
§ 252-22. Right-turn prohibition.
Right turns shall be prohibited at all times as follows:
§ 252-23. Left turns permitted.
The center lane on East and West Crescent Avenues is designated as an
exclusive left-turn lane at Franklin Turnpike.
§ 252-24. Stopping and standing prohibited. [Amended 7-27-1995;
11-10-2016]
Stopping and standing shall be prohibited at all times as follows:
A. Vehicles traveling south on Franklin Turnpike to east on East Crescent
Avenue.
B. Vehicles traveling north on Franklin Turnpike to West Crescent Avenue.
C. From southbound West Crescent Avenue into the driveway of the
dwelling at 301 West Crescent Avenue. [Added 7-26-2007]
D. From the driveway of the dwelling at 301 West Crescent Avenue onto
southbound West Crescent Avenue. [Added 7-26-2007]
E. In addition, no vehicle shall back out from the driveway at 301 West
Crescent Avenue into West Crescent Avenue. [Added 7-26-2007]
A. Vehicles traveling west on East Crescent Avenue to north on Franklin
Turnpike.
B. Vehicles traveling east on West Crescent Avenue to south on Franklin
Turnpike.
A. At all times on Franklin Turnpike from a point 300 feet south of the
southerly curbline of East Crescent Avenue to a point 300 feet north of
the northerly curbline of East Crescent Avenue.
§ 252-20 TAXATION § 252-24
237:625
§ 252-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto or amendment thereof shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both, at
the discretion of the Judge before whom such person may be convicted.
§ 252-26. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon publication after final passage as provided
by law and upon approval thereof by the State of New Jersey, Department
of Transportation, Traffic Bureau, and upon the posting of signs announcing
the prohibitions provided herein.102
B. At all times on East and West Crescent Avenues from a point 250 feet
west of the westerly curbline of Franklin Turnpike to a point 250 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Franklin Turnpike.
C. At all times on the north side of Crestwood Park's driveway from the
westerly curbline of West Crescent Avenue to a point 396 feet west.
D. At all times on the south side of Crestwood Park's driveway from the
westerly curbline of West Crescent Avenue to a point 351 feet west.
E. Monday through Friday from 2:00 p.m. through 4:00 p.m. on the entire
length of Burtwood Court.
102. Editor's Note: See the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-26
237:626
ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 3-24-1977]
§ 252-27. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-28. One-way streets designated. [Amended 10-14-1982]
The following described streets or portions thereof are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Location
Park Avenue Eastbound Between West Crescent
Avenue and a point 75 feet
easterly therefrom
West Allendale Avenue Northbound Between Park Avenue and
Myrtle Avenue
§ 252-29. Violations and penalties.
Violations are subject to the general penalty provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-203,
as amended.
§ 252-30. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law and upon approval in writing by the Department of Transportation of
the State of New Jersey as provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8 and may, as the same
concerns the County of Bergen by certain of those streets named herein, if
necessary, require the consent of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the
County of Bergen.103
103. Editor's Note: See the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-27 TAXATION § 252-30
237:627

ARTICLE VI
Northern Highlands Regional High School Premises: One-Way
Streets and Parking
[Adopted 3-23-1978]
§ 252-31. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-32. One-way streets designated.
The following described streets or roadways or portions thereof are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Location
Circle Drive at front of
North- ern Highlands
Regional High School
building
Counterclockwise
For entire circle
South entrance to
Northern High- lands
Regional High School
premises
Northbound From West Maple Avenue to
parking lot entrance on
premises, approximately 20
yards
§ 252-33. Parking prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any roadway on the
Northern Highlands Regional High School premises, except that school
buses may park in front of the school building parallel to the sidewalk.
§ 252-34. Violations and penalties.
Violations are subject to the general penalty provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-203,
as amended.
§ 252-35. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law and upon approval, in writing, by the Department of Transportation of
the State of New Jersey as provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.104
104. Editor's Note: See the list of approval dates included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-31 TAXATION § 252-35
237:629

ARTICLE VII
Allendale Town Center
[Adopted 3-24-1983; amended in its entirety 2-1-2010]
§ 252-36. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-37. Stop intersections.
Stop intersections shall be those intersections adequately signed and
marked in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways prepared by the United State Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration (MUTCD) and as shown
on the approved Site Plan, latest revision dated February 18, 2009, and
executed on July 30, 2009, and made a part of this article.105
§ 252-38. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated on the approved Site Plan, latest
revision date February 18, 2009, and executed on July 30, 2009, and made
a part of this article.106
Description of Street Limits Direction Limits
Bank drive-in lane Entire length Counterclockwise
Entrance driveway Southbound From West Allendale Avenue to
Bank drive-in lane
§ 252-39. Parking. [Amended 5-10-1984]
A. Vehicles are to park only in designated areas and between painted lines.
B. No person shall park a vehicle in any area of the Allendale Town Center
for a period of time in excess of four hours, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m., which limitations shall apply for seven days of each
week.
C. No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle in those areas marked by
signage and striping in accordance with the MUTCD and as shown on
105. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 10-02 referenced said site plan as Allendale Plaza Extension
and Improvement Site Plan, lots 1 and 2, block 1807, 35-63 W. Allendale Avenue in the
Borough of Allendale, Bergen County, New Jersey, consisting of 11 sheets and dated
February 18, 2009, and executed on July 30, 2009, on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
106. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 252-36 TAXATION § 252-39
237:631
§ 252-40. Parking for handicapped; violations and penalties.
§ 252-41. Pedestrian crossings.
Pedestrian crossings shall be those crossings adequately signed and marked
in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways prepared by the United State Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration (MUTCD) and as shown
on the approved Site Plan, latest revision date February 18, 2009, and
executed on July 30, 2009, and made a part of this article.108
§ 252-42. Signs and pavement markings.
Signs and pavement markings shall be installed conforming with the
requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
§ 252-43. Violations and penalties.
Violations are subject to the general penalty provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-203,
as amended.
the approved Site Plan, latest revision date February 18, 2009, and
executed on July 30, 2009.
A. The following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person
shall be permitted to park in these spaces which are indicated on the
approved site plan, latest revision date February 18, 2009, and
executed on July 30, 2009.107
B. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Code, any person convicted of a violation of § 252-40 of the Code of the
Borough of Allendale or any amendment or supplement thereto shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days community service on
such terms and in such form as the Court shall deem appropriate, or
any combination thereof.
107. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
108. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 252-39 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-43
237:632
ARTICLE VIII
Brookside Avenue Intersections
[Adopted 2-12-1987]
§ 252-44. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 252-45. Parking, stopping and standing.
Stopping and standing shall be prohibited at all times as follows:
A. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle along the:
(1) North side of Hillside Avenue from the westerly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet west.
(2) South side of Hillside Avenue from the westerly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet west.
(3) North side of the Brookside Avenue School driveway from the
easterly curbline of West Crescent Avenue to a point 100 feet east.
(4) South side of the Brookside Avenue School driveway from the
easterly curbline of West Crescent Avenue to a point 100 feet east.
(5) North side of Brookside Avenue from the westerly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet west.
(6) South side of Brookside Avenue from the westerly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet west.
(7) North side of Brookside Avenue from the easterly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet east.
(8) South side of Brookside Avenue from the easterly curbline of West
Crescent Avenue to a point 200 feet east.
B. No person shall park a vehicle at any time along the:
(1) West side of West Crescent Avenue from a point 400 feet north of
the northerly curbline to Hillside Avenue to a point 400 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Brookside Avenue.
(2) East side of West Crescent Avenue from a point 400 feet north of
the northerly curbline of the Hillside Avenue School driveway to a
point 400 feet south of the southerly curbline of Brookside Avenue.
§ 252-44 TAXATION § 252-45
237:633

ARTICLE IX
On-Street Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 11-25-1991]
§ 252-46. Authority; restricted parking spaces.
Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197,
the following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces
for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards
by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Name of Street Side Location
High Street [Added
8-22-1999]
West From a point 290 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Myrtle Avenue
for a distance of 24 feet
Maple Street East From a point 61 feet north of the
northerly curbline of West Allendale
Avenue for a distance of 24 feet
Maple Street West From a point 68 feet north of the
northerly curbline of West Allendale
Avenue for a distance of 24 feet
West Allendale Avenue South From a point 339 feet west of the
westerly curbline of DeMercurio Drive
for a distance of 11 feet (angle
parking)
§ 252-47. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any person convicted
of a violation of § 252-46 of the Code of the Borough of Allendale or any
amendment or supplement thereto shall be subject to a fine of a minimum of
$100 on first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a minimum fine of $100
and up to 90 days' community service.
§ 252-46 TAXATION § 252-47
237:635

ARTICLE X
Traffic During Road Construction
[Adopted 9-24-1992]
§ 252-48. Scope.
§ 252-49. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
§ 252-50. Preconstruction meeting.
A. This article shall apply to construction companies, excavators, land
developers, public utilities (except municipal utilities) and any person
connected with construction affecting traffic conditions including the
owner and/or resident of affected property.
B. No part of this article shall relieve a contractor from any obligations to
Chapter 233, Article III, Street Openings and Excavations, of the
Borough Code or obligations to the Department of Public Works.
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above or below
ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work forces performing these operations.
B. The Borough of Allendale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, does
hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
1988 Edition, hereafter known as "MUTCD," except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates wherever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or in the case of a
public utility wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway
to contact the Traffic Bureau or Chief of Police, Borough of Allendale, in
order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit plans for the safe
movement of traffic during such period of construction work. Any
person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior
to the start of such work of whose plans are not approved by the Traffic
Bureau or Chief of Police, Borough of Allendale, is in violation of this
article.
§ 252-48 TAXATION § 252-50
237:637
§ 252-51. Emergency contact phone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Traffic Bureau or Chief of
Police with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in
case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior
to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contacts cannot be
reached or if the emergency contract person does not respond to a call
from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Borough
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Borough shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 252-52. Heavily traveled roads.
The Borough of Allendale Police Department Traffic Bureau or Chief of
Police shall maintain a list of all roads determined to be heavily traveled for
the purposes of this article. Such determination shall be made by the Police
Department Traffic Bureau or Police Chief and shall be binding. Said list
may be amended from time to time as conditions warrant to include roads
which become heavily traveled due to temporary conditions or events. This
list shall be available for inspection during normal business hours, and a
copy shall be provided upon request of any party.109
§ 252-53. Time limits.
§ 252-54. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Allendale Police Traffic Bureau or Chief of Police.
B. Public utilities conducting routine maintenance work need not comply
with the preconstruction meeting requirement.
A. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work
under, on or above any heavily traveled roadway (as defined in § 252-52,
Heavily traveled roads) in the Borough before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m.
B. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic Bureau or the Chief
of Police of the Allendale Police Department. If it is determined by the
officer in charge of the Allendale Police Traffic Bureau or Police Chief
that the construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. on any roadway would substantially delay traffic or
cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only
between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
109. Editor's Note: The original list of heavily traveled roads is attached to Ord. No. 708 and on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 252-50 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-55
237:638
§ 252-55. Posting of traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Allendale Police that the same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 252-56. Stop-work orders.
The Traffic Bureau or Chief of Police of the Allendale Police Department
shall have the authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment
and vehicles, stored materials within the street right-of-way, backfilling of
open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance,
traffic delay and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this article.
§ 252-57. Emergency repair work.
§ 252-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility who or which commits a violation of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days; and for a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days; and for a third or subsequent
conviction, pay a fine of not less than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 252-59. When effective.
This article shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
A. In the case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance
operations or emergency utility work must be performed that will
obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the Borough, the
person, contractor or utility performing such operation shall notify the
Allendale Police Department of such emergency operation. The person,
contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency location
and hours of operation.
B. All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be
performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to
an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work, the person,
contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions of the MUTCD
while performing such emergency repair work.
§ 252-55 TAXATION § 252-59
237:639

ARTICLE XI
Park and Ride
[Adopted 9-9-1993]
§ 252-60. Definitions.
Whenever any words or phrases are to be used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein. The park and ride facility, as hereinafter referred to, consists of
property as set forth on certain maps on file with the office of the Borough
Clerk and generally located at the Allendale Train Station and adjacent
parking lots within the Borough of Allendale.
§ 252-61. Parking areas defined.
§ 252-62. Parking permits; residents and nonresidents; shopper
parking; parking meters. [Amended 8-25-2011]
A. West Side Parking Area. The West Side Parking Area shall be that area
adjacent to Park Avenue and the Allendale Train Station on the west
side of the railroad tracks, as designated on a map filed with the
Borough Clerk entitled "Commuter Parking Area Eastbound Side of
New Jersey Transit Railroad Station Prepared by Azzolina and Feury
Engineering Company Dated June 25, 1993."
B. East Side Parking Area. The East Side Parking Area shall be that area
on the east side of the railroad tracks as designated on a map filed with
the Borough Clerk entitled "East Side Commuter and Shopper Parking
Area, Borough of Allendale, Bergen County, N.J.," prepared by
Dewberry-Goodkind, Inc., dated July 26, 2011. [Amended 8-25-2011]
A. Annual parking permits shall be issued by the Police Department for
commuter parking in areas designated in the West Side Parking Area
and East Side Parking Area. The Mayor, Council and Administrative
Officer are empowered to establish rules and regulations for the sale
and implementation of parking permits. Such rules and regulations
shall be on file for public inspection at the office of the Borough Clerk.
The hours of operation for the commuter parking shall be 6:00 a.m.
prevailing time to 6:00 p.m. prevailing time. The fee for said permits
shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council and shall
renew in June of each year.
(1) There are hereby established resident parking spaces for the entire
West Side Parking Area and 52 spaces in the East Side Parking
Area. These resident parking spaces are for bona fide residents of
the Borough of Allendale who have established proof of said
residency.
§ 252-60 TAXATION § 252-62
237:641
§ 252-63. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto or amendment thereof shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both, at
the discretion of the Judge before whom such person may be convicted.
(2) There are hereby established general parking spaces in the East
Side Parking Area for commuters of the railroad who are and are
not residents of the Borough of Allendale.
B. Shopper parking is hereby established in the Park and Ride facility as
follows:
(1) Thirty-four shopper parking spaces are established in the East Side
Parking Area for shoppers in the business district. A two-hour time
limit is hereby established. Said spaces are outlined on the map on
file with the Borough Clerk.
(2) All commuter parking permit spaces as outlined in Subsection A(2)
above shall be shopper parking spaces from 6:00 p.m. prevailing
time to 1:00 a.m. prevailing time, Monday through Friday,
Saturday, Sunday and holidays from 6:00 a.m. prevailing time to
1:00 a.m. prevailing time.
C. Meter parking is hereby established in the Park and Ride facility as
follows:
(1) Twelve meter spaces are established in the East Side Parking Area
for daily commuters. No permit is required to park at these meters.
The parking fee shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council. Meters shall operate from 6:00 a.m. prevailing time to
6:00 p.m. prevailing time, Monday through Friday, inclusive.
§ 252-62 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-63
237:642
ARTICLE XII
Hillside Elementary School
[Adopted 6-27-1996]
§ 252-64. General parking regulations.
§ 252-65. Reserved parking.
All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this article, such as police
vehicles, ambulances and teachers, must be properly identified and the
reserved parking spaces must be shown on the attached site plan.
§ 252-66. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Road A and Road B Road B
Road C and Road B Road C
Donny Brook Drive and Road B Road B
§ 252-67. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
A. All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
B. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any streets or parts of
streets described below.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Road A East All Entire length
Road A West All As indicated on site plan
Road B Both All Entire length
Road C Both All Entire length
C. Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the
attached site plan110 and signed with R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking
Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division
of Motor Vehicles.
110. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 252-64 TAXATION § 252-67
237:643
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road A East Entire length
Road C West Entire length
§ 252-68. Speed limits.
§ 252-69. Towing of vehicles in violation.
Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic; block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
or pedestrian walkway; or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 252-70. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designed as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Hillside Avenue and Road A Northbound left lane of Road A reserved
for left turn only
Hillside Avenue and Road A Northbound right lane of Road A reserved
for right turn only
§ 252-71. Signs.
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signage shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
39:4-183.27.
§ 252-72. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, unless
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be
15 miles per hour.
B. The speed for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Roadway
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Road A 15 Entire length
Road B 15 Entire length
Road C 15 Entire length
§ 252-67 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-72
237:644
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $20 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 252-72 TAXATION § 252-72
237:645

ARTICLE XIII
Parking on Private Property
[Adopted 7-8-2004]
§ 252-73. Parking restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person shall park
any vehicle on any private property within the Borough nor shall the owner
of such property cause or allow any such vehicle to be parked so as to
encroach upon or damage any adjoining property or the public right-of-way.
§ 252-74. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of this article or any
amendment thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both. In addition to the
penalties set forth, the Judge may order restitution.
§ 252-73 TAXATION § 252-74
237:647

ARTICLE XIV
Stop Intersections; Stop Signs
[Adopted 10-14-2004]
§ 252-75. Stop intersections.
The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided herein:
Intersection Stop Signs on
Maple Street and Elm Street Elm Street at the southwest corner of
the intersection facing eastbound
traffic
§ 252-76. Signage.
All signage shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
§ 252-77. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto or amendment thereof shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or both, at
the discretion of the Judge before whom such person may be convicted.
§ 252-78. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this
article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 252-79. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 252-80. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law, as well as approval thereof by the New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation.
§ 252-75 TAXATION § 252-80
237:649

ARTICLE XV
Parking Prohibition for Snowplowing and Snow Removal
[Adopted 4-8-2010]
§ 252-81. Existence of snow emergency.
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that plowing and/
or snow removal will be required by the Borough, an emergency is deemed
to exist and no vehicles shall be parked on any street or highway within the
Borough. Such parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that
parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 252-82. Removal of vehicle; costs of removal and storage.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and any
police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall
pay the reasonable costs of such removal and storage before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 252-83. Posting of signs.
Signs bearing the legend "NO PARKING WHEN ROADS ARE SNOW
COVERED" are authorized to be posted under the supervision of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 252-84. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished with a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 15 days or both.
§ 252-85. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this
amendatory article are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in
full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances, which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this amendatory article are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 252-86. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 252-81 TAXATION § 252-87
237:651
§ 252-87. When effective.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 252-87 ALLENDALE CODE § 252-87
237:652
Chapter 256
VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 199.
Sidewalk area maintenance — See Ch. 233,
Art. II.
Trees — See Ch. 244.
§ 256-1. Preservation of public safety; responsibility of owners.
[Amended 9-25-1986]
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
safety, the owner of lands may be required to cut any or all brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of the edge of the paved portion
of any roadway and within 25 feet of the nearest junction of the paved edges
of two intersecting streets to a height of not more than 30 inches above the
crown of the road at the nearest point.
§ 256-2. Enforcement. [Amended 8-25-2011; 6-14-2012]
The Allendale Code Official is hereby empowered to determine the necessity
for the cutting of brush, hedges and other plant life as hereinabove
provided. He shall give the property owner 10 days' written notice to cut
the same to the height required herein, and, upon failure of the owner to
comply with said notice, the brush, hedges or other plant life shall be cut by
municipal employees.
§ 256-3. Appeal; failure to receive notice.
§ 256-4. Cost of work to become part of taxes. [Amended 8-25-2011;
6-14-2012]
The Allendale Code Official shall certify the cost of any such work
performed to the Governing Body, which shall, under the provisions of
Chapter 152 of the Laws of 1949,111 charge the same against the lands, to
A. Any person, upon receiving such notice and within three days thereof,
may, in writing, appeal to the Mayor and Council from the
determination by the Allendale Code Official that a necessity exists
requiring the clearing of the premises. Such an appeal shall act as a
stay until the Council acts upon the appeal and determines the validity
thereof. [Amended 8-25-2011; 6-14-2012]
B. The failure of an owner of land to receive the ten-day notice provided
for herein shall not be a defense against the application of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 252-87 TAXATION § 256-4
237:653
be added to and become a part of the taxes assessed and levied upon such
lands.
Chapter 262
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Sewer use — See Ch. 220.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 231.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 233.
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27.
§ 256-4 ALLENDALE CODE § 256-4
237:654
ARTICLE I
Storm Sewers
[Adopted 12-28-1967 as Ch. 62 of the 1967 Code; amended in its
entirety 12-28-2015 by the Governing Body]
§ 262-1. Diversion of water into storm sewers.
After the effective date of this article, no person shall cause or permit the
connection of any pipe or conduit or cause the development or diversion of
any brook, ditch or other waterway to any storm sewer, catch basin or other
appurtenances thereof or cause the diversion of any rain- or surface water
by pipe or other conduit to the public roads and streets within the Borough
of Allendale, except in conformance with the regulations herein contained.
§ 262-2. Permit required; application and sketch.
A. Prior to the doing of any act or acts described in § 262-1 hereof, the
owner, tenant or occupant or contractor thereof shall make application
to the Borough Engineer/Engineering Department for a permit. The
application for said permit shall be in writing.
B. A deposit in the amount of $500 shall be established as an escrow
account to defray the costs to the Borough of Allendale for the services
of the Borough Engineer in review of the application, inspection of the
work to be done and written approval of the same at the completion of
the work. If the funds are depleted prior to completion of the project,
the applicant shall deposit additional escrow funds to cover the
remainder of the work. Upon completion, any balance remaining will be
returned to the applicant upon request, in writing, to the Engineering
Department.
C. The application shall state the name of the applicant and be signed by
him and shall describe the property or properties upon which the
improvement recited in § 262-1 hereof is intended to be located, by
reference to lot and block of the assessment map and by reference to
public streets.
D. The application shall state the proposed date of commencement and
completion of said improvement, and the permit, if issued, shall be
limited to a time interval appearing thereon, not exceeding that recited
in the application.
E. The application shall describe the type of material intended to be used
and the name and address of the contractor, if other than the applicant.
F. The application shall be accompanied by a written sketch, accurately
sealed, showing reference points and showing the location and extent
of the sanitary sewage disposal system on the property and that of the
nearest adjacent property if the intended improvement shall be located
within 40 feet thereof, as well as invert elevations of proposed
improvement and point of connection as well as the proposed location
§ 262-1 TAXATION § 262-2
237:655
§ 262-3. Inspection of connections; certified prints.
All piping and connections to sewers must be inspected by the Borough
Engineer or his designated agent before being covered. On completion of
the work, the applicant must give the Engineering Department two certified
prints of the work performed as installed.
§ 262-4. Correction of unsafe and unsanitary conditions.
Upon the finding that an unsafe or unsanitary condition exists as the result
of discharge of effluent and upon notification, in writing, by the Chief
of Police, Superintendent of Public Works, Borough Engineer or Sanitary
Inspector, the owner of property shall correct such condition or stop the
discharge within 24 hours.
§ 262-5. Subdivisions.
The minimum requirements hereinabove set forth shall be applicable to
subdivisions, though the procedure herein required shall not apply thereto.
§ 262-6. Issuance of permit; definitions.
of the improvement. The plan as set forth in said sketch shall locate said
improvement not closer than 20 feet to any part of any sanitary sewage
system. Any underground pipe connecting to an underground sewer
shall be provided with a six-inch-diameter lamp hole at the property
line. Top of lamp hole shall be flush with finished grade and be suitably
closed.
A. The permit herein provided shall be issued by the Construction Code
Office only upon approval, in writing, by the Borough Engineer of the
application and sketch, which approval shall be granted or denied by
the Borough Engineer within 10 days after delivery of the same.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPLICANT or PERSON — Includes any natural person, corporation or
partnership.
§ 262-2 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-6
237:656
ARTICLE II
Water Supply
[Adopted 3-14-1968 by the Board of Public Works; amended in its
entirety 12-28-2015 by the Governing Body]
§ 262-7. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to water service furnished by the
Borough of Allendale, hereinafter referred to as the "Borough," both within
and outside the Borough limits.
§ 262-8. Control and use of water supply system.
The public water supply and distribution system of the Borough of Allendale
and the organization, administration and operation thereof shall be under
the control and jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council.
§ 262-9. Definitions.
Whenever the following words, clauses or terms are used in this article,
they shall be construed to mean and shall have the meanings herein defined,
unless otherwise specifically stated:
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — The length of pipe, lying generally outside
the street right-of-way, which connects the curb box to the building to be
served with water. The curb box is considered to be part of the customer
service line.[Amended 7-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-17]
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — Total floor area times water usage per
square foot (0.125) divided by water usage per single-family dwelling (350
gallons per day) (N.J.A.C. 7:9-1.106).
FIRE STANDBY SERVICE — A service connection that terminates in a
privately owned hydrant and/or in an internally installed sprinkler system
and which is not in any way connected to any fixtures other than those
designed for fire protection. Where any service connection shall serve
two or more sprinklered buildings, the system in each building shall be
considered a separate fire standby service.
LAWN SPRINKLER — A system of pipes, hoses and nozzles, either aboveor
under ground, for watering land covered with flowers, gardens, grass,
shrubbery, soil, trees or vegetation. Nothing herein shall be deemed or
construed to apply to any business principally engaged in the cultivation,
growth and sale of trees, flowers, shrubs, plants or similar vegetation.
MAIN or MAINS — Either in the singular or plural, all pipes, other than
pipes forming part of service connections, used for conveying water to or
distributing water in the Borough.
NONRESIDENTIAL USERS — Commercial users, industrial users, schools,
churches and other users, including tenants and lessees.
§ 262-7 TAXATION § 262-9
237:657
OCCUPANT or TENANT — Any person, persons, corporation, partnership
or association, other than the owner thereof, occupying or in possession of
property or premises which is or can be supplied with water.
OWNER — Any person, persons, corporation, partnership or association
owning or any mortgagee in possession of any property or premises which
is or can be respectively supplied with water, or his or her agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or
any group of two or more of them.
QUARTER — Any period of consecutive days equal in time to three months
or 1/4 of a year. A quarter need not be three calendar months nor a calendar
quarter.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Single-family and multifamily dwelling users,
including tenants and lessees.
SENIOR CITIZENS — Persons qualifying for senior citizens real property
tax deductions.
SERVICE CONNECTION — A pipe or pipes connected to the main and
extending into privately or publicly owned property or premises for
supplying water thereto.
TAPPING or MAKING A TAP — The physical act of breaking into a main to
install a service connection.
WATER TAP INSTALLATION — The curb box and the portion of the service
connection which connects the box to the main and lies generally within the
street right-of-way.
§ 262-10. Employees.
§ 262-11. Water charges.
A. A Water Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and shall hold office for the term of
one year beginning January 1 and until his successor shall have
qualified. The Water Superintendent shall be responsible for the
general operation and maintenance of the Borough water system and
shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may from
time to time prescribe.
B. A Water Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council and shall hold office for the term of one year
beginning January 1 and until his successor shall have qualified. The
Water Collector shall keep the financial records of the water utility,
cause the bills to be issued incident to the sale, distribution and use of
the water services and collect accounts due to the Borough.
C. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint
such other employees as he may deem necessary and fix their duties
and terms of service.
§ 262-9 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-11
237:658
A. Metered water.
(1) The rates to be charged for the use of water through each meter
shall be as follows:
(a) For the Borough, churches, schools, restaurants, plant and
flower nurseries, geriatric care facilities, Allendale Senior
Housing Corporation/Allendale Urban Renewal, L.P., Allendale
Housing, Inc., and for businesses located in Zoning Districts
C-1 and C-2: [Amended 3-23-2017; 3-22-2018 by Ord. No.
18-08]
Gallons Per Quarter Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
0 to 9,000 Minimum of $47.85 per
quarter per metered account
9,001 to 15,000 $5.33
15,001 to 50,000 $6.26
50,001 to 70,000 $10.01
70,001 to 100,000 $10.65
More than 100,000 $11.27
(b) All other customers with the exception of those qualifying
under Subsection A(1)(c) and (d) immediately following:
[Amended 3-23-2017; 3-22-2018 by Ord. No. 18-08]
Gallons Per Quarter Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
0 to 9,000 Minimum of $47.85 per
quarter per metered account
9,001 to 15,000 $5.33
15,001 to 50,000 $6.26
50,001 to 70,000 $10.01
70,001 to 100,000 $10.65
More than 100,000 $11.27
(c) Citizens qualifying for real property tax deductions:
Gallons Per Quarter Rate Per 1,000 Gallons
0 to 9,000 Minimum of $14.75 per
quarter per metered account
9,001 to 15,000 $4.92
15,001 to 50,000 $5.79
50,001 to 70,000 $9.26
70,001 to 100,000 $9.85
More than 100,000 $10.42
§ 262-11 TAXATION § 262-11
237:659
(d) Residents/owners of affordable housing subject to regulation
by the Council on Affordable Housing, "COAH": a fixed charge
of $44.25 per quarter irrespective of the amount of water used.
(e) Those qualifying for real property tax deductions, or for
renters who would qualify for real property tax deductions if
they were owners and paid property taxes: a fixed rate of
$14.75 per quarter irrespective of the amount of water used.
(f) In a multiple-unit COAH dwelling where one meter is serving
multiple units, a minimum fee of $44.25 per unit per quarter
will be charged irrespective of the amount of water used.
(g) In addition to the charges based on usage covered in
§ 262-11A(1)(a) through (e), each metered customer will pay a
facilities charge of $25 per meter per quarter, effective April 1,
2016. In the case of users referenced in Subsection A(1)(f)
above, a facilities charge per unit per quarter of $25 will be
effective April 1, 2016. [Amended 2-25-2016]
(h) Radio read meter opt-out fee (see § 262-19C): $25 per quarter.
(i) For water supplied at the Borough's discretion at the New
Street Water Department to landscapers for horticultural
spraying and other landscaping use, there shall be an annual
charge of:
[1] For zero to 25,000 gallons: minimum payment of $75.
[2] Over 25,000 gallons: $5 per 1,000 gallons.
(2) Bills for water consumption shall be rendered quarterly or monthly,
as may be determined by the Borough. The Borough may establish
a system of staggering billing or continuous billing in lieu of billing
all customers on the basis of calendar quarters.
(3) Regardless of the date on which service is connected or
disconnected, the rate as defined in Subsection A(1)(a) through (h)
above shall apply and shall be prorated daily from the date service
is connected to the first billing date or from the last billing date to
the day service is disconnected on the basis of calendar quarters.
(4) If the Borough's representatives are unable to gain access to any
premises for the purpose of reading a meter, the Borough may, at
its option, render a bill to such customer based upon an estimated
reading. The rendering of one or more bills based upon estimated
readings shall not be deemed a waiver of the Borough's right to
discontinue service under § 262-29A(6).
B. Unmetered water. Charges for unmetered water shall be applied at the
discretion of the Borough at the cost of bulk water plus 20%. The
calculation for the amount of water used in such instances shall be
determined by a designee of the Mayor.
§ 262-11 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-11
237:660
§ 262-12. Payment of bills.
C. Fire standby service.
(1) For each fire standby service, the following annual surcharge shall
be made, which shall be payable in advance:
Size of Main
(inches) Annual Surcharge
10 $750
8 $500
6 $350
4 $250
3 $150
2 $75
(2) All buildings owned or occupied by the Borough of Allendale are
exempt from these surcharges. Special needs housing, including
Orchard Common and Crescent Common are also exempt from
these surcharges.
D. Wholesale water. The water utility may provide for the sale of water on
a wholesale basis to other water utilities. The rate for such sale will be
$2,300 per 1,000,000 gallons.
E. Fire hydrant service; replacement or new installation.
(1) For each fire hydrant located on property which includes an
industrial park, industrial building or shopping centers, there shall
be an annual service charge of $300 per hydrant to be paid by the
owner thereof. There shall be no annual service charge for
hydrants located on public property, public streets or rights-of-way.
(2) If the owner of private property does not supply and install fire
hydrants but requests the Water Department to supply and install
such hydrants, there will be an installation charge of $4,000 per
hydrant. In the event a private owner installs a fire hydrant, the
hydrant shall be installed pursuant to Borough specifications at the
owner's cost, and there will be an inspection fee charged by the
Borough of $100.
F. The cost of a fire flow test shall be $225 per test which shall be payable
in advance. No approval shall be given until the fee is paid in full.
A. Water and other water utility bills are payable on or before the due date
printed on the bill. The due date provides for a grace period of 30 days
from the billing date.
§ 262-11 TAXATION § 262-12
237:661
§ 262-13. Meter readings.
All meter readings shall be final and conclusive unless objection thereto, in
writing, is filed with the Borough within 15 days after the mailing of the bill
which is based upon the disputed meter reading.
§ 262-14. Application for service; fees.
B. Bills which remain unpaid after the due date are subject to a
delinquency charge. Delinquency charges begin on the billing date or
30 days prior to the due date. Delinquency charges are calculated on
any unpaid balance at the daily equivalent of 1 1/2% a month until the
bill, and any penalties thereon, is paid in full.
C. If any water bill or any other charge imposed under this article is not
paid within 60 days from the billing date, the Water Collector shall
notify the owner of the premises (as appears from the tax duplicate) and
the person to whom such bill was rendered or charge made, if different
from the owner, of such arrearage. If such bill or charge is not paid
within 25 days of the date of such notice, the water service shall be shut
off. No service shutoff for nonpayment shall be turned on or
reconnected until all billings for water and all other charges have been
paid in full or a payment plan has been agreed to in writing with the
Borough, and there has been paid a turn-on charge of $50, during
normal business hours and $65 after hours.
A. Applications for water service shall be made by the owner of the
property to be served on forms prescribed by the Borough. Such
application shall specify, among other things, the purpose for which the
water is to be used. The owner may request that bills for water and
other charges be rendered to a tenant or other occupant of the
premises.
B. Upon each change of ownership and/or occupancy of property being
served with water, an application for service shall be made by the
owner and/or occupant, and service of water to the new user shall be
considered a new service, notwithstanding that water service may not
have been physically disconnected or shut off in connection with the
transfer of service.
C. With each application for water service, there shall be paid the
following charges:
(1) In each case where a new service connection is required and the
water tap installation is made by the Borough, a charge of $750 for
a three-quarter-inch or a one-inch connection, $875 for a one-andone-
half inch connection, and $1,000 for a two-inch connection will
apply. The charges above will include the furnishing and
installation of a five-eighths-inch water meter, unmetered water for
a reasonable period during construction and inspection of the
§ 262-12 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-14
237:662
customer service line and any road resurfacing required in
connection with the tap installation.
(2) In any case where a three-quarter-inch or a one-inch service
connection is required and approval is given for an owner to make
his own tap installation to an inactive main, there will be a charge
of $500. Charges of $625 for a one-and-one-half-inch connection
and $750 for a two-inch connection will apply. These charges shall
include the furnishing and installation of a five-eighths-inch water
meter, unmetered water for a reasonable period during
construction and one inspection each of the water tap installation
and the customer service line.
(3) In each case where a new tap into a new water service line larger
than two inches is required or requested, a charge exceeding that
in § 262-14C(1) will be imposed in the amount of $200 per inch
greater than two inches.
(4) If a meter larger than five-eighths inch is required, the water utility
shall supply the meter. If a meter larger than five-eighths inch is
required, the owner shall be assessed an additional charge of 120%
of the difference in the cost of a five-eighths-inch meter and the
cost of the meter installed.
(5) In each case where water service is requested through an existing
service connection, there shall be no charge, except after normal
business hours when it is necessary to turn on the service and/or
reinstall a meter, in which event the charge shall be $65.
D. In any case where service is to be billed to a tenant or to an owner of
property located outside the Borough of Allendale, a deposit shall be
required from the applicant, which deposit shall be in addition to all
other applicable charges and which shall be refunded only when the
service is disconnected and all bills therefor have been paid. The
amount of the deposit shall be as follows:
Type of Service Deposit
Residential $50
Nonresidential
Business $100
Industrial $200
E. Each meter shall be deemed to be a separate water service for the
purpose of this section.
F. The Borough will not make water tap installations between December 1
and March 1 unless the applicant agrees to pay the differential between
the actual cost to the Borough for making the installation and the
estimated cost of performing the same work under average conditions
during the balance of the year.
§ 262-14 TAXATION § 262-15
237:663
§ 262-15. Moving by consumer.
Persons moving from one property to another cannot transfer their water
privilege or right to use water from the one property to another, and moving
permits shall be required in respect to water bill clearance.
§ 262-16. Discontinuing service.
Any consumer wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the
system shall give notice thereof to the Borough or its representatives at its
office at least five days before the date of termination of service. Charges
will be prorated in accordance with § 262-11A(3).
§ 262-17. Water tap installation.
§ 262-18. Customer service line installation. [Amended 7-12-2018
by Ord. No. 18-17]
A. Only a regularly designated employee or agent of the Borough may tap
an active water main and make the water tap installation.
B. With specific written authorization of the Borough, water tap
installations may be made by other than a Borough employee or agent if
the main to be tapped is not in service and the person, firm or
corporation making the tap is, in the opinion of the Borough, qualified
to perform such operation. All work shall be done in such manner and at
such location as shall be approved by the Borough, all in accordance
with its specifications. The entire installation shall remain open until
the Borough has inspected and approved said installation and issued its
certificate of approval in writing.
A. The customer service line and service connection shall be laid in a
manner approved by the Borough. After the ditch has been dug, the
pipe shall not be covered until the Borough has inspected and approved
the laying of such pipe and all connections thereto and has issued a
certificate of approval in writing. The installer shall take all precautions
to cover by plank, or otherwise, all excavations made in sidewalks for
the laying of the service line and service connection and shall not leave
on the sidewalk or in the public highway any stones or piles of dirt or
other refuse. All service lines and service connections must have a
covering of at least four feet of approved backfill and shall be a
minimum of five feet distant from any sewer line.
B. All new installations of customer service lines, and all repairs,
replacements and renewals of the same made for any reason, shall
require renewal of the service connection, and all costs associated with
any of the foregoing installations, repairs, replacements and/or
renewals shall be made at the expense of the consumer or property
owner. All pipes and fittings used in making such installations, repairs
and renewals shall meet all state and federal requirements and shall be
approved by the Borough.
§ 262-15 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-19
237:664
§ 262-19. Meters.
A. All customers shall be required to have a radio read metering device.
The type and location of any such device shall meet the approval of the
Water Department before being installed, and the property owner is
subject to the fees contained in Chapter 262 for the installation of said
device.
B. Except for ordinary wear, all damages to a water meter, including frost
damage, shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
C. A customer may opt out of having a radio read meter installed on his or
its property, provided:
(1) That the structure has a meter that is able to be read from the
exterior of that structure; and
(2) That the Borough Water Department has a written request from the
customer acknowledging that by opting out of having the radio
read meter installed that he or it accepts that he or it will be
charged an opt-out fee as stated in § 262-11, Water charges.
D. The location of each meter must be approved by the Borough. It must
be accessible and located in the cellar, the first floor near the point of
entrance of the service connection or in a location preapproved by the
Borough. The meter must be located in a clean, dry, safe and easily
accessible place not subject to great variations in temperature.
E. Whenever an existing water main is tapped for a multiple dwelling, a
charge of $500 per dwelling unit will be applied in addition to the
normal service connection charge. Whenever an existing main is tapped
for industrial, commercial or institutional uses, a charge of $500 will be
applied on an equivalent dwelling unit basis (defined in § 262-9) in
addition to the normal service connection charge.
F. Any owner or occupant desiring to have a meter tested may apply to the
Borough therefor, paying a fee as noted below for such test. If the test
discloses that the meter is registering incorrectly, said fee shall be
returned to the owner or occupant. A meter registering within 3%, plus
or minus, of the correct value will be considered as registering
correctly.
Meter Size
(inches) Rate
5/8 to 1 1/2 $50
2 $78
3 $247
4 $255
6 and larger $267
§ 262-19 TAXATION § 262-19
237:665
§ 262-20. Main extensions.
§ 262-21. Water-cooled equipment.
All water-cooled machinery and equipment shall be so designed and
constructed as to recirculate and reuse the cooling water. No water-cooled
machinery or equipment shall be connected to the water supply system
until it has been inspected and approved by the Borough. The Borough may
exempt from the requirements of this section any machinery or equipment
G. No meter is required on a fire standby service.
H. No person, except a designated employee or agent of the Borough, shall
connect, disconnect, repair, adjust or tamper in any way with a water
meter.
I. Any nonresidential owner or occupant who has an above- or
underground lawn sprinkler system shall have a separate water meter
installed for such purpose.
J. No fixture of any kind from which water might be drawn shall be placed
on the street side of the meter.
K. Failure of a meter to register properly shall be reported immediately in
writing to the Water Department. Charges for water during the period
of failure shall be computed on the basis of an average consumption
over a reasonable period prior to the failure.
A. Whenever water service is desired for property which is so located that
there is no water main located on the portion of any street abutting that
property, application for extension of the main shall be made to the
Borough, accompanied by a plan showing the detail of the proposed
method of extending the nearest existing main to the property and
indicating the size of the proposed main. If such application is approved
by the Borough, the applicant shall, at his own cost and expense, extend
said main in accordance with the application. All work shall be done in
such manner and at such location as shall be approved by the Borough,
all in accordance with its specifications. The entire installation shall
remain open until the Borough has inspected and approved said
installation and issued its certificate of approval in writing. The
applicant shall pay to the Borough a fee of $500 for the inspection of
each main extension. Upon completion of such installation, the
extension of such main shall become a part of the public water supply
system of the Borough of Allendale and under the supervision and
control of the Borough.
B. Whenever a water main is extended, there will be a charge of $500 per
dwelling or on an equivalent dwelling unit basis if an industrial,
commercial or institutional use is involved, in addition to the normal
service connection charge.
§ 262-19 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-21
237:666
using only a nominal quantity of water. Such exemptions may be made by
general regulation and/or by action with respect to specific installations.
§ 262-22. Lien for unpaid charges.
The owner of the property on which water service is furnished shall be liable
for the payment of the water rates and charges provided for by this article
for the use of water on the premises, and such water rates and charges so
fixed shall, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, be a lien
on the premises until paid and satisfied, irrespective of whether or not the
unpaid charges were incurred prior to, or during, such owner's period of
ownership, and, in case of nonpayment thereof, the premises may be sold to
pay and satisfy the same in the manner provided by law.
§ 262-23. Curtailment of water usage during periods of shortage.
A. If it shall appear that for any reason the water supply system is or may
be unable to furnish sufficient water for all uses and if, as a result, the
Borough shall determine that a condition exists that constitutes an
emergency requiring the conservation of water for the protection of
public health and safety, the Borough, to conserve water, may by
resolution prohibit, partially prohibit or limit to certain hours and/or
certain areas of the Borough the use of water for the sprinkling or
watering of lawns, trees, gardens, flowers, shrubbery or similar plant
life, the use of water for the washing of cars, buildings, sidewalks and
other structures or things and for any other nonessential, nonsanitary
purposes.
B. In the event of the existence of any condition covered by § 262-23A and
if the condition is of such a nature that action cannot be delayed until a
regular or special meeting of the Mayor and Council can be convened,
the Mayor or, in case of his absence or illness, the President of the
Council shall have the power to take any action which could be taken by
the Borough pursuant to § 262-23A. Any prohibition, partial prohibition
or limitation so imposed by the Mayor or by the Council President shall
have the same force and effect as action by the full Borough Council
and shall remain in effect until modified or annulled by the Borough
Council at a duly convened regular or special meeting.
C. Notice of any prohibition or limitation of the use of water imposed by
this section shall be given:
(1) By publishing the same on the Borough of Allendale website;
(2) By activating the Borough's emergency notification system; or
(3) By posting notices in Borough Hall.
(4) Where time does not permit the use of the methods described in
Subsection C(1), (2) or (3), by any other method which, under the
circumstances, will notify as many customers as possible.
§ 262-21 TAXATION § 262-24
237:667
§ 262-24. Failure of water supply.
The Borough is not responsible for any damage caused by failure to deliver
water to any consumer resulting from any cause whatsoever.
§ 262-25. Excess pressure.
The Borough of Allendale will not be responsible for injury to persons
or property because of excessive pressure. It shall be each consumer's
responsibility to install whatever check valves he may deem necessary for
the protection of his plumbing and connections and of persons at or near
the same.
§ 262-26. General regulations.
A. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof, other than an agent or employee of the Borough, shall
break or remove any seal placed upon any water meter, nor shall any
such person tamper with or attempt to alter any meter.
B. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof shall take, use or consume any water through the water
supply system of the Borough unless the same shall first pass through a
water meter installed and maintained in accordance with this article,
unless the use of unmetered water has been expressly authorized by the
Borough.
C. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof, except an agent or employee of the Borough, shall tap or
connect to any water main or insert a stop cock therein other than with
the written permission of the Borough.
D. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof, except an agent or employee of the Borough, shall turn
on or off the service connection at the curb.
E. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof shall keep, within 50 feet of any part of the water supply
system, any explosives, acids or other substances likely to injure or
damage the system or any part thereof.
F. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent thereof, except an agent or employee of the Borough, shall enter
upon any property owned or controlled by the Borough of Allendale and
used by the Borough in connection with the water supply system; nor
shall any person tear down, break, destroy or tamper with any of the
structures, machinery, mains, valves or any other part or portion of the
water supply system.
G. No interconnection shall be made between the water supply system of
the Borough and any other water supply system of any nature
whatsoever, including private wells, except such connection or
§ 262-24 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-26
237:668
§ 262-27. Filling of pools.
No person, firm or corporation shall fill a pool having a capacity of more
than 10,000 gallons with water from the public water supply system unless
he or it shall have obtained a permit therefor from the Borough. The
Borough Council may by resolution adopt regulations for the issuance of
such permits and for the filling of pools by persons holding such permits
in order to prevent the imposition of excessive demand upon the water
system. No person, firm or corporation shall fill a pool between October 1
and March 31 in any year.
connections as the Borough may make with other public water supply
systems.
H. No connections of a service pipe shall be made with the distribution
system, nor shall any alterations, addition or extension be made in or to
any service pipe, nor shall any device for drawing water be attached
thereto, except in a manner approved by the Borough.
I. No attachment from which water can be drawn shall be connected to a
service pipe between the water main and the water meter.
J. No person, corporation, firm, company, consumer or property owner or
agent or representative thereof shall use or consume water after the
service connection has been turned off by the Borough or its agents,
employees or representatives.
K. No water shall be taken from a fire hydrant in the Borough unless
specific authorization is granted by the Borough in writing.
L. Any person wishing to install an underground water sprinkling system
for lawns, shrubs or other vegetation on any property shall, prior to
installation, apply for a permit therefor to the Allendale plumbing
subcode office. If such installation, partially or otherwise, shall be made
in the public easement (right-of-way easement, sewer, water or other
types of municipal easements), the application shall so note. All such
installations in public easements are subject to removal by the Borough
in the event that the public easement area shall be required for other
authorized public purposes and installations or to maintain existing
public installations such as, but not by way of limitation, water service
lines, sewer lines, drainage pipes and like installations. In the event of
such removal by the Borough, the cost of removal shall be charged
against the property owner. The restoration of surface conditions shall
be optional with the Borough, and, if completed by the Borough, the
cost of such restoration shall also be charged against the property
owner unless otherwise provided by law or prior separate easement
agreement.
§ 262-26 TAXATION § 262-28
237:669
§ 262-28. Private wells.
No person, firm or corporation shall drill, sink, dig or otherwise create a
well, nor shall any existing but unused well be placed in operation, unless
notice thereof has first been given to the Borough, together with such
information with respect thereto as the Borough may require.
§ 262-29. Discontinuance of water service.
§ 262-30. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of any provision of this article, the consumer,
owner, firm, company, contractor or other persons interested as agents
or employees or any other persons who commit, permit, allow, take part
or assist in any violation of this article, who fail to comply with any
requirements of this article or who shall maintain any building or premises
or uses on land where a violation of this article shall exist shall, for each
and every violation, be punished as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions. Each and every day that such violation continues shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of this article.
A. A customer's service may be discontinued for any of the following
reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other premises or purposes than those
described in the application.
(2) Under any flat-rate service, for addition of fixtures or increase in
the use to be made of water without notice to the Borough.
(3) For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(4) For failure to maintain in good order any connections, service lines
or fixtures owned by the customer.
(5) If the premises supplied shall be vacant.
(6) For inability of the representatives of the Borough to gain access to
the premises served at reasonable hours for purposes of inspection
or for reading, caring for or removing/installing meters, provided
that reasonable request for such access has been given.
(7) For any violation of § 262-26E, G, H or I.
B. Any service which is so discontinued shall not be reinstated unless and
until the violation has been corrected or, if the violation consists of
improper or excessive use of water, unless and until the Borough has
received assurance, in form satisfactory to it, that such use will not be
continued.
§ 262-28 ALLENDALE CODE § 262-31
237:670
§ 262-31. Effective date.
This article shall take effect January 1, 1981, and upon publication as
required by law.
§ 262-32. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, Borough Engineer
and other Code Officials of or contracted by the Borough of Allendale.
§ 262-31 TAXATION § 262-32
237:671
Chapter 267
YOUTH CAMPS
§ 267-1. Reference to state regulations; definitions.
Reference is made to N.J.A.C. 8:25, et seq. (entitled "New Jersey Youth
Camp Standards," hereinafter the "Administrative Code"), which
implements the New Jersey Youth Camp Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 26:12-1, et seq.
The definitions contained in the Administrative Code are adopted for the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 267-2. License to operate; fees; inspections.
§ 267-3. Violations and penalties.
A. License required. No person shall operate a youth camp until a license
has been issued by the State of New Jersey and a preoperational
inspection has been completed by the Board of Health.
B. Fees and charges.
(1) For the preoperational inspection to operate a youth camp, the fee
shall be $200 each.
(2) For any inspection or reinspection of a youth camp subsequent or
in addition to any inspection required for the issuance of an annual
license or the renewal of an annual license required by this chapter,
the fee shall be $75 each.
(3) Not-for-profit youth camps and quasi-municipal youth camps shall
be exempt from the requirement to pay the foregoing fees and
charges.
C. Terms of inspections; application for renewal. Inspections for the
operation of a youth camp shall expire annually on December 31 of each
year, and application for renewal thereof shall be submitted together
with the required fee prior to January 1 of each year.
D. Denial or suspension of license or inspections. Inspections required by
this chapter may be denied or suspended by the Board of Health for
failure to comply with this chapter or the Administrative Code.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or the Administrative Code shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $50 but not more than
$500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 262-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 267-4
237:672
§ 267-4. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and/or the Administrative Code are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Chapter 270
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
6.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 40.
Open Space Trust Fund — See Ch. 55.
Building construction — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 120.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 147.
Plot plan approval — See Ch. 196.
Stream corridor protection — See Ch. 232.
§ 267-4 TAXATION § 267-4
237:673

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 270-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Revised Zoning Ordinance — 1979" of
the Borough of Allendale and shall be considered a revision of all existing
zoning ordinances.
§ 270-2. Purpose.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among other purposes,
such provisions are intended to provide for adequate light, air and
convenience of access; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety
from fire and other dangers; to avoid undue concentration of population
by regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings wherever so
erected; to limit and determine the size of yards, courts and other open
spaces; and to regulate the density of population, all with reasonable
consideration to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of property and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough of
Allendale. It is further intended by this amendment to comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and to adopt provisions regulating
land use which are compatible to the existing planning and zoning of
adjoining municipalities.
§ 270-3. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter, or of any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
agreement. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage
or requires greater lot areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces
than imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance
or by such rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 270-1 TAXATION § 270-3
237:675

ARTICLE II
Use Districts
§ 270-4. Zone districts. [Amended 4-11-1985; 1-24-1991;
12-22-1994; 11-13-2003; 5-9-2013; 5-8-2014; 6-12-2014]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Borough of Allendale is hereby divided
into 21 zone districts as follows:
AAA Residence Zone District (single-family residential)
AA Residence Zone District (single-family residential)
A Residence Zone District (single-family residential)
AU Townhouse Zone District (residential)
BU Garden Apartments Zone District (residential)
B Residence Zone District (two-family residential)
C-1 Central Business Zone District
C-2 Central Business Zone District -- Shopping Center
D-1 Industrial Zone District
D-2 Industrial Zone District
E Industrial Zone District
EM Mixed Industrial and Low- and Moderate-Income Multiple-
Dwelling Zone District
ML-1 Multiple-Dwelling Zone District
ML-2 Townhouse Zone District
ML-3 Townhouse Zone District
ML-4 Multifamily Zone District
ML-5 Townhouse Zone District
ML-6 Townhouse/Apartment Zone District
ML-7 Single-Family Residence Zone District
ML-8 Affordable housing District
SC Redevelopment Area: Senior Citizen Housing
§ 270-5. Map. [Amended 4-11-1985; 1-24-1991; 12-22-1994]
A. The Zoning Map entitled "Zoning Map, Borough of Allendale, Bergen
County, New Jersey," prepared by Borough Engineer, John J. Yakimik,
P.E., dated May, 2014, is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter.112 Said Zoning Map is hereby revised and amended by the
creation of the D-1 and D-2 Zoning Districts set forth herein.
[Amended 5-14-1998; 11-3-2003; 5-9-2013; 5-8-2014; 6-12-2014]
112. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 270-4 TAXATION § 270-5
237:677
§ 270-6. Lot divided by zone line.
Where a district boundary line as established in this section or as shown on
the Zoning Map divides a lot which was in single ownership and on record
at the time of enactment of the aforesaid ordinance, the use authorized
thereon and the other district requirements applying to the least restricted
portion of such lot under this chapter shall be considered as extending
to the entire lot, provided that the more restricted portion of such lot is
entirely within 25 feet of said dividing district boundary line. The use so
extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
B. Except where referenced on said revised Zoning Map to a street line or
other designated line by dimensions shown on said map or referenced
by lot and block, the district boundary lines follow lot lines or the center
lines of streets or alleys as they are shown on said map at the time of
adoption of this section; provided, however, that where a district line
does not coincide with such lot lines or such street center lines or
where it is not designated by dimensions, it shall be deemed to be 150
feet back from the nearest parallel street right-of-way.113
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the Schedule of Requirements, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-13-2003.
§ 270-5 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-6
237:678
ARTICLE III
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 270-7. Word usage.
All words and terms used in this chapter are deemed to be used in their
commonly accepted meaning, and it is not the intent of this chapter that
any prohibited use shall be allowed because of a technical distinction in the
meaning of any word.
§ 270-8. Definitions. [Added 10-11-1979; amended 9-25-1986]
A. Words used in this chapter which are defined in the Municipal Land Use
Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), shall have the same
meanings as found in said law, except as noted below.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT DAY CARE — A nonresidential facility providing care for the
elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective environment.
Operators shall be licensed as required by the State of New Jersey
as applicable to operate and offer services such as providing meals,
social services, recreational outings and trips, physical therapy, general
supervision and support. The participants at such a facility shall not
be related to the members of the facility's governing authority by
marriage, blood, or adoption. Adult day-care facilities shall not provide
services to participants for longer than 12 hours in a calendar
day.[Added 6-12-2014]
AFFORDABLE — Having a sales price or rent within the means of a lowor
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, or in the
case of housing developed in accordance with the third-round rules of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, as defined by N.J.A.C.
5:94-7.[Added 3-23-2006]
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of a lot within which a principal
building is permitted to be located by law. The building envelope
excludes the minimum front, side and rear yards required by the zoning
regulations as well as wetlands, approved wetland transition areas,
floodways, utility easements, access easements, conservation
easements and all other areas within which buildings are
prohibited.[Added 9-7-2000]
DWELLING UNIT or RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling or residential unit
as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
§ 270-7 TAXATION § 270-8
237:679
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building of no more than two stories
containing at least eight dwelling units, in which one dwelling unit may
be located over another unit, access to such units may be by a common
entrance, and utilities may be shared.
INDOOR PHYSICAL FITNESS FACILITY — A building or portion of
a building in which facilities and individualized training and/or
instruction are provided on a membership basis for physical fitness,
sports training or weight loss, but specifically excluding schools,
activities involving spectator viewing, competitive events or performing
events.[Added 4-10-2006]
INSTITUTION — Any church, public library, public or private
educational institution, hospital or other public or quasi-public building
or public park or playground permitted in a residential zone.
MARKET-RATE DWELLING UNITS — Housing units not restricted to
low- and moderate-income households that may sell at any price
determined by a willing seller and a willing buyer.[Added 3-23-2006]
MINIMUM LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front
lot line and the rear lot line, or extensions thereof, measured along
a line perpendicular to the street upon which the lot fronts.[Added
9-7-2000]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building of no more than three stories
containing at least eight dwelling units, in which the dwelling units may
be located over one another.
SATELLITE ANTENNA OR DISH — Any apparatus of a concave or
dish-like configuration which is designed for the purpose of receiving
telephone, television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A structure or structures
containing separate, individual and private storage spaces of varying
sizes, leased or rented on individual leases to residential and
commercial users for varying periods of time. For purposes of this
chapter, "self-service storage facility" shall be considered synonymous
with self-storage warehouse, self-storage facility, mini-warehouse or
mini-storage.[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
SIGN — Any letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark or illuminating
device intended to attract attention to any place, subject, person, firm,
service, corporation, public performance, article, machine or
merchandise whatsoever and painted, printed or constructed and
displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors or intended to be
viewed from out of doors. However, this shall not include any official
court or public notices or the flag, emblem or insignia of a government,
school or religious group when displayed for official purposes.
SIGN AREA — The surface area computed by drawing a rectangle
touching the outermost edges of the outermost letters or pictures
comprising the sign or the area established by reason of distinctive
§ 270-8 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-8
237:680
variation in background color, by borders or by some other equivalent
manner, whichever is greater.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING OR RESIDENCE — A building containing
one dwelling or residential unit.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit in a group of at least two dwelling
units, in which each structure unit has its own front and rear access, no
unit is located above another unit, each unit is separated from others
by a fire wall, and each unit has its own independent utilities.
WAREHOUSE FACILITY — A warehouse shall refer to structures used
for the reception and storage of goods, materials or merchandise for
later or subsequent distribution or delivery elsewhere for purposes of
processing for sale. Such goods, materials or merchandise shall be
incidental to the primary business and no manufacturing shall occur in
warehouse structure.[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
§ 270-8 TAXATION § 270-8
237:681

ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 270-9. Compliance required.
Zoning affects all structures, buildings and land and the use thereof. No
building or premises or land is to be erected, raised, moved, extended,
enlarged, altered or used for a purpose other than a purpose permitted
by this chapter. All construction and use shall be in conformity with the
regulations provided for the zone district in which such construction or use
is intended to be made.
§ 270-10. Building permits.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a drawing of
the proposed building and a plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building erected,
the location of the building upon the lot, the dimensions of all open spaces,
the established building lines within the block and such other information
as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter. In
connection with the issuance of a building permit, where application is
made therefor, the Building Inspector may, in his discretion, issue a permit
for the construction of a temporary contractor's shanty to be used for the
storage of tools or building materials incidental to the construction of a
building; provided, however, that such building or shanty shall be removed
at the completion of the construction of the building. Applications for all
other temporary structures shall be referred to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with § 270-23 of this article.
§ 270-11. Subdivision of lot.
When a new lot or lots are formed from part of a parcel of land, the
separation must be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the
provisions of this chapter, and in accordance with all applicable provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and all applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Allendale.
§ 270-12. Public utilities.
Public utilities may be located in any zone district; provided, however, that
before a construction permit or certificate of occupancy or use shall be
issued, application shall first be made in writing to the appropriate Board in
accordance with the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and
the Land Use Procedures Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale.114
§ 270-13. Yards.
A. Every lot shall provide front, rear and side yards required in its zone
district; and all front yards shall face on a dedicated public street or
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land Use Procedures.
§ 270-9 TAXATION § 270-13
237:683
§ 270-14. Accessory buildings.
right-of-way which is at least 35 feet wide and is sufficiently improved
in the opinion of the Building Inspector so as to give safe access by
fire and other emergency vehicles at all times and which can be plowed
free of snow without risk of damage to equipment. No lot shall contain
more than one principal building unless otherwise provided herein.
On streets or rights-of-way of less than 50 feet in width, the required
front yard setback shall be increased by 1/2 the difference between the
dedicated width and 50 feet.
B. Minimum lot depth. Any lot, or part of a lot, which separates a street
from an adjacent lot shall be of a minimum depth between the street
and the adjacent lot of not less than 3/4 of the minimum front yard
required for lots in the zone district in which the lot is located, plus such
additional depth as may be required for streets of a width less than that
required by the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinances115 of the
Borough or any applicable residential site improvement standards of
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. [Added 9-7-2000]
A. Unless otherwise provided herein, no accessory building shall be built
on any lot on which there is no principal building or structure. No
accessory building shall exceed 21 feet in height, except in the
industrial zone district. Height shall be measured as provided in
§ 270-51A. In all zone districts except the industrial zone district,
accessory buildings shall be at least 10 feet from any principal building
situated on the same lot unless an integral part thereof; at least six feet
from any other accessory building; and at least six feet from all other lot
lines. The requirements of Article XV and Article XVI of this chapter
shall apply to accessory buildings in the industrial zone district.
B. Unless otherwise provided herein, in residence zone districts:
(1) In the case of an interior lot fronting upon only one street, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach
upon that half of the lot depth nearest the street.
(2) In the case of an interior lot fronting upon two or more streets, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach
upon that fourth of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
(3) In the case of a corner lot fronting upon two streets, no accessory
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon that
area of the lot between each street and a line drawn parallel to
such street in a manner to divide the lot into two equal parts.
(4) In the case of a corner lot fronting upon three or more streets, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach
upon that fourth of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-13 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-14
237:684
§ 270-15. Dwelling in rear of lots.
No dwelling shall be constructed or altered in the rear of a building on the
same lot, nor shall any building be constructed in front of or moved to the
front of a dwelling on the same lot.
§ 270-16. Existing platted lots.
§ 270-17. Required area or space.
(5) No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of its rear lot
line when such line forms part of the front half of the side line of an
adjacent interior lot, or the front quarter of an adjacent through lot.
(6) Notwithstanding any requirements in this section, the foregoing
rules shall not prohibit any accessory building 70 feet or more from
any street bounding the block.
A. Where any lot or plot which was established on an official or filed map
prior to the effective date thereof fails to comply with the minimum
requirements of this chapter and the record title of said lot was then in
one owner, or husband and wife, and the said owner was not vested
with the record title to any abutting lot whereby the aforesaid minimum
requirements could be complied with, said single lot may be used for
any use not otherwise prohibited in the zone district in which it lies;
provided, however, that all other provisions respecting side yards and
rear yards are complied with and the front yard thereof conforms with
the established setbacks from the street of the block within which said
lot is situated, and upon compliance with the foregoing, the Building
Inspector is herewith authorized to issue an appropriate building
permit.
B. Where three or more adjacent lots so owned as above exist, such lots
shall be used in conformity with the minimum requirements of this
chapter.
C. The use of two adjacent lots in ownership as above provided, where the
same do not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter and
where there is no practical possibility of obtaining additional land, shall
be determined, upon application to the Board of Adjustment, on the
basis of hardship and of neighborhood character.
D. Where a plot plan presented in the application for a permit includes
more than one recorded lot, the Building Inspector or his deputy shall
execute an affidavit in which the facts with reference to the use of said
platted lots or parts of platted lots shall be stated and shall cause the
same to be recorded in the office of the Registrar of Deeds of Bergen
County, New Jersey, the cost of recording to be borne by the applicant.
A. Once established, no lot, yard, parking area or other space shall be so
reduced in area or dimensions so as to make said area or dimension less
§ 270-14 TAXATION § 270-17
237:685
§ 270-18. Garages, driveways and parking in residential districts.
[Amended 3-22-1984; 10-22-1998]
than the minimum required under this chapter. If already less than the
minimum required under this chapter, said area or dimension shall not
be further reduced.
B. Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed, or intended to be
developed, with a single-family or two-family residence, there shall be
provided a building envelope, rectangular in shape, having the
following minimum dimensions. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. [Added 9-7-2000]
Zone District
Minimum Width of
Rectangle
(feet)
Minimum Depth of
Rectangle
(feet)
AAA 60 50
AA 50 50
A 50 50
B one-family twofamily
50 60 45 45
A. Garages in residential districts. In all residential zone districts, there
shall be at least one enclosed garage for each dwelling unit erected;
provided, however, that affordable housing units erected pursuant to
the Borough’s housing element shall be exempt from this requirement.
No such garage shall thereafter be eliminated without the erection of
an equivalent enclosed garage. No more than one garage for each
dwelling unit shall be permitted. Unenclosed garages, all-weather
shelters and temporary or instant garages shall be prohibited. Drivethrough
carports, attached to the dwelling, shall be permitted on
residential lots containing an enclosed garage. Garages shall be subject
to the following requirements: [Amended 6-14-2001; 3-25-2002;
12-29-2003]
(1) Each garage shall contain at least one parking space for motor
vehicles.
(2) No garage shall be permitted which is used, designated or intended
to be used for more than three motor vehicles.
B. Driveways for single- or two-family dwellings. All driveways accessory
to single- or two-family dwellings shall comply with the following
requirements: [Amended 3-25-2002]
§ 270-17 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-18
237:686
(1) Driveways shall be permanent in nature and constructed of
crushed stone, asphalt, concrete or other similar material.
(2) The width of driveways shall be at least 8 feet and shall not exceed
35 feet, including any adjacent parking areas or turning areas.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the width of circular or curved
driveways shall not exceed 12 feet. The driveway shall be measured
perpendicular to the normal direction of travel.
(3) The width of curb cuts for driveways shall not exceed 20 feet.
(4) No more than two driveways shall be permitted on any property
developed, or intended to be developed, as a single- or two-family
dwelling. A circular or curved driveway, as provided for in
Subsection B(6)(b), is permitted if connected to the one permitted
driveway.
(5) If a driveway or driveways require(s) more than one curb cut, the
distance between such curb cuts shall be at least 50 feet.
(6) No driveway may be located between a dwelling unit and any street
upon which the subject property has frontage, except in the
following situations:
(a) A driveway may be located between the street and a garage
attached to the principal building by a common wall.
(b) A circular or curved driveway may be located between a
dwelling and the street.
(7) No driveway shall be expanded or replaced without first securing
the required permit from the Borough's Construction Code Official.
The permit fee shall be $100. [Added 9-14-2017]
C. Parking in residential districts.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway, paved in accordance with this
chapter, providing access to and from a street.[Amended
3-25-2002]
GARAGE — A place in which motor vehicles are stored and cared
for.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING or GVWR — The value
specified by a manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single or
combination (articulated) vehicle, or the registered gross weight,
whichever is greater. The GVWR of a combination (articulated)
vehicle, commonly referred to as the “gross combination weight
rating” or “GCWR,” is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR
of the towed unit or units. In the absence of a value specified
for the towed unit or units by the manufacturer, the GVWR of a
§ 270-18 TAXATION § 270-18
237:687
combination (articulated) vehicle is the GVWR of the power unit
plus the total weight of the towed unit, including the loads on
them.[Added 12-22-2005]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than
by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails
or tracks and motorized bicycles.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or property
is or may be transported upon a highway, excepting devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks
or motorized bicycles.
(2) Motor vehicles. [Amended 10-28-1999; 6-14-2001]
(a) No motor vehicle with a registered gross vehicle weight of
8,000 pounds or more shall be parked outside of a garage on
property in any residential zone between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. No more than one such vehicle shall be parked
outside of a garage in any residential zone between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. unless such additional vehicle(s) are
engaged in an active construction project on the premises for
which a valid building permit or zoning approval is in effect.
(b) No more than one motor vehicle registered as a commercial
vehicle, with a registered gross vehicle weight of less than
8,000 pounds, shall be parked outside of a garage on property
in any residential zone between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. No more than one such vehicle shall be parked on
property in any residential zone between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m. unless such additional vehicle(s) are engaged in an
active construction project on the premises for which a valid
building permit or zoning approval is in effect.
(3) Recreational vehicles, campers, mobile homes, trailers of any kind
and boats may be parked on residential lots; provided, however,
that no such parking shall be permitted within the front, side or
rear setback areas.
(4) With the exception of vehicles set forth in Subsection C(3), all other
motor vehicles shall be parked within the confines of a designated
driveway, as herein defined; such vehicles not to encroach on the
applicable front or side property line or sidewalk parallel to the
streets. [Added 4-22-1999]
(5) No motorized landscape equipment shall be parked or stored on
any residential premises except as follows: [Added 6-14-2001]
(a) Residential landscape motor vehicle(s) and equipment used
exclusively on the premises where it is parked or stored;
(b) Landscape motor vehicle(s) and equipment of landscape
contractors performing landscape services on the premises but
§ 270-18 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-18
237:688
§ 270-19. Dangerous conditions.
No permit shall be granted for a building or use if the design or construction
of such structure or use involves exceptional risks of traffic congestion or to
public safety or if the design or construction of said building is so markedly
incongruous with the character of the neighborhood as to be seriously
detrimental to the value of adjacent or nearby property. If the Building
Inspector finds either of the above to be the case, he shall refuse a permit.
§ 270-20. Signs. [Amended 5-27-1982]
only so long as it is necessary to perform such work and while
such work is being actively performed.
(6) No motorized construction equipment shall be parked or stored on
a residential premises except as needed to perform work on that
premises and only so long as it is necessary to perform such work
and while such work is being actively performed. [Added
6-14-2001]
(7) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
parking of passenger vehicles used by the occupant of residential
premises for day-to-day activities, provided that such vehicles have
side windows and are parked on the driveway. [Added 6-14-2001]
(8) Equipment and materials may be stored in or on a motor vehicle
regulated by this section, subject to the following: [Added
6-14-2001]
(a) The equipment or materials shall not be visible from outside
the motor vehicle. In the case of equipment or materials stored
in the open bed of a commercial vehicle and similar cases, this
provision shall be deemed to be complied with if the equipment
and materials are completely covered by a solid opaque tarp.
Exposed ladders shall not be permitted to remain on a vehicle
overnight, but shall be required to be removed and stored out
of view.
(b) The storage of materials which give off offensive odors such as
but not limited to decaying vegetation, manure, etc., is
prohibited.
(c) The storage of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizer and similar
materials shall comply with applicable regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Definitions. See § 270-8. [Amended 9-25-1986]
B. Permits.
(1) No sign, (unless otherwise specifically provided herein), window
signs and signs erected on residential premises in compliance with
§ 270-18 TAXATION § 270-20
237:689
the requirements herein, shall be erected without first having
obtained a permit from the Construction Code Official. Applications
for said permit shall be made in writing to the Construction Code
Official and shall set forth in the following information: [Amended
8-27-1987]
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
owner.
(b) Location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be located or erected.
(c) Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures
and property lines.
(d) Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting
the sign.
(e) A sketch of the sign, showing all dimensions and colors So that
the Construction Code Official may determine compliance with
all the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable
ordinances of the Borough.
(f) Such other information as the Construction Code Official may
require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other
laws and ordinances of the Borough.
(2) Every application, except that made by a municipal, county or state
authority or institution, shall be accompanied by a fee as
prescribed in Chapter 100, Building Construction. [Amended
9-25-1986]
(3) Repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a
sign or a sign structure, unless a structural change is made, shall
not require a permit.
C. Prohibitions.
(1) Within any zone, no sign shall:
(a) Have any mechanically operated moving parts.
(b) Have or consist of any pennants, banners, ribbons, baubles,
spinners or similar movable or moving components.
(c) Have more than four colors, including black and white as
colors.
(d) State or otherwise indicate that the property is sold or rented.
(e) Be mounted on or supported otherwise than by a building
structure or by the ground.
§ 270-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-20
237:690
(f) Be mounted on a roof, other than the front facade of mansard
roofs, nor project above the roof of any building.
(g) Be made of the paste-up type, installed externally.
(2) Searchlights are not permitted.
(3) All signs shall refer only to the premises on which they are
displayed and shall be displayed only within the lot lines of the
property to which they refer.
(4) If any sign configuration or type for the zones mentioned herein or
for any zone created after the enactment of this chapter is not
covered by this chapter, such signs are prohibited.
D. Signs in residential zones.
(1) Two signs containing the street number and name of a residence or
the name of the family residing therein shall be permitted for each
residence, provided that it is less than two square feet in area. One
additional sign containing advertisements of farm produce for sale
or announcement of occupations permitted in the zone is
permitted, not over two square feet in area. If any sign is
freestanding, the area specified is of one side.
(2) Wall signs bearing only the name of an institution and such other
information pertaining to such premises as is required for the
convenience of the general public and not exceeding 16 square feet
in area are permitted.
(3) In the AU and BU zones only, one wall sign per development
providing the name and address of such development is permitted,
provided that such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area.
Permits are required for such a sign.
E. Business Zones (C, D, E and OR Zones).
(1) Signs advertising the business conducted on the premises may be
displayed, provided that:
(a) There shall be no more than one main external sign for each
occupant tenant and the total area of all main external signs
shall not exceed two square feet per foot of building frontage,
except that for buildings fronting on more than one street, two
main signs (one directed toward each frontage) shall be
permitted. One supplemental external sign, not to exceed eight
square feet, shall be permitted for each tenant occupant in
cases where an additional frontage and access exists on a
paved parking area, such sign to front on the parking area.
(b) A sign attached to a building shall be firmly fastened to it and
shall extend out from the building not more than one foot.
When such sign extends more than three inches from the face
§ 270-20 TAXATION § 270-20
237:691
of said building, the bottom of said sign shall not be closer than
10 feet from the ground level below said sign.
(c) All signs identified with a business on the premises shall be
removed when the business operation ceases or moves from a
specific location. The removal of the sign shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the building.
(2) Internal window signs are permitted in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter.
F. Gasoline service stations. Gasoline service stations may display the
following special signs, which are deemed customary and necessary to
the business of a gasoline service station:
(1) Lettering or other insignia which are a structural part of a gasoline
pump, consisting only of the brand name of the gasoline sold, leadwarning
sign and any other sign required by state or federal law
and not exceeding a total of three square feet on each pump; and if
illuminated, such signs shall be nonflashing and shall not in any
manner constitute a traffic hazard with respect to adjacent streets
or intersections.
(2) A credit card sign not exceeding two square feet in area, placed on
or near the gasoline pumps.
(3) One sign bearing the name of the gasoline sold at the service
station, of a design specified by the manufacturer of the gasoline
and not more than 30 feet in area.
G. Temporary signs. [Amended 8-27-1987; 9-27-1990]
(1) Temporary signs are subject to the following regulations:
(a) Real estate "for sale" signs. One sign per lot is permitted to
advertise the sale or rental of the premises upon which it is
located by the owner or by a real estate agent or broker. This
sign is not to exceed an area of six square feet and shall be
removed seven days after the execution of a contract or the
expiration of the listing agreement. In the event that the
contract is voided or canceled within 60 days, the sign may be
placed back on the property without an additional fee. All "for
sale" signs shall be set back at least 15 feet from the curbline
and shall not, under any circumstances, block the vision of the
driver of an automobile.
(b) Real estate open-house signs. The owner of a residential home
which is being offered for sale may erect, in addition to a forsale
sign, an open-house sign. Only one open-house sign will be
permitted on the property and shall be placed no sooner than
one hour before the beginning of the scheduled open house
and removed immediately upon its conclusion. Open-house
§ 270-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-20
237:692
directional signs may be placed at no more than two
intersections on the day of an open house. Such directional
signs are subject to the same time limitations as the property's
open-house sign. Directional signs shall be placed so as not to
impede traffic or driver visibility. Signs not in compliance with
these regulations may be removed by the Zoning Official or his
designee. [Amended 11-12-2002]
(c) In residential zone districts where an area has been subdivided
and five or more newly constructed residences are offered for
sale, a temporary sign may be erected on one lot of the
subdivision to advertise it. The sign shall not be larger than 36
square feet. Permits for signs permitted by this subsection are
required and shall be issued for periods of one year and may be
renewed as provided in Subsection B for a total not to exceed
three years.
(d) During the construction, alteration or renovation of a building
or driveway or during property landscaping in any zone,
temporary signs advertising the names of contractors,
subcontractors or professionals employed in such
construction, alteration, renovation or landscaping shall not be
permitted. [Amended 9-28-2000]
(e) Upon written application by a nonprofit organization, the
Mayor and Council may instruct the Construction Code Official
to issue a permit without fee for the erection of a temporary
sign or of a display banner for a period not to exceed two
weeks in connection with an event sponsored by said nonprofit
organization. Such permit shall not be issued more often than
twice in any twelve-month period to any one organization.
(f) Signs for garage sales, lawn sales, attic sales, rummage sales,
flea market sales or tag sales (collectively "garage sales") No
such signs shall be posted on structures such as telephone
poles, street signs, trees or fences. Notwithstanding anything
else contained in this chapter, the Police Department shall
enforce these regulations relating to garage sale signs.
[Added 3-28-1996]
(g) The following temporary signs are permitted, not to exceed a
period of 10 days; provided, however, that an additional tenday
extension may be granted and any further extensions shall
be at the reasonable discretion of the Code Official: sandwich
board signs, posters, grand opening signs, weekly
advertisements and display banners. [Added 10-14-2004;
amended 11-22-2010]
(2) Fees and fines. There shall be a fee of $45 for temporary real estate
for sale or subdivision signs. There shall be a fee of $20 for a
temporary sign permit under Subsection G(1)(g) hereinabove.
§ 270-20 TAXATION § 270-20
237:693
However, no such fee or permit shall be required for real estate
open house signs or garage sale signs. There shall be a fine of up
to $1,000 imposed upon the property owner or the owner’s agent
or applicant for any violation of the regulations which apply to
the temporary signs. A fine of up to $1,000 shall be imposed for
each and every day the violation continues to exist. Permits issued
for temporary signs shall be issued for a period not to exceed
six months or when the reason for the issuance of the permit no
longer exists or is otherwise described herein, whichever is shorter.
[Amended 10-14-2004; 11-22-2010]
H. Freestanding signs.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, one
freestanding sign accessory to the business conducted on the
premises shall be permitted per building in the C, D, E and OR
Districts, provided that the following requirements shall be met:
(a) The total area of such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet per
side. Either a solid sign or a directory-type sign announcing the
name, nature of use or uses and/or containing the names of the
tenants or occupants of the premises is permitted.
(b) The maximum height of either the sign or of the structure
supporting the same shall not exceed 10 feet.
(c) In the event that the sign is not flush with the ground, the
bottom of the sign shall not be either less than two feet or more
than four feet above the ground level.
(d) No portion of the sign or supporting structure shall be located
nearer than three feet from any public right-of-way, including
sidewalks and streets.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, one
freestanding sign for an institution shall be permitted, provided
that the following requirements are met:
(a) The sign is located on the same lot as the institution.
(b) The total area of the sign does not exceed 24 square feet per
side for schools and churches and 12 square feet per side for
all other institutions.
(c) The requirements of Subsection H(1)(b) and (c) are met.
(d) No portion of the sign or structure supporting the sign is
located closer than 15 feet to any front, rear or side lot line.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, in the AU
or BU Zone Districts, one freestanding sign per development is
permitted, subject to the restrictions of Subsection H(2) above.
§ 270-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-20
237:694
(3) All freestanding signs are to be permanently mounted to the
ground.
I. Illumination.
(1) In the C, D, E and OR Zones, all business signs and all spotlights
and floodlighting used in connection with the operation of any
business shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. or upon the close of
business serviced by said signs or lighting, whichever occurs last.
Such signs shall not be illuminated before 7:00 a.m. or the start of
business, whichever is earlier.
(2) Signs in residential zones may be illuminated between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief of Police, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Council, can authorize lighting, at times
other than approved by this chapter, specifically designed for the
protection of properties.
(4) No sign shall be illuminated by lighting of intermittent or varying
intensity or color or by neon or similar illumination.
(5) Illumination of all signs shall be arranged so that no direct glare is
visible outside the boundaries of the lot on which the sign is
erected and no traffic hazard is created.
(6) No sign shall be backlighted or constructed of any material which
permits the passage of light or allows light to be seen through the
material so as to illuminate the exterior surface of the sign. [Added
3-26-1992]
J. Exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not
apply to the following signs:
(1) A memorial sign or tablet or a sign indicating the name of a
building or the date of its erection when cut into any masonry
surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible
material.
(2) Signs for public convenience and welfare erected by or on behalf of
the United States of America, the State of New Jersey, the County
of Bergen and the Borough of Allendale, traffic controls in private
ways and parking lots, legal notices, railroad crossing signs or
other signs as required by law.
K. Window signs. No signs, temporary or otherwise, on the inside of a
window or glass door shall be greater than two feet in height or cover in
total more than 20% of the square footage of said window or door, and
no such sign shall be permitted above the first floor of any building or
on the exterior surface.
§ 270-20 TAXATION § 270-20
237:695
§ 270-21. Satellite antennas. [Added 11-14-1985]
L. Additional requirements. If the Construction Code Official finds that
any sign has been erected in such a manner or has deteriorated to such
a degree as to be unsightly or to constitute a hazard to the general
public, the hazard shall be eliminated within 24 hours and the sign shall
be removed or repaired to the satisfaction of the Construction Code
Official within seven days after written notice of such condition has
been served upon the owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant. Failure
to comply therewith shall be a violation of this Zoning Code and subject
to its penalties.
A. Definitions. See § 270-8. [Amended 9-25-1986]
B. Size and location. All satellite antennas shall be in compliance with the
following regulations:
(1) The service area of a satellite antenna reflective dish shall not
exceed 10 feet in diameter.
(2) A satellite antenna reflective dish shall be constructed in
conformance with manufacturer's specifications and shall be
anchored in a solid concrete foundation so that the front face of the
dish shall withstand a static wind load of not less than 75 miles per
hour.
(3) The overall height from the mean ground level to the highest point
of the satellite antenna and any attachments thereto, when
extended to their full height, shall not exceed 13 feet.
(4) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard and shall
comply with the rear yard and side yard requirements for the
principal structure on the lot.
(5) The satellite antenna shall be located and screened to minimize
motor noise and visibility from the street and adjacent properties.
The ability of the applicant to install the satellite antenna in an
unobtrusive location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or not a
site plan shall be approved.
(6) A satellite antenna shall only be permitted on residential lots and
shall be designed for use solely by such residents.
(7) No lot shall contain more than one satellite antenna as heretofore
regulated.
C. Site plan approval. Site plan approval by the Planning Board will be
required for the installation of a satellite antenna in all zone districts.
Each application shall include an antenna plan showing the specific
design, location, size and construction of the proposed antenna, which
will comply in all respects with the standards enumerated herein.
§ 270-20 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-21
237:696
§ 270-22. Corner lots.
For the purpose of this chapter, where a lot is bounded by more than one
street, the yard depth or setback from each street shall be determined
by the front yard requirements for that street so that the front yard
requirements of the zone are met for all streets upon which the property
abuts. The owner of the lot shall determine which shall be considered the
front of the lot, subject to the approval of the Building Inspector.
§ 270-23. Temporary permits.
Temporary permits may be authorized by the Board of Adjustment for
a period not to exceed one year for nonconforming uses incidental to
construction projects on the same premises, including such uses as storage
of building supplies and machinery essential to the construction, assembly
of building materials and a real estate office located on the tract offered
for sale, provided that the issuance of such permits shall be conditional
upon agreement by the owner to remove any structure or structures erected
thereunder upon expiration of the permit. Such permits may be renewed
annually over a period not exceeding three years.
§ 270-24. Parapet walls.
A parapet wall or cornice may be erected extending above the building
height limit not more than three feet.
§ 270-25. Nature and extent of uses of land.
The control and regulation of the use of buildings and structures as herein
provided shall equally apply to the nature and extent of the use of the land.
§ 270-26. Prohibited uses within the Borough.
The following uses shall be prohibited within the Borough:
D. Procedure. The procedure for application to the Planning Board on site
plan approval shall be identical to the procedure established for
approval of a major site plan in accordance with Chapters 40 and 147 of
this Code and the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D et seq.).
A. Cemeteries.
B. Diners.
C. Amusement parks, including miniature railroads, carousels, Ferris
wheels, miniature automobiles and swimming pools, all for commercial
or public use.
D. Trailer parks or use of any mobile structure for dwelling purposes.
§ 270-21 TAXATION § 270-26
237:697
E. Retail sale establishments primarily intended for consumption of
products in premises but not within a permanent, enclosed structure
with adequate seating facilities for patrons served.
F. Motels or hotels.
G. Theaters or commercial exhibitions not entirely within the confines of a
permanent, enclosed structure.
H. Junkyards or open dumps.
I. Commercial kennels for the sale, breeding or boarding of dogs.
J. Any other use not specifically permitted by this chapter.
K. Any business establishment that is situated on a lot which is either 1)
located within 150 feet of any of the Borough's zoning districts in which
residential use is permitted or 2) located within the Central Business
Zone District (C-1) or within the Central Business Zone District-
Shopping Center (C-2), shall not be permitted to conduct business
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. [Added 9-22-2016]
L. Drive-through operations or facilities; provided, however, that same
shall be permitted within the Central Business Zone District-Shopping
Center (C-2). As used in this Subsection L, "drive-through operations or
facilities" shall mean a business or establishment engaged in the sale of
any goods, products or services which are sold, served, delivered or
dispensed to persons in motor vehicles. [Added 10-13-2016]
M. Sale and distribution of marijuana. [Added 9-27-2018 by Ord. No.
18-20]
(1) Except as set forth hereinbelow, any land, premises or building
used for the sale or distribution of marijuana, which includes retail
and wholesale marijuana stores, retail and wholesale marijuana
cultivation facilities, retail and wholesale marijuana products
manufacturing facilities, retail and wholesale marijuana testing
facilities, and the operation of retail and wholesale marijuana social
clubs: all activities related to the above mentioned retail and
wholesale uses, such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession,
extraction, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing,
labeling, transporting, delivering, dispensing, transferring and
distributing, are expressly prohibited within the Borough, except
for such land, premises or buildings located within the E Industrial
Zone District or the EM Mixed Industrial and Low- and Moderate-
Income Multiple-Dwelling Zone District engaged regularly in the
sale or dispensing of medical marijuana pursuant to the New Jersey
Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:6I-1 et seq.
(2) Violations and penalties. The maximum penalty for violation of any
provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
§ 270-26 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-26
237:698
§ 270-27. Outdoor storage. [Amended 12-13-1979]
§ 270-28. Similarity of residences.
In single-family residence zone districts, no residence shall be constructed
which is substantially identical to either of the residences on adjoining lots.
When a number of houses are constructed in a subdivision, no two out
of any three residences in a row shall be substantially identical. For the
purposes of this chapter, single-family residences which are mirror images
shall be considered identical, as shall those which are identical except for
kind or color of exterior finish or which differ only in exterior dimensions
and differ by less than five feet in dimension parallel to the street.
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, at
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
A. The following outdoor storage is prohibited on any residential property
and in all residential zones: [Amended 6-14-2001]
(1) Construction equipment, materials and supplies, paving and
landscaping materials, except for those materials being used for a
current, active construction or landscaping project on the premises
and for which a valid building permit or zoning approval, as
applicable, is in effect;
(2) Tires, wheels, other motor vehicle parts or truck caps;
(3) Appliances and machinery, such as but not limited to refrigerators,
freezers, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, water heaters,
and plumbing fixtures;
(4) Furniture, except furniture designed and intended to be used
outdoors on the premises;
(5) More than one extension ladder;
(6) Snowplows; and
(7) Garbage, waste material or debris of any kind, except for typical
household trash or recyclables generated on the premises and
stored in approved containers for pickup, and except for temporary
storage, stockpiling or composting of leaves and grass clippings
generated on the premises.
B. Tanks for the storage of motor vehicle fuel, including gasoline and
diesel automotive fuels and pumps and equipment related thereto, shall
be permitted as an accessory use only in the C-1 and C-2 Central
Business Zone Districts and the D and E Industrial Zone Districts. All
such installations, where permitted, shall comply with all applicable
provisions of state law and Borough ordinances. These provisions shall
not apply to home heating fuel tanks in residential districts.
§ 270-26 TAXATION § 270-29
237:699
§ 270-29. Keeping of animals.
The raising for sale or keeping of animals is prohibited in all zone districts
in the Borough of Allendale, except as provided in Article VIII. This shall not
prohibit the keeping of household pets. The keeping of more than four dogs
of licensable age shall be presumptive evidence of a commercial use.
§ 270-30. Tennis courts. [Added 7-28-1983]
Tennis courts in residential districts shall meet the following requirements:
A. Tennis courts shall be permitted only in connection with a dwelling unit
or units erected on the same lot or lots. Tennis courts shall be further
permitted on any lot adjoining a lot containing a dwelling, provided that
both lots are in common ownership.
B. Tennis courts, as authorized herein, shall not be used for commercial
purposes.
C. Tennis courts shall be located behind the front setback line of such
dwelling to which it is accessory and not closer than 20 feet to either
side line, inclusive of fencing, or 25 feet to the rear property line,
inclusive of fencing.
D. In all instances on corner lots, the tennis courts shall not be located any
closer than 35 feet to either street.
E. All fences installed in connection with such tennis courts shall be
cyclone-type fencing or equal type of permanent fencing and shall not
exceed 10 feet in height as measured from the surface of the tennis
court.
F. Lighting fixtures for tennis courts must comply with the following
regulations:
(1) Such fixtures shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the rear and side
lot lines.
(2) Lighting intensity at property lines shall be a maximum of 0.15
footcandle and shall be conducted in accordance with generally
accepted engineering standards, and the measurement of such
lighting shall include and be the sum of the combined illumination
of the tennis court lighting, other lighting on the premises and
lighting from any natural light sources.
(3) Lighting of tennis courts is prohibited after 10:00 p.m., except on
Friday and Saturday evenings, when such lighting shall be
permitted until 11:00 p.m.
(4) Lighting fixtures shall not exceed 15 feet in height and shall be
mounted and shielded in such a manner as to prevent the light
source being visible off the property.
§ 270-29 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-30
237:700
§ 270-30.1. Basketball courts. [Added 2-28-2002]
G. All applications for permits to install a tennis court shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall include a detailed plot plan of the
entire property showing existing buildings and the proposed tennis
court, drawn to scale, with pertinent dimensions and grade elevations
shown in figures at the court, building and property lines. The plot plan
shall be signed by the owner or his agent or a duly licensed engineer,
registered architect or land surveyor of New Jersey. Prior to the
issuance of any building permit for installation of a tennis court, the
Construction Code Official shall be satisfied that there has been full
compliance with all of the requirements pertaining to building permits.
A. Basketball courts in residential districts shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Basketball courts shall be permitted only in connection with a
dwelling unit or units erected on the same lot or lots. Basketball
courts shall be further permitted on any lot adjoining a lot
containing a dwelling, provided that both lots are in common
ownership.
(2) Basketball courts, as authorized herein, shall not be used for
commercial purposes.
(3) Only one basketball court of the type specified herein shall be
permitted per lot.
(4) Basketball courts shall be located behind the front setback line of
such dwelling to which it is accessory and not closer than 20 feet to
either side line, and 25 feet to the rear lot line.
(5) In all instances on corner lots, the basketball court shall not be
located any closer than 35 feet to either street.
(6) Basketball courts shall not exceed the following dimensions: 40
feet long by 35 feet wide.
(7) Only one basketball goal shall be permitted.
(8) Lighting for the purposes of playing night basketball is expressly
prohibited.
(9) The construction of proposed basketball courts shall not interfere
with existing drainage patterns.
(10) Basketball courts will be considered as an impervious surface and
are subject to bulk regulations pertaining to such.
(11) All applications for permits to install a basketball court shall be
made to the Construction Official and shall include a detailed plot
plan of the entire property showing existing buildings and the
proposed basketball court drawn to scale with pertinent
§ 270-30 TAXATION § 270-30.1
237:701
§ 270-31. Fences. [Amended 9-25-1986]
§ 270-32. Swimming pools. [Added 9-25-1986]
dimensions and grade elevations shown in figures at the court,
building and property lines. The plot plan shall be signed by the
owner or his agent or a duly licensed engineer, registered architect
or land surveyor of New Jersey. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit for installation of a basketball court, the Construction Code
Official shall be satisfied that there has been full compliance with
all the requirements pertaining to building permits.
B. This section is intended to apply to freestanding or standalone
basketball courts and not driveways on which a basketball goal may be
installed.
A. Fences within 15 feet of lot lines may be erected to a height of not more
than five feet. Beyond 15 feet from a lot line, fences can be erected to a
height of not exceeding six feet. Exceptions to these limits may be
granted by the appropriate board upon notice and finding of hardship.
[Amended 5-11-2017]
B. Opaque fences to a height of not more than eight feet may be permitted
on exterior lot lines, solely for the purpose of meeting the light trespass
requirements of § 270-32.1. [Added 3-2-2017116]
C. No person shall erect or maintain any type of barbed wire or electrified
fence in the Borough. The height of fences on corner lots shall be
regulated by the provisions of Chapter 256, Visual Obstructions.
D. Fences in residential zones shall be installed so that the finished side of
the fence faces the street or the neighboring property. [Added
6-14-2001]
A. A swimming pool shall be considered a customary accessory use in
residential districts and shall be suitably designed and located so as not
to become a nuisance or hazard to adjacent property owners or the
public.
B. A swimming pool shall be constructed behind the front setback line and
not closer than 20 feet to either side line or 10 feet to the rear property
line or 10 feet to any building or accessory structure. It must also be at
least 20 feet from any portion of any sanitary sewage disposal system.
Notwithstanding the above, for properties located in either the A or B
Zones, the side line restriction shall be reduced from 20 feet to 15 feet.
[Amended 5-22-2008; 10-23-2008]
116. Editor's Note: This section also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
and C as Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 270-30.1 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-32
237:702
C. Surface area of the water must not exceed 50% of the rear yard area.
The highest surface-water level shall not be higher than 12 inches
above the average rear yard grade, except for aboveground pools.
D. The pool area shall be completely enclosed with a chain-link fence or
secure enclosure, or equal, of durable construction with self-closing
gates, of the minimum height required by the Uniform Construction
Code. Every gate of such fence shall be kept securely locked at all times
when the pool is not in use.
E. The use of the pool shall be for a single, private family and the owner's
social guests.
F. The pool must be of permanent-type construction. Uncovered sand or
earth bottoms shall not be permitted. This section does not govern nor
regulate a portable wading pool; provided, however, that all the parts
for such pool are portable and no part of it is permanently installed and
that the pool can hold no more than 1,500 gallons of water.
G. The immediate area surrounding the pool shall be designed to slope
away from the pool so that all surface water will drain away from the
pool.
H. Filters shall be located below ground or in an enclosure not to exceed
eight feet zero inches in height, suitably screened from adjacent
property, and not closer than four feet to a property line.
I. Provisions shall be made for drainage of the pool and for backwash
water disposal. Effluent may be used upon or in lawns, fields, woods or
dry wells, provided that the same does not overflow onto property
belonging to others. Water emptied into brooks must have a minimum
chlorine residual of 0.1 part per million. Permission for the use of storm
sewers or sanitary sewers may be obtained from the Borough upon
written application and approval, provided that the applicant agrees to
regulations and recurring charges established by the Public Works
Department.
J. Water tests. Pool water shall be tested daily for residual chlorine by the
orthotolidine test for chlorine and use of color comparator, which has a
set of standards for various chlorine residuals. The residual chlorine
content shall range from a minimum of 0.2 to 0.6 part per million at any
time the pool is in use. The pH of the pool water shall range from
neutral 7.0 to slightly alkaline 7.6.
K. A cross-connection between the pool and public water system shall not
be permitted. A fill pipe, if used, must be a minimum of two pipe
diameters above the rim of the pool. A fill line is not required, and the
pool may be filled with a hose. Any permanent pipe connection must be
inspected by the Plumbing Subcode Official and be in compliance with
the Uniform Construction Code.
§ 270-32 TAXATION § 270-32
237:703
§ 270-32.1. Lighting of school athletic fields. [Added 3-2-2017]
L. A permit shall be required to fill a pool as provided in § 262-27 of
Chapter 262, Article II, Water Supply System.
M. A bathhouse is not required. Any such construction, including screened
enclosure, must conform to accessory building construction defined and
governed by this chapter and Chapter 100, Building Construction.
N. Inspection. Inspection and enforcement as provided for by the terms of
this chapter shall be vested in the Subcode Official and the Health
Officer of the Board of Health.
O. Light. No floodlights or lights shall be maintained in such a manner that
the source of light is visible from a public street or neighboring
property.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ATHLETIC FIELD AREA — For the purposes of this section, an athletic
field area is a demarcated field or track area located on school property
where school associated or school authorized activities are conducted.
An athletic field area shall be lit to a maximum maintained illuminance
target of 500 lux horizontal and 150 lux vertical with recommended
uniformity ratios as stipulated in Section 35 of "The Lighting
Handbook," 10th Edition, by the Illuminating Engineering Society.
CERTIFICATE OF FIELD LIGHTING APPROVAL — A certificate issued
by the Borough Zoning Officer for each approval year, in consultation
with the Borough Construction Code Official, after submission of a
lighting plan prepared by a certified lighting consultant (CLC) meeting
the performance standards regulated by this section, which approves
and permits the installation, construction and/or use of light structures
as permitted in this section. Approval year shall mean the period
commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30.
FIELD ANGLE — The angle between two planes of light where the
intensity is 10%, or less, of the maximum intensity at the center beam.
FOOTCANDLE — A measurement of illuminance equal to one lumen per
square foot.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field
that are sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes
are adapted, which causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual
performance and visibility.
LIGHT STRUCTURE — A complete lighting unit consisting of
supporting structure(s), lamp(s), ballast(s), and/or power sources,
together with the parts designed to distribute the light generated by the
lamp(s), to position and protect the lamp(s) and to connect the lamp(s)
to a power source, which light structure may be permanent or portable.
§ 270-32 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-32.1
237:704
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of light produced by a light structure
beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located, in excess
of the limitations specified by this section.
OWNER — The party seeking authorization for the school field lighting,
as applied to this § 270-32.1 only.
B. Lighting of athletic field areas by permanent and/or portable light
structures shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The minimum distance from any light structure to any front, side or
rear property line shall be 45 feet, excluding surface or subsurface
electrical conduit. Light structures are accessory structures, not
accessory buildings. The requirements of § 270-14 (Accessory
buildings) do not apply to light structures.
(2) The height of any light structure shall not be lower than 35 feet, nor
exceed 90 feet, each as measured from grade at the base of said
light structure to its highest point.
(3) The hours of operation for use of any light structure shall be limited
as follows:
(a) Monday through Thursday, 3:00 p.m. until 9:15 p.m.;
(b) Friday, 3:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m.;
(c) Saturday, 12:00 noon until 9:00 p.m., limited to not more than
10 Saturdays per year;
(d) Use of any light structure shall not be permitted on Sunday
with the exception of state and county interscholastic
tournaments, in which case the light structures may be used
from 12:00 noon until 8:00 p.m.;
(e) Use of light structures shall not be permitted between
December 1 and March 1, and between June 1 and August 15.
(f) In the event of unforeseen circumstances, including but not
limited to overtime, inclement weather or injury, the use of the
light structures may be extended for an additional 30 minutes.
(g) More than one, but no more than two athletic field areas may
be illuminated at any one time.
(4) Light structures shall use cutoff or directional shielding and all
lamps shall be aimed toward the athletic field area so as to
minimize glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties. The
upper limit of the field angle shall be no more than 80° above nadir.
(5) Light trespass created by the light structure, shall not exceed 0.25
vertical footcandles at any adjacent residential property line
calculated vertically at five feet above grade. Calculated light levels
shall reflect buffering associated with existing or proposed
§ 270-32.1 TAXATION § 270-32.1
237:705
vegetation, structures and fences. All buffering, vegetation, light
structures and fences shall be maintained by the owner.
(6) A minimum aggregate lot area of 10 acres.
(7) To the extent required to comply with this section, the owner shall
provide a buffering plan to be utilized to meet the performance
requirements set forth herein.
(8) Opaque fencing to a height of not more than eight feet shall be
permitted up to an exterior lot line to meet the light trespass
requirements of this section.
(9) In the event that the owner relocates a portable light structure
from the location specified in its application for a certificate of field
lighting approval, it shall be required to submit an amended
lighting plan certifying that the relocated light structure complies
with all requirements of this section.
C. Review process.
(1) A certificate of field lighting approval shall be required prior to the
installation, construction and/or use of any light structure
regulated herein. Additionally, an annual certificate of field lighting
approval shall be required prior to the use of any light structure
each approval year. Site plan approval and land use board review is
not required for the installation, construction and/or use of light
structures as permitted in this § 270-32.1, unless a variance is
required from the provisions of this § 270-32.1 in connection with
the use of a light structure. The Borough Zoning Officer shall
render a determination on any application within 21 days of receipt
of a completed application.
(2) The owner shall provide a lighting design and custom lighting
aiming plan prepared by a certified lighting expert specific to the
athletic field area where the light structures are to be used. All
proposed light levels shall properly incorporate impacts associated
with existing and proposed buffering.
(3) A certificate of field lighting approval shall be required for each
light structure regardless of whether or not it is temporary or
permanent in nature. Once a certificate of field lighting approval is
issued, the light structure may be utilized on the property as
provided in this § 270-32.1 for the approval year for which the
certificate was issued. Should a change in equipment be desired
following the issuance of a certificate, it may be amended by an
updated certificate application submitted to the Borough Zoning
Officer for approval.
(4) The following shall be submitted to and approved by the Borough
Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a certificate of field lighting
approval:
§ 270-32.1 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-32.1
237:706
§ 270-33. Awnings, canopies and marquees. [Added 4-11-1991;
amended 7-25-2019]
(a) A certificate of compliance submitted by a certified lighting
consultant on behalf of the owner certifying that the light
structures comply with all provisions of this § 270-32.1.
(b) A certification from a licensed structural engineer or a
qualified engineer certifying as to the safety of the light
structures.
(c) A description of outdoor light fixtures including component
specifications such as lamp type and wattage, reflector, optics,
angle of cutoff, supports, poles and including manufacturer's
catalog information.
(d) A plan at a defined scale of the school tract with the tract
boundary and fields to be illuminated showing the boundary
limits of where the light structures will be utilized.
(e) An application fee of $100 for each lighting plan submitted
pursuant to this chapter.
D. Ongoing compliance. Usage of light structures during each year of
issuance of a certificate of field lighting approval is contingent upon
ongoing compliance with all provisions of this section.
E. Penalties. Failure to comply with the provisions of this § 270-32.1 may
result in such fines as are set forth in § 1-18 of the Borough Code and/or
revocation of the certificate of field lighting approval. In the event of a
revocation of the certificate of field lighting approval, the use of any
light structure shall not be permitted until such time as a new
certificate of field lighting approval is issued by the Borough Zoning
Officer, in consultation with the Borough Construction Code Official.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AWNING — Any structure of any material with an extendable or
retractable frame attached to a building or structure and projecting
over a public or quasipublic right-of-way or sidewalk which is so
constructed as to rest against the building when not in use.
CANOPY or MARQUEE — Any structure of any material of a permanent
or fixed construction which is attached to a building or structure and
which permanently extends over a public or quasipublic right-of-way or
sidewalk.
B. Site plan application.
(1) Awnings, canopies and marquees are deemed to be structural
components of any building, and no site plan approval for any
building or structure shall be granted until the applicant has set
§ 270-32.1 TAXATION § 270-33
237:707
forth the information required by Subsection E, Permit procedure,
and presented to the Land Use Board plans setting forth how the
same shall be located upon the building or structure to which it
is to be attached so that the Land Use Board may determine and
ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(2) No modification, repair (other than normal maintenance),
reconstruction, relocation or alteration of a structure or structural
component of an existing awning, canopy or marquee shall be
permitted unless an application has been filed and presented to the
Construction Code Official for approval, setting forth the
information required by Subsection E, Permit procedure, and how
the same shall be located upon the building or structure to which it
is to be attached so that the Construction Code Official may
determine and ensure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
C. Prohibitions.
(1) No structural support may extend from the building above the top
surface of the awning, canopy or marquee.
(2) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be of more than three colors,
inclusive of any color used for the permitted lettering or logo.
White and black shall be deemed to be colors.
(3) No lettering, signs, symbols or logos are permitted on any part of
the awning, canopy or marquee, except that lettering constituting
the name of the business conducted on the premises and/or a logo
symbol shall be permitted and such name and/or logo symbol shall
be deemed to be a sign. Address number(s) shall be required.
(4) No lettering, logo or symbol identifying the business shall exceed
12 inches in height. The address numbers shall not exceed six
inches and be located within the bottom 1/3 of the awning, canopy
or marquee. Any business identifying lettering, logo or symbol
existing as of July 1, 2019, on any existing awning, canopy or
marquee shall be exempt from any height restrictions set forth in
this Subsection C(4); provided, however, that any modification,
repair, reconstruction, relocation or alteration of such preexisting
lettering, logo or symbol after July 1, 2019, shall be subject to the
foregoing limitations of this subsection.
(5) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be permitted which will be in
such a form or presented in such a manner as may confuse or
dangerously distract motorists within view thereof.
(6) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be constructed in such a
manner so as to permit the framework or structure to be viewed
from either end, and, where necessary, the ends shall be enclosed
with the same material used to construct the canopy or awning.
§ 270-33 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-33
237:708
(7) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be backlighted or be
constructed of any material which permits the passage of light or
allows light to be seen through the material so as to illuminate the
exterior of the awning, canopy or marquee.
(8) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be permitted to extend above
the height of the first floor in a two- or more story building, or 15
feet in a one-story building, except that individual awnings,
canopies or marquees may be erected over windows located on
floors above the first floor.
(9) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be supported from the ground
where such support rests upon or interferes with public property or
a public right-of-way.
(10)No awning, canopy or marquee shall be affixed to any commercial
building or structure in any zone district so as to have a minimum
height of less than seven feet from the ground at any point; nor
shall any awning extend more than five feet from the building or
structure to which it is attached or four feet in the case of a canopy
or marquee.
D. Maintenance.
(1) All awnings, canopies or marquees shall be maintained in a clean
and neat-appearing condition, and such maintenance, where
applicable, shall include regular cleaning and removal and
repainting of any chipped or blistered paint or replacement of
fabric or material which is cracked, torn, ripped or otherwise
disintegrating.
(2) Any awning, canopy or marquee which no longer identifies a bona
fide business shall be taken down and removed or modified by the
owner of the premises within 30 days after such business has
ceased, and any permits or approvals therefor shall be deemed to
have expired at such time.
(3) If the Construction Code Official finds that any awning, canopy or
marquee has been erected in such a manner or has deteriorated to
such a degree as to be unsightly or to constitute a hazard to the
general public, the hazard shall be eliminated within 24 hours and
the awning, canopy or marquee shall be removed or repaired to the
satisfaction of the Construction Code Official within seven days
after written notice of such condition has been served upon the
owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant. Failure to comply
therewith shall be a violation of this Zoning Code and subject the
offender to its penalties.
E. Permit procedure.
(1) No awning, canopy or marquee (unless otherwise specifically
provided herein) shall be erected without first having obtained a
§ 270-33 TAXATION § 270-33
237:709
permit from the Construction Code Official and, whenever
necessary, an approval as required herein by the Land Use Board.
Applications for said permit shall be made in writing and shall set
forth the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of both the applicant
and the owner of the premises.
(b) The location of the building upon which the awning, canopy or
marquee is to be erected.
(c) The proposed location and position of the awning, canopy or
marquee, including its relationship to adjoining buildings or
structures, height from grade and distance from property line
located on a survey.
(d) A sketch or drawing showing all dimensions, coloration and
lettering.
(e) Materials and details of construction.
(2) Application for a permit for the erection of an awning, canopy or
marquee shall be to the Construction Code Official. Where the
awning, canopy or marquee is a new part of the structure of the
building and the subject of a site plan application or where the
structure or canopy has been altered, relocated or otherwise
reconstructed and is the subject of an amended site plan, prior
approval from the Land Use Board is required. Nothing herein shall
prevent the Land Use Board from reviewing such information as it
deems necessary with regard to any application before it to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable ordinance.
(3) The normal maintenance, cleaning and repair of an awning, canopy
or marquee shall not require a permit.
(4) Any approvals granted by the Land Use Board under the provisions
of this section may, at the option of said Board, be specifically
conditioned upon the approval of the Construction Code Official.
(5) Every application, except that made by a municipal, county or state
authority or agency, shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by
Chapter 100, Building Construction.
§ 270-33 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-33
237:710
ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§ 270-34. Continuance of nonconforming use of structure.
Any nonconforming use which existed at the time of the passage of this
chapter may be continued, and any existing building designed, arranged,
intended or devoted to a nonconforming use may be reconstructed or
structurally altered, subject to the following regulations:
§ 270-35. Completion of existing buildings.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plan, construction
or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued or plans for which are on file with the Building Inspector
at the time of the passage of this chapter, and which entire building shall
have been completed, according to such plans as filed, within one year from
the date of the passage of this chapter.
§ 270-36. Restoration of existing buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a building destroyed
by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public enemy. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the restoration of a wall declared unsafe by the Building
Inspector.
§ 270-37. Additions to nonconforming structures. [Added 7-7-2000]
A. The structural alterations may be made in such buildings but shall in
total not exceed 50% of the fair market value of the building unless the
use thereof is changed to a conforming use. Such alterations shall not
change the extent, the use or uses of the various portions of the
premises, except that a conforming use may be extended at the expense
of a nonconforming use.
B. No nonconforming use shall extend at the expense of a conforming use.
C. A nonconforming use shall not be changed unless changed to a
conforming use. A nonconforming use changed to a conforming use
may not hereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
D. No additions shall be permitted to the premises, including grounds and
buildings, of any nonconforming use property, except such additions as
shall be conforming.
A. Any nonconforming principal or accessory residential structure may be
altered or enlarged without Land Use Board approval, provided that all
of the following conditions are met: [Amended 8-23-2012; 2-15-2018
by Ord. No. 18-04]
(1) Use of same is permitted in the district;
§ 270-34 TAXATION § 270-37
237:711
(2) Such alteration or enlargement does not create any new or
additional encroachment or nonconformity;
(3) Such alteration or enlargement complies with all applicable
development regulations as defined by this Zoning Code;
(4) Such alteration or improvement does not result in any vertical
expansion above any existing nonconformity;
(5) Such alteration or improvement does not result in the closure or
enclosure of any existing, open nonconformity, such as open deck;
and
B. In any application where an addition, otherwise conforming, is
proposed to a conforming structure located on a nonconforming lot, the
Zoning Official may issue a building permit without referral to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 10-10-2002]
§ 270-37 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-37
237:712
ARTICLE VI
Parking
§ 270-38. Facilities to be provided.
§ 270-39. Location. [Amended 3-22-1984; 11-19-1990]
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereafter specified. However,
nothing herein is to be construed to permit commercial parking within any
residential zone district.
§ 270-40. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 11-13-2003;
4-10-2006; 6-12-2014; 10-13-2016; 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
Off-street parking requirements shall be as follows, except as may be
superseded by the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards,
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.:
A. Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in
connection with the use of any property in any zone within the Borough
of Allendale where the land or building thereon is intended to be used in
whole or part as a hotel, theater, auditorium, restaurant, hospital,
sanitarium, church or a place of public assembly, or for any purpose
likely to attract persons using motor vehicles. Provision shall be made
for usable off-street parking space for each new dwelling unit.
B. Such facilities shall be provided for in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, upon any plans or specifications required
to be filed under the provisions of any ordinance of the Borough.
A. For all residential buildings and for all nonresidential buildings in
residential zone districts, required parking shall be provided on the
same plot with the building or on a plot or plots contiguous therewith in
accordance with the provisions of § 270-18.
B. For commercial and all nonresidential uses in business zone districts,
required parking shall be provided within 300 feet, measured from the
most distant point of the parking facility to the nearest point, for the
building that such facility is required to serve.
C. For industrial uses, required parking shall be provided on the same plot
with the building.
D. In industrial zone districts, required parking space shall be provided
not less than 40 feet from the street. In residential zone districts,
parking space shall be behind the setback lines.
A. Table of requirements.
§ 270-38 TAXATION § 270-40
237:713
Use Parking Spaces Required
Adult or child day-care centers 1 per 6 participants in maximum
attendance plus 1 space per
employee on the maximum shift
(see MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6
for applicable criteria)
Dance hall or private club 1 per 40 square feet of gross floor
area
Hotel or lodging house 1 per unit or family, plus 1 per
each nonresident employee
Indoor physical fitness facilities as
defined in § 270-8
1 per 300 square feet of gross
floor area, or 1.5 for each
employee and member receiving
training or instruction during the
peak hour of operation, whichever
is more restrictive
Manufacturing building 1 per each employee on the total
of the 2 shifts having the most
employees
Medical and dental offices 1 per 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Offices and professional offices 1 per 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Other than single-family
residential structure, not provided
for
2 per each unit for
multiresidential; otherwise 1 per
100 square feet of gross floor area
Physical rehabilitation and
therapy offices
1 per 200 square feet of gross
floor area
Retail or wholesale mercantile 1 per 100 square feet of gross
floor space
Self-storage facility 1 per 2,500 square feet of floor
area plus one parking space per
200 storage units
Storage building 1 per each 400 square feet of
usable area
Theater, auditorium, hospital,
house of worship or other similar
use of public assembly likely to
attract groups of people (with
fixed or permanent seats)
See § 270-183F(1)(a), plus 1
parking space for each 2 resident
employees and 1 parking space
for each 1 nonresident employee
§ 270-40 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-40
237:714
§ 270-41. Nonresidential off-street parking.
§ 270-42. Parking areas in commercial and industrial zone districts.
[Amended 11-19-1990]
Subject to the approval of the Planning Board, off-street parking is
permitted in the commercial and industrial zone districts, provided that
such parking areas:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Theater, auditorium, hospital,
house of worship or other similar
use of public assembly likely to
attract groups of people (without
fixed or permanent seats)
See § 270-183F(1)(b), plus 1
parking space for each 2 resident
employees and 1 parking space
for each nonresident employee
Warehouse building 1 per 1,000 square feet of GFA of
storage area and 1 per 650 square
feet of GFA of related office space
B. In buildings, other than "houses of worship" as defined in § 270-182,
used for assembly purposes without fixed or permanent seats, if seating
is by bleacher type, the seating capacity shall be calculated to be one
space per each 66 inches of bleacher seating board.
C. If there is a combination of uses in any one plot or in any one building,
parking shall be provided as required for each use, which requirements
shall be additive unless facts are shown proving that the requirements
are at different times, which times do not overlap.
D. In addition to the off-street parking required for a house of worship
consisting solely of the primary use set forth in § 270-182B i.e., a place
of assembly for religious services or worship, there shall be provided, if
applicable, off-street parking as set forth in § 270-183F(2)(a) through
(e).
A. Provisions shall be made for parking area for all new nonresidential
buildings or additions to such buildings in all zone districts, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. Parking area must be provided to accommodate any commercial
vehicles required for conduct of the use. Such area shall be in addition
to that provided in accordance with this chapter. The provisions of
§ 270-42 of this chapter shall also apply.
A. Are provided with a paved surface as prescribed in § 270-44.
B. Are bounded where they adjoin residential areas by a curbing of a
height at least seven inches above the paved surface and which is at
least seven feet from the boundary.
§ 270-40 TAXATION § 270-42
237:715
§ 270-43. Minimum space necessary. [Amended 11-13-2003]
An area of 200 square feet, exclusive of driveways, having a minimum width
of 10 feet and a minimum length of 20 feet is hereby determined as the
minimum space necessary for the parking of a single motor vehicle, except
as may be superseded by the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.
§ 270-44. Additional requirements. [Amended 9-25-1986;
11-13-2003; 7-22-2004]
In addition to the requirements prescribed in § 270-42, all parking areas for
nonresidential and multi-unit uses shall provide:
§ 270-45. Issuance of use permit.
C. Are landscaped where they adjoin residential areas according to one of
the following alternatives:
(1) A dense planting of evergreen shrubs or trees at least four feet
high, either alone or in combination with a wire or wooden fence.
(2) A solid fence of wood or masonry four feet high, with the balance of
the setback area attractively landscaped.
D. Are provided with entrances and exits at least 10 feet wide but not more
than 15 feet wide and preferably separate from each other. If not
physically separated, the entranceway and exit shall be clearly
indicated by appropriate painted pavement markings.
A. A four-inch surface of concrete, asphalt, bituminous cement or binder
pavement, graded so as to dispose of all surface water.
B. A concrete curb at least seven inches above the paved surfaces, parallel
to the street property line and arranged so as to prevent overhang from
any vehicle extending over the public right-of-way or the adjoining
property.
C. Parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of vehicles, and no
commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted on
such parking lots.
D. No signs other than entrance, exit or conditions of use signs shall be
maintained.
E. Any parking area lighting shall be so arranged as to direct the light
away from all adjoining buildings, residence districts or streets.
A. Upon completion of any nonresidential parking area complying with the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Inspector shall issue a use
permit, which shall be revoked if the requirements are no longer
complied with. No occupancy permit shall be valid in the absence of a
valid use permit for the required parking area.
§ 270-42 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-45
237:716
§ 270-46. Community parking.
The provisions of this article may be met by participation in a community
parking program designed to serve a larger area, provided that plans for
such community parking have been approved by the Planning Board.
B. No parking space shall be reduced in area when once established
without special permit from the Building Inspector, which permit shall
only be issued when the reduced area complies with the provisions
hereof.
§ 270-45 TAXATION § 270-46
237:717

ARTICLE VII
Public Garages and Gasoline Filling Stations
§ 270-47. Public garages.
No public garage shall have an opening in the roof or side or rear walls,
less than 20 feet from any property line or street right-of-way, and no
public garage or private garage accommodating more than five cars or
gasoline filling station shall have an entrance within 500 feet, measured in
a straight line, to a public school, public library, church, theater or other
public gathering place or park or playground.
§ 270-48. Gasoline filling stations.
Gasoline filling stations and gasoline pumps whose service facilities are not
within a public garage shall have their gasoline pumps and other service
facilities set back at least 50 feet from any street line. No gasoline filling
station shall hereafter be permitted within 1,500 feet of other existing
gasoline filling stations or public buildings.
§ 270-47 TAXATION § 270-48
237:719

ARTICLE VIIA
Wireless Communication Facilities
[Added 9-23-2010]
§ 270-48.1. Findings.
The Borough of Allendale makes the following specific findings with regard
to wireless communications:
§ 270-48.2. Purpose.
A. The FCC requires holders of wireless communications licenses to build
out their systems and provide reliable wireless communication services
throughout their service areas. These FCC requirements impose a
burden on the service providers to install wireless communication
facilities in specified locations in order to close significant gaps in
service and/or provide additional network capacity. This FCC mandate
to build out the communication system does not preclude municipalities
from utilizing local zoning authority to reasonably regulate construction
of wireless facilities.
B. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 preserves local zoning authority
to reasonably regulate wireless communication facilities. However,
municipalities may not prohibit or adopt regulations that have the effect
of prohibiting wireless service. Further, municipalities may not
unreasonably discriminate between and among wireless service
providers. Lastly, since the FCC has exclusive jurisdiction over the
regulation of radio frequency emissions, municipalities may not
regulate or prohibit the installation of wireless communications
facilities due to the perceived health or environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications monopoles and antennas. The goals
of this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of monopoles and antennas;
(2) Require the location of towers in nonresidential zones;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Require the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
§ 270-48.1 TAXATION § 270-48.2
237:721
§ 270-48.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE MONOPOLE STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or monopoles.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
monopole, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's monopole/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a monopole or other structure, the distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest
point on the monopole or other structure, including the base pad and any
antennae.
MONOPOLE — A structure that is designed and constructed for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, television, radio and
similar communication purposes. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto. The term "monopole" does not include self-supporting
lattice or guyed towers.
PREEXISTING MONOPOLES AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any
monopole or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit
has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this article, including
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Enable the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently;
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers, as
appropriate; and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Allendale shall give due
consideration to the Borough of Allendale's master plan, zoning map,
existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of monopoles and antennas.
§ 270-48.2 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.3
237:722
permitted monopoles or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas
for telephone, radio and similar communications purpose, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common carrier towers, cellular towers, alternative tower structures and
other similar towers. The term includes the structure and any supports
thereunto: freestanding structures on which one or more antennas are
located; including lattice towers, guyed towers, monopoles and similar
structures.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless service as defined
in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), which includes FCClicensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services, including
cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. It does
not include any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operation or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone services.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The required facilities for the
provision of wireless communications services, including but not limited
to antennas, antenna support structures, telecommunications towers and
other related necessary support equipment and structures.
§ 270-48.4. Applicability.
A. New monopoles and antennas. All new monopoles or antennas in the
Borough of Allendale shall be subject to these regulations, except as
provided in Subsections B through D, inclusive.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article
shall not govern any monopole or the installation of any antenna that is
under 50 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federallylicensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas. Application for monopoles under this section
shall be received and approved by the Planning Board.
C. Preexisting monopoles or antennas. Preexisting monopoles and
preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of
this article, other than the requirements of § 270-48.5F and G, absent
any enlargement, structural modification, addition of any structures,
addition of any users or addition of any type of uses.
D. AM array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more monopole units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one monopole. Measurements for setbacks and separation
§ 270-48.3 TAXATION § 270-48.4
237:723
§ 270-48.5. General requirements.
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the monopoles
included in the AM array. Additional monopole units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array, subject to the review of the
Planning Board to ensure that the additional units do not violate any
provisions in the Borough of Allendale's Zoning Code.
A. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and monopoles may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or monopole on such lot.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
monopole or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control even though the antennas or monopoles may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each application for an antenna and/or
monopole shall provide to the Borough Engineer an inventory of its
existing monopoles, antennas or sites approved for the monopole or
antennas, as well as all sites where an application is pending, that are
either within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Allendale or within five
miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height and design of each monopole. The Borough Engineer
may share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or permits under this article or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Allendale; provided, however, that the Borough Engineer is
not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Monopoles.
(1) Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use permits pursuant to Chapter 33117
of the Borough Code, applicants for a conditional use permit for a
monopole shall submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed monopole, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth in § 270-48.6A(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed monopole and any other structures, topography,
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land use procedures.
§ 270-48.4 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.5
237:724
parking and other information deemed by the Borough
Engineer to be necessary to assess compliance with this
article.
(b) Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed monopole and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties,
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other monopoles described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 270-48.5C
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant
shall also identify the type of construction of the existing
monopole(s) and the owner/operator of the existing
monopole(s), if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with §§ 270-48.5C, D, E, F, G, J, L,
and M, 270-48.6A(4) and (5), and all applicable federal, state
or local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the monopole will accommodate colocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the monopole(s) described in the application and other
cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the
municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing monopoles,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
use of monopoles or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new monopole.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future monopoles or
antennas within a two-mile radius surrounding the Borough of
Allendale based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed monopole is erected.
(l) Every applicant seeking approval for, or to amend, an existing
wireless communications facility shall submit a visual impact
analysis. This analysis shall include both photos of existing
conditions and computer generated photosimulations
demonstrating how the telecommunications tower will look
after construction/reconstruction of the site. The visual impact
§ 270-48.5 TAXATION § 270-48.5
237:725
analysis shall be prepared from adjacent residential, parks and
recreation, civic and/or business areas at distances of 400 feet,
800 feet, 1,500 feet and 2,600 feet in all directions from the
location of the proposed or modified wireless communication
facility.
(m) A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased.
E. Aesthetics. Monopoles and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Monopoles shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce the visual obtrusiveness. Such monopole may include a
design commonly referred to as a "monopole tree" to provide
camouflaging.
(2) At a monopole site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into the
natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a monopole, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
F. Lighting. Monopoles shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least amount of
disturbances to the surrounding views.
G. State or federal requirements. All monopoles must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate
monopoles and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the monopoles and antennas governed by
this article shall bring such monopoles and antennas into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations within 120 days of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring monopoles and antennas into compliance with
such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the monopole or antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
monopoles, the owner of a monopole shall ensure that it is maintained
in compliance with standards contained in applicable state, local and
appropriate industry building codes. If, upon inspection, the Borough of
Allendale concludes that a monopole fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then
§ 270-48.5 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.5
237:726
upon notice being provided to the owner of the monopole, the owner
shall have 30 days to bring such monopole into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such monopole into compliance within said
30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the monopole or
antenna at the owner's expense.
I. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, monopole setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in the Borough of Allendale irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
J. Not essential services. Monopoles and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities,
unless mandated by federal and state law.
K. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of monopoles or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough of
Allendale have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Borough Engineer.
L. Public notice and hearing. For purposes of this article, any conditional
use request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively
approved use or conditional use shall require public notice to all
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties that are
located within the corresponding separation distance listed in
§ 270-48.6A(2), Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by
the Zoning Ordinance. A public hearing must be held before the
Allendale Planning Board for all conditional use requests under this
article.
M. Signs. No signs or advertisements shall be allowed on an antenna or
monopole.
N. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or monopoles shall comply with the
requirements of § 270-48.7.
O. Multiple antenna/monopole plan. The Borough of Allendale encourages
the users of monopoles and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple monopoles and/or antenna sites. Applications for
approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
P. Height. The maximum height of new monopoles shall not exceed 150
feet in height.
Q. Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of §§ 33-7C and 33-9118 of
the Borough Code, except as modified in this Section.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land use procedures.
§ 270-48.5 TAXATION § 270-48.5
237:727
§ 270-48.6. Conditional use permits.
R. In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Board may impose
conditions to the extent the Planning Board concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed monopole
on adjoining properties.
S. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
T. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the information
described in this section and a nonrefundable application fee and an
escrow deposit as required by the Borough Code for conditional use
applications.
U. Existing wireless communications facilities. It is the express intent of
this article to minimize the number of telecommunications towers in the
Borough of Allendale. One of the strategies employed to implement this
intent is to encourage and require the joint use of existing and new
tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers. In furtherance of this strategy and notwithstanding
any ordinance prohibitions to the contrary, an existing
telecommunications tower can be modified, extended, or be
reconstructed to accommodate antennas of additional wireless service
providers upon review and approval of the Planning Board but only if
the applicant complies with each and every requirement contained in
§ 270-48.5 of this article.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for wireless communications facilities by the
Planning Board.
(1) Wireless communication facilities are a permitted conditional use
in the D Industrial Zone District and the E Industrial Zone District.
A wireless communication facility application shall comply with
each of the following conditions to be considered a permitted
conditional use and thereby vest jurisdiction with the Planning
Board. If an applicant fails to comply with one or more of the
following four conditions, the use is not permitted and an
application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(3) is
required.
(a) Maximum height of the telecommunications tower shall not
exceed 150 feet.
(b) Telecommunications towers shall maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be
painted a neutral color so as to reduce the visual
obtrusiveness. Such telecommunications tower may include a
§ 270-48.5 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.6
237:728
design commonly referred to as a "monopole" tree, or be of a
flagpole design to provide camouflaging.
(c) Lighting of telecommunications towers is not permitted, unless
required by the FAA or other federal agency with jurisdiction
over lighting. In such cases, the minimum required lighting of
a wireless communications tower shall be the maximum
allowed lighting under this article.
(d) No signs or other forms of advertising shall be permitted in
conjunction with a wireless communications facility except
that this prohibition shall not extend to required hazard and
safety signs.
(2) Factors to be considered by the reviewing board in considering
applications for wireless communications facilities. In their review
of wireless communications facilities, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consider the following factors in their
deliberations; said factors shall not be considered as conditions of
nor attached to the conditional use:
(a) Proximity of the monopole to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
(b) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(c) Surrounding topography;
(d) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(e) Design of the monopole, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(f) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(g) Availability of suitable existing monopoles, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of monopoles or
structures, as discussed in § 270-48.6A(3) of this article.
(h) Availability of proposed monopole to other potential users.
(3) Availability of suitable existing monopoles, other structures or
alternative technology. No new monopole shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that no existing monopole, structure or alternative
technology that does not require the use of monopoles or
structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An
applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning
Board related to the availability of suitable existing monopoles,
other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing monopole, structure or alternative
§ 270-48.6 TAXATION § 270-48.6
237:729
technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna
may consist of the following:
(a) No existing monopoles or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing monopoles or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing monopoles or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna
and related equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
monopoles or structures, or the antenna on the existing
monopoles or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing monopoles and structures
unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
wireless communications facilities for which a development
application has been filed with the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment:
(a) Monopoles must be set back a distances equal to at least 100%
of the height of the monopole from any adjoining lot line.
(b) All accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(c) No monopole shall exist within required buffer areas, if
adjacent to residential zones and as prescribed under local
ordinance.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all wireless communications facilities for which a development
application has been filed with the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment:
(a) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
§ 270-48.6 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.6
237:730
[1] Monopole separation shall be measured from the array
line to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
[2] Separation requirements for monopoles shall comply with
the minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Residential, public parks,
schools or house of
worship
200 feet or 300% height of
monopole, whichever is
greater, from lot line
Vacant residentially
zoned land
200 feet or 300% height of
monopole, whichever is
greater, from lot line
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses
None; only zoning code
setbacks apply
(b) Separation distances between monopoles. Separation
distances between monopoles shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed monopole and preexisting
monopoles. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of the
existing monopole and the proposed base, pursuant to a site
plan of the proposed/monopole. The separation distances
(listed in the linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Existing Monopoles – Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole,
75 Feet In
Height
Monopole,
Less Than 75
Feet in Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole, 75
feet in height
1,500
1,500 1,500 750
Monopole, less
than 75 feet
750
750 750 750
(6) Security fencing. Monopoles shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height nor more than eight feet in height
§ 270-48.6 TAXATION § 270-48.6
237:731
§ 270-48.7. Buildings or other equipment storage.
and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding wireless communications facilities for
which a development application has been filed with the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment:
(a) Monopole facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screen the view of the monopole
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the monopole would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as monopoles sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 40 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following:
(1) In front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area and the
cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet from all lot lines.
The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of at least 42-48 inches and a planted
height of at least 36 inches.
§ 270-48.6 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.7
237:732
§ 270-48.8. Removal of abandoned antennas and monopoles.
Any antenna or monopole that is not operated for a continuous period of
nine months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna
or monopole shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice
from the Borough of Allendale notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or monopole within 90 days shall
be grounds to remove the monopole or antenna at the owner's expense. If
there are two or more users of a single monopole, then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease using the monopole. The Borough
may condition the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a monopole
or antenna on the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other
suitable guarantee in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost (as
determined by the Planning Board Engineer) of such removal, grading and
restoration to a state required under all applicable Borough ordinances.
§ 270-48.9. Existing monopoles.
(2) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than
eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge, with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches.
(3) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
and a planted height of at least 72 inches.
C. Antennas located on monopoles. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor area
or be more than 10 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
located.
A. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming monopoles or
antennas.
(1) Nonconforming monopoles or antennas that are damaged may not
be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval.
They shall also meet the separation requirements specified in
§ 270-48.6A(4) and (5).
(2) Nonconforming monopoles or antennas that are destroyed (more
than 51%) may not be rebuilt without having to first obtain a
conditional use permit. They shall also meet the separation
requirements specified in § 270-48.6A(4) and (5).
(3) The type, height and location of the monopole on site shall be of the
same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building
§ 270-48.7 TAXATION § 270-48.9
237:733
§ 270-48.10. Severability.
The various parts, sections and clauses of this article are hereby declared
to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of the article shall not be affected thereby.
§ 270-48.11. Repealer.
Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this article
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 270-48.12. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication pursuant to
law.
permits to rebuilt the facility shall comply with the then-applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date
the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or
if said permit expires, the monopole or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in § 270-48.8.
§ 270-48.9 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.12
237:734
ARTICLE VIIB
Solar Energy Facilities
[Added 8-13-2015]
§ 270-48.13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENERGY — The ability to do work.
PHOTOVOLTAIC — Refers to technology which uses a device, typically a
solar panel, to convert light into electricity.
SOLAR ARRAY — A group of multiple solar panels connected together to
provide a single electrical output.
SOLAR ENERGY — Energy from the sun that is converted into thermal or
electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — All associated equipment which converts solar
energy into usable electrical energy, heats water, or produces hot air or
other similar function.
SOLAR PANELS — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by
way of a solar energy system.
§ 270-48.14. Purpose; approval; applicability.
A. The purpose of this article is to ensure a solar energy system as an
accessory use for the principal power use and which will be to provide
power for the principal use of the property whereon said system is to be
located and shall not be for the generation of power for commercial
purposes, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time from a solar
energy system designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use.
For the purposes of this article, the sale of excess power shall be limited
so that in no event is an energy system generating more energy for sale
than what is otherwise necessary to power the principal use on the
property.
B. Solar energy systems shall only be permitted on rooftops only as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal use. All energy systems
require approval from the Allendale Construction Code Office and
Allendale Fire Official prior to installation. Applications for an energy
system shall include information demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this article.
C. Applicability of article. This article shall apply to systems intended for
the provision of the electrical or mechanical power needs of the owner/
operator of the system; also, such a system shall be for one main
building and its accessory buildings and uses only.
§ 270-48.13 TAXATION § 270-48.15
237:735
§ 270-48.15. Permit requirements.
§ 270-48.16. Installation requirements.
A. Before any solar panel may be installed, plans for such installation shall
be submitted to, and approved by, the Allendale Construction Code
Office and Allendale Fire Official. No solar panel shall be installed
without a permit issued by the Borough.
B. The design of the solar energy system shall conform to all applicable
industry standards, including the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code, the International Building Code, the National Electrical Code and
the Allendale Building Code and Zoning Regulations. The applicant
shall submit certificates of design compliance obtained by the
equipment manufacturer from a certified organization, and any such
design shall be certified by an engineer registered in the State of New
Jersey, certifying that the structural design of the solar energy system
complies with all of the standards set forth for safety and stability in all
applicable codes then in effect in New Jersey and all sections referred
to in this article. The manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted
as part of the application.
C. When the requirements imposed by any applicable code are either in
conflict, more stringent or impose additional design standards than the
requirements contained within this chapter, then the requirements of
the other applicable code shall govern and shall supersede
requirements contained in this chapter.
A. Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any zoning
district. Roof-mounted solar panels shall be mounted parallel to the roof
angle and, if mounted on a sloping roof, shall not exceed a height of 15
inches above the ridge of the roof. No such mounted panel shall exceed
the maximum permitted height of the structure.
B. A roof-mounted solar panel that is mounted on a flat roof may be angled
to achieve maximum sun exposure but shall not exceed eight feet above
the roof. No such mounted panel shall exceed the maximum permitted
height of the structure.
C. All roof-mounted solar panel installations shall be designed and
constructed to provide designated pathways. Every roof pathway shall
comply with the standards for same as detailed in the latest edition of
the New Jersey International Building Code.
D. Roof-mounted solar panels must be installed in such locations so as to
provide for roof access points to designated walkways in areas that do
not require the placement of ground ladders over openings such as
windows or doors and located at strong points of building construction
that are not in conflict with overhead obstructions such as tree limbs,
wires or signs. Roof access pathways shall be located at structurally
§ 270-48.15 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.16
237:736
strong locations on the building capable of supporting the live load of
firefighters accessing the roof.
E. All roof-mounted panels shall be installed at least three feet from the
roof edges and shall provide access pathways depending on the style of
roof construction pursuant to the most recent-edition of the New Jersey
International Building Code.
F. Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or
glare shall not be directed onto nearby properties, businesses,
residential homes or roadways.
G. Conduit, wiring systems, and raceways for photovoltaic circuits shall be
located as close as possible to the ridge or hip or valley and from the
ridge, hip or valley as directly as possible to an outside wall to reduce
tripping hazards and maximize ventilation opportunities. Conduit runs
between subarrays and to DC combiner boxes shall be installed in a
manner that minimizes the total amount of conduit on the roof.
H. An external disconnect switch, readily accessible by emergency
responders, and which is clearly identifiable and unobstructed, shall be
provided to disconnect power at the solar panel and shall be noted on
the application submitted to the Allendale Construction Code Office.
I. Marking is required on all interior and exterior direct conduit,
enclosures, raceway, enclosures, cable assemblies, junction boxes,
combiner boxes and disconnects to alert emergency first responders to
avoid cutting them.
J. Marking is required on all interior and exterior direct conduit,
enclosures, raceway, enclosures and cable assemblies every 10 feet,
within one foot of turns and bends and within one foot above and below
penetrations of roof/ceiling assemblies, walls or barriers.
K. The materials used for marking shall be reflective, weather-resistant
and suitable for the environment. Marking shall have all letters
capitalized with a minimum letter height 3/8 inch tall. Letters shall be
white on a red background.
L. Signage identifying the use of solar panels shall be posted at an easily
visible location. The signage shall clearly state the name, address and
telephone number of the vendor authorized to deactivate the solar
panel system in the case of an emergency. In addition, the marking shall
contain the words "WARNING: PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SOURCE."
Marking shall be placed adjacent to the main service disconnect in a
location clearly visible from the location where the disconnect is
operated.
M. In addition to the required signage, property owners shall provide the
Allendale Fire Official with a map illustrating the location of the
disconnect switch, as well as any information regarding the vendor
authorized to deactivate the solar panel. The Allendale Fire Official is
§ 270-48.16 TAXATION § 270-48.16
237:737
herein authorized to request additional information on the map or in a
format specified by the Allendale Fire Official.
N. A solar energy system erected above an off-street parking area shall be
screened from the view of public streets and residential zones by
vegetation, fencing or walls and/or topographic features.
Notwithstanding other provisions within this article, a solar energy
system erected above a parking area shall be permitted a maximum
height of 22 feet above the elevation of the parking pavement.
Mounting equipment necessary for a solar energy system to be installed
above parking infrastructure is permitted to encroach the minimum
distance necessary into the depth and/or width of a parking space
without creating a variance condition relative to the dimension or size
of a parking space.
O. Solar energy systems erected over off-street parking areas or
pedestrian walkways shall be equipped with snow and ice cleats.
P. When installed as an accessory use on a lot with a principal use or
structure, solar energy systems shall be designed and sized to provide
energy for the principal use of the property whereon the solar energy
system is installed and shall not be for the generation of power for
commercial purposes. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit
the sale of excess power generated from time to time from an accessory
use solar energy system designed and sized to meet the energy needs of
the principal use located on the same property whereon the solar
energy system is installed. This provision is not applicable to solar
energy systems installed as the principal use of the property. In these
cases, there is no other principal use on the property that could utilize
the energy generated by the solar energy system.
§ 270-48.16 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-48.16
237:738
ARTICLE VIII
AAA Residence Zone District
§ 270-49. Primary intended use. [Amended 12-27-1984]
This zone district is intended for single-family and limited agricultural use.
The following uses are permitted:
A. Single-family residences.
B. No more than two roomers or boarders permitted in a principal
dwelling. Roomers or boarders are prohibited in any accessory
structure and under Subsection F herein. [Amended 2-14-2002]
C. As part of a dwelling, the office or studio of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, teacher, artist, musician, lawyer, architect, engineer or like
professional person residing on the premises, provided that not more
than one person not residing in said dwelling is employed in such office
and said office does not occupy more than 1/2 of the first floor area.
D. All public buildings and uses for schools, churches and other quasipublic
buildings for use by nonprofit organizations. Application for any
such use, except uses for municipal purposes, shall be made to the
appropriate board in accordance with the applicable provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and the Land Use Procedures Ordinance119 of
the Borough of Allendale and as provided in § 270-12.
E. The raising or growing for sale of annual and perennial plants, of fruits
and of vegetable crops and such buildings and equipment as are
required for the use.
F. Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses, provided that
they shall not include any activity commonly conducted for gain.
G. Private garages, in accordance with § 270-18.
H. Signs, in accordance with § 270-20.
I. The keeping of domestic animals or fowl for personal use, provided that
they are kept at least 50 feet from any existing or later constructed
dwelling and enclosed by a suitable fence or other enclosure and are on
a lot at least two acres in area.
J. Home occupation conducted by an individual other than a professional
as set forth in Subsection C hereinabove; provided, however, that such
home occupation shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added
12-22-2005]
(1) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land Use Procedures.
§ 270-49 TAXATION § 270-49
237:739
§ 270-50. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-49 is prohibited.
§ 270-51. Height and area. [Amended 9-7-2000]
(2) Only family members who reside in the dwelling and not more than
one person who does not reside in said dwelling shall participate in
the home occupation on the premises.
(3) The residential character of the lot and the dwelling unit shall be
maintained. Neither the interior nor the exterior of the dwelling
will be structurally altered so as to require compliance with
nonresidential construction codes to accommodate the home
occupation. No additional buildings shall be added on the property
to accommodate the home occupation.
(4) The home occupation shall not generate customer-related
vehicular traffic.
(5) No direct selling of merchandise is permitted to occur on the
premises.
(6) No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation
shall be displayed or stored where visible from anywhere outside
the premises.
(7) The occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference or waste
runoff outside the dwelling unit or in the property surrounding the
dwelling unit.
(8) No vehicle used in connection with the home occupation which
requires a commercial driver’s license to operate is allowed to be
parked on the premises or on any street adjacent to the
residentially zoned property.
(9) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 270-20D, no home occupation
is permitted to be advertised by any signs on the premises, nor
shall the street address of the home occupations be advertised
through signs, billboards, television, radio or newspapers.
(10)No animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics, hospitals,
contractors’ yards, dancing schools, junkyards, lodging house
residential uses, massage parlors, restaurants, rental outlets or
vehicle repair shops are permitted as home occupations.
K. Lighting of athletic field areas in accordance with § 270-32.1. [Added
3-2-2017]
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is the lesser. Where a height is
specified for any building in this chapter, it should be measured from
§ 270-49 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-51
237:740
the lowest ground level immediately adjacent to the foundation to the
top of the highest point of the roof of the building. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to lighting of athletic field areas regulated by §
270-32.1. [Amended 7-13-1995; 3-2-2017]
B. Area.
(1) A lot used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall be
not less than 40,000 square feet in an area within 250 feet of the
street line.
(2) A lot used or intended for a public building, a school, a church, a
hospital or other public or quasi-public building or use shall be not
less than three acres in area.
(3) A lot used or intended to be used for any commercial, agricultural
or horticultural use shall be not less than five acres in area.
C. Minimum lot width.
(1) A lot used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall be
not less than 120 feet wide measured along a line parallel with the
street lot line and 50 feet therefrom, and not less than 110 feet
wide at the shortest distance between side lot lines within 250 feet
of the street lot line, except that any lot so situated that its side lot
line would meet at an angle of 70° or more if extended in the
direction of the street may have a minimum distance between the
side lot lines at the street lot line which is not less than 100 feet.
(2) A lot used or intended to be used for any other purpose permitted
in this zone district shall have a minimum width of 250 feet within
250 feet of the street lot line and a minimum depth, measured
perpendicular to the street lot line, of 250 feet over a width of not
less than 250 feet.
D. Front yard. No building or paved area other than access walks and
driveways shall be constructed nearer to the street front property line
than 50 feet, except that:
(1) Where the existing buildings on the same side of the street and
within 500 feet form an established setback, new residential
buildings shall conform to such established line, provided that no
new building may be constructed closer than 30 feet to the front
property line nor need be set back more than 60 feet from said
property line.
(2) No building used for other than residential purposes shall be
constructed less than 60 feet from the street front property line.
E. Side yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than 25 feet wide. No building or structure accessory to any use other
than residential shall be constructed closer to a side property line than
50 feet.
§ 270-51 TAXATION § 270-51
237:741
F. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.120
G. Lot area and yard requirements set forth in this section for uses other
than residential shall be required in any zone district in which the uses
permitted in the AAA Residence Zone District are also permitted.121
120. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Minimum living area, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
121. Editor's Note: Former § 77-47, Approvals, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-25-1986.
§ 270-51 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-51
237:742
ARTICLE IX
AA Residence Zone District
§ 270-52. Primary intended use.
This zone district is designed for single-family residential use but also
permits any use permitted in the AAA Residential Zone District.
§ 270-53. Prohibited use.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-49 is prohibited.
§ 270-54. Height and area.
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is the lesser. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to lighting of athletic field areas regulated
by § 270-32.1. [Amended 7-13-1995; 3-2-2017]
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 40 feet, except
that where the existing buildings on the same side of the street and
within 500 feet form an established setback, new buildings shall
conform to such established line, provided that no new building may
project closer than 30 feet to the front property line nor need be set
back more than 50 feet from said property line.
C. Side yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than 20 feet.
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
E. Minimum lot area. [Amended 9-7-2000]
(1) A lot used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall have
an area of not less than 26,000 square feet located within a
distance of 200 feet from the street upon which it fronts or, for
corner lots, from both streets.
(2) A lot used or intended for a public building, a school, a church, a
hospital or other public or quasi-public building or use shall be not
less than three acres in area.
(3) A lot used or intended to be used for any commercial, agricultural
or horticultural use shall be not less than five acres in area.122
F. Minimum lot width. A lot used or intended to be used for residential
purposes shall have an average width of 130 feet within 200 feet of the
street lot line. The shortest distance between side lot lines shall be not
less than 100 feet, measured along a line parallel with the street lot line
and 40 feet therefrom, and not less than 90 feet within 200 feet of the
122. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Minimum floor area, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
§ 270-52 TAXATION § 270-54
237:743
street lot line, except that any lot so situated that its side lot line would
meet at an angle of 70° or more, if extended in the direction of the
street, may have a minimum distance between side lot lines at the
street lot line which is not less than 80 feet.123 [Added 9-7-2000]
123. Editor's Note: Former § 77-51, Approvals, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-25-1986.
§ 270-54 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-54
237:744
ARTICLE X
A Residence Zone District
§ 270-55. Primary intended use.
This zone district is designed for single-family residential use, but permits:
§ 270-56. Prohibited use.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-55 is prohibited.
§ 270-57. Height and area.
A. Any use permitted in the AA Residence Zone.
B. Customary home occupations, such as millinery, dressmaking or
hairdressing, provided that there is no display of goods visible from the
street, and provided that such occupation shall be carried on by a
person only within a dwelling or apartment used by him or her as his or
her private residence, and provided that such occupation does not
occupy more than 1/2 of the first floor area.
C. Lodging for roomers and boarders not exceeding two in number.
D. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses; the term
"accessory use," however, not including a business or any building or
use not located on the same lot with the building to which it is
accessory.
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is the lesser. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to lighting of athletic field areas regulated
by § 270-32.1. [Amended 7-13-1995; 3-2-2017]
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet, except
that where the existing buildings on the same side of the street and
within 500 feet form an established setback, new buildings shall
conform to such established line, provided that no new building may
project closer than 25 feet to the front property line nor need be set
back more than 45 feet from said property line.
C. Side yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than 15 feet.
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
E. Minimum lot area. [Amended 9-7-2000]
(1) A lot used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall have
an area of not less than 20,000 square feet located within a
distance of 175 feet from the street upon which it fronts or, for
corner lots, from both streets.
§ 270-55 TAXATION § 270-57
237:745
(2) A lot used or intended for a public building, a school, a church, a
hospital or other public or quasi-public building or use shall be not
less than three acres in area.
(3) A lot used or intended to be used for any commercial, agricultural
or horticultural use shall be not less than five acres in area.124
F. Minimum lot width. A lot used or intended to be used for residential
purposes shall have an average width of 115 feet within 175 feet of the
street lot line. The shortest distance between side lot lines shall not be
less than 90 feet therefrom, measured along a line parallel with the
street lot line and 35 feet therefrom, and not less than 80 feet within
175 feet of the street lot line, except that any lot so situated that its side
lot line would meet at an angle of 70° or more, if extended in the
direction of the street, may have a minimum distance between side lot
lines at the street lot line which is not less than 70 feet.125 [Added
9-7-2000]
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Minimum floor area, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
125. Editor's Note: Former § 77-55, Approvals, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-25-1986.
§ 270-57 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-57
237:746
ARTICLE XI
B Residence Zone District
§ 270-58. Primary intended use.
This zone district is designed for one- and two-family residential use, but
also permits any use permitted in the AA Residence Zone District.
§ 270-59. Prohibited use.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-58 is prohibited.
§ 270-60. Height and area.
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is the lesser. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to lighting of athletic field areas regulated
by § 270-32.1. [Amended 7-13-1995; 3-2-2017]
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet, except
that where the existing buildings on the same side of the street and
within 500 feet form an established setback, new buildings shall
conform to such established line, provided that no new building may
project closer than 20 feet to the front property line nor need be set
back more than 40 feet from said property line.
C. Side yard. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard shall be less
than 10 feet.
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 25 feet.
E. Minimum lot area. [Amended 9-7-2000]
(1) A lot used or intended to be used for residential purposes shall have
an area of not less than 10,000 square feet for a single-family
residence and not less than 12,500 square feet for a two-family
residence contained within a distance of 175 feet from the street
upon which it fronts or, for corner lots, from both streets.
(2) A lot used or intended to be used for a public building, a school, a
church, a hospital or other public or quasi-public building or use
shall not be less than three acres in area.
(3) A lot used or intended to be used for any commercial, agricultural
or horticultural use shall be not less than five acres in area.126
F. Minimum lot width. A lot used or intended to be used for residential
purposes shall have a lot width of at least 100 feet for single-family use
and at least 115 feet for two-family use, measured at the shortest
distance between side lot lines within 100 feet of the street lot lines.
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Minimum floor area, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
§ 270-58 TAXATION § 270-60
237:747
Over a width of at least 75 feet, the lot line shall be not less than
100 feet deep measured perpendicular to the street front property line.
[Added 9-7-2000]
§ 270-60 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-60
237:748
ARTICLE XII
Impervious Surface Coverage, Side Yard Setbacks and Building
Coverage
[Added 5-13-1999]
§ 270-61. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLOWABLE COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that may be
covered by building structures or impervious surfaces.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Land areas covered by buildings or other
structures. These areas shall include residences, garages, sheds, porches,
decks, cabanas and buildings or other structures with roofed areas.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The percentage of the lot area that limits the overall
gross building floor area.
GROSS BUILDING AREA — Is defined as the gross building floor area of the
buildings on the property. The gross building area shall include all enclosed
floor areas on all floors for residences, accessory buildings or garages.
The gross building area shall not include open porches, unfinished attics,
basements, decks or patios.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Land surface areas that do not allow rainwater
to be directly absorbed by the ground. These surfaces shall include:
LOT AREA — The actual land area of the property or lot, including
easements or rights-of-way.
NONIMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Includes:
SIDE YARD SETBACK — The minimum dimension between a building or
structure and the side property line.
A. Building coverage.
B. Driveways or other paved areas.
C. Patios and walkways.
D. Tennis courts.
E. Water surface area of swimming pools.
Decks which do not allow free drainage of rainwater through to the
ground underneath.
F.
Gravel or loose stone areas that allow water to pass through to the
ground below.
A.
B. Fences, playground equipment, arbors or outdoor furniture.
§ 270-61 TAXATION § 270-62
237:749
§ 270-62. Impervious surfaces.
The maximum allowable coverage for the combined building and impervious
surface area for single-family residential lots shall be determined as follows:
§ 270-63. Floor area ratios.
§ 270-64. Side yard setbacks.
The minimum side yard setback distance for residential zones shall be
controlled by the zone and by the gross building area. No side yard shall
be less than the minimum side yard requirement calculated for each zone
district as set forth herein.
A. For lots less than 10,000 square feet in area, the maximum allowable
impervious coverage shall be 55% of the lot area.
B. For lots over 40,000 square feet in area, the maximum allowable
impervious coverage shall be 27.5% of the lot area.
C. For lots with areas between 10,000 square feet and 40,000 square feet,
the maximum percentage of allowable impervious coverage shall be
equal to 55 divided by the square root of the lot area.
A. The floor area ratio (FAR) is determined as follows:
(1) For lots with less than 10,000 square feet, the FAR shall be 25% of
the lot area.
(2) For lots with more than 40,000 square feet, the FAR shall be 19% of
lot area.
(3) For lots between 10,000 square feet and 40,000 square feet, the
FAR percentage shall be computed as follows: FAR = 25 - .0002
times (lot area - 10,000).
B. The gross building area of a residential lot shall not exceed the
percentage of the lot area which is equal to the floor area ratio as
determined herein.
A. Zone AAA.
(1) Minimum of 25 feet.
(2) .008 times the gross building area for areas over 3,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum of 40 feet for gross building areas over 5,000 square feet.
B. Zone AA.
(1) Minimum of 20 feet.
(2) .007 times the gross building area for areas over 2,800 feet.
(3) Minimum of 40 feet for gross building areas over 5,600 square feet.
§ 270-62 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-64
237:750
C. Zone A.
(1) Minimum of 15 feet.
(2) .006 times the gross building area for areas over 2,400 square feet.
(3) Minimum of 40 feet for gross building areas over 6,6OO square
feet.
D. Zone B.
(1) Minimum of 10 feet.
(2) .005 times the gross building area for areas over 2,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum of 40 feet for gross building areas over 7,800 square feet.
§ 270-64 TAXATION § 270-64
237:751

ARTICLE XIII
C-1 Central Business Zone District
§ 270-65. Purpose of district. [Amended 7-26-1990]
It is the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance to provide that the C-1
Business Zone District shall serve as the principal retail and service area
of the Borough, accommodating shopping and business needs customary
in a residential community. The zone is intended to serve the following
functions: to provide convenience goods and services to the Borough and
its residents; to provide consumer goods and services usually attendant
to the needs of a residential community; and to provide office uses which
complement and support the business uses and which are customarily
attendant to the needs of a residential community.
§ 270-66. Permitted uses. [Added 7-26-1990]
In the C-1 Business Zone District, no building or premises shall be used and
no building or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or altered
which shall be arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose
other than the following uses:
§ 270-67. Prohibited uses. [Amended 7-26-1990]
The C-1 Business Zone District is intended to be used for retail sales and
service only. Accordingly, all uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
Without intending to limit the application of this provision, the following
uses are specifically prohibited:
A. Any use permitted in the A, AA, AAA or B Zone Districts; provided,
however, that no residential use shall be permitted below the level of
the second floor in any structure.
B. Shops or stores for retail merchandising, provided that there are no
fabricating, manufacture, conversion, alteration or assembling
operations permitted, except as may be only incidental to the particular
retail trade to be conducted.
C. Restaurant, tavern or ice cream parlor, shops rendering a retail service,
such as a baker, barber, cleaner, hairdresser, cobbler, tailor, milliner or
other retail service, appliance sales and their incidental repair or
servicing.
D. Banks, savings and loan associations, real estate or insurance agents or
brokers, travel agents or professional service offices, such as doctor,
lawyer, accountant, architect, artist, schools of dance or music or
government offices.
A. Subject to the provisions of § 270-66D aforesaid, office uses whose
primary principal activity is other than on-site sales or service to retail
consumers or professional services.
§ 270-65 TAXATION § 270-67
237:753
§ 270-68. Applicable requirements. [Added 7-26-1990; amended
8-12-1999]
Within this zone district, any and all businesses, together with the
appurtenant uses thereof, including warehousing and storage, shall be
conducted entirely within a permanent, enclosed roofed structure which
shall comply with the Building Code127 of the Borough of Allendale, except
licensed outdoor cafes. No warehousing or storage is permitted except
insofar as it is ancillary and incidental to the primary and intended uses
conducted lawfully on the premises.
§ 270-69. Height and area.
B. Repair facilities, including body shops, automobile repair shops or
shops, businesses or uses whose major activity is the fabrication, repair,
manufacture or assembly or storage of equipment, machinery or other
products and any repairs not incidental to a retail sales or service
activity.
C. General executive business and nonretail sales and service offices are
prohibited within the business zone district. Corporate headquarters,
regional and sales offices and similar offices are specifically excluded
from this zone district.
D. No uses permitted in this zone shall be conducted out of doors except
licensed outdoor cafes. [Amended 8-12-1999]
E. Drive-through style fast-food restaurants primarily engaged in the sale
of foods for off-premises consumption.
F. No unattended business or any business of a laundry, dry-cleaning
establishment, self-service laundry, bakery or repair shop where any
one of the same shall employ more than six persons or use machinery
having a cumulative horsepower rating of more than 20 is permitted.
A. Height. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, no building or structure shall exceed a maximum of two
stories or 28 feet in height, whichever is lesser; provided, however, that
a parapet wall or walls shall be permitted a maximum height of 35 feet
if the width of the portion of such wall or walls over 28 feet high does
not exceed 25% of the total width of the building facade devoted to the
use in question. [Amended 7-13-1995; 6-22-2006]
B. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 42 feet from the
center line of the street.
C. Side yard. All business buildings may be built without side yards, except
that where a business zone district adjoins a residence zone district,
there shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 100, Building Construction.
§ 270-67 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-69
237:754
§ 270-70. (Reserved)128
D. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 24 feet where property
abuts any residence zone district, provided that where an alley
separates the business zone district from the residential zone district,
the full alley width may be counted as part of the required yard.
128. Editor's Note: Former § 270-70, Permit procedure, as amended, was repealed 10-23-2008.
§ 270-69 TAXATION § 270-70
237:755

ARTICLE XIV
C-2 Central Business Zone District -- Shopping Center
§ 270-71. District regulations.
All regulations pertaining to C-1 Central Business Zone District shall apply
to C-2 Central Business Zone District — Shopping Center; provided,
however, that there shall be a minimum area requirement of six acres and a
minimum frontage requirement of 500 feet.
§ 270-71 TAXATION § 270-71
237:757

ARTICLE XV
D-1 and D-2 Industrial Zone Districts
[Amended 9-25-1986; 7-13-1995; 12-9-2004; 11-9-2006;
10-23-2008; 6-12-2014]
§ 270-72. Primary intended use.
The D-1 and D-2 Districts are intended primarily for office, light
manufacturing, processing and assembly operations, together with only
wholesale sales and display rooms necessarily pertinent thereto. The D-1
and D-2 Districts are differentiated by the added permission of medicalrelated
office and commercial uses.
A. The following uses are permitted in the D-1 Zone District:
(1) Indoor individualized instructional sports training facility, which
shall not exceed a maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet
(excluding health clubs and bowling alleys).
(2) Martial arts and gymnastic instruction.
(3) Studios for the instruction of individualized musical and other fine
and performing arts, which shall not exceed a maximum floor area
of 2,500 square feet.
(4) State-licensed rehabilitation and physical therapy clinics.
(5) Medical and dental offices, medical imaging and medical dialysis
facilities, excluding testing laboratories or medical clinics.
(6) State-licensed adult day-care facilities.
(7) Warehouse facility. Subject to the following minimum standards:
[Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
(a) Such facilities shall be within completely enclosed buildings.
(b) Such facilities shall not be freight-forwarding or transshipping
terminals.
(c) No loading dock or service area may be on or visible from any
street frontage. Provision for handling all freight shall be on
those sides of any building which do not face on any street or
proposed streets.
(d) Trucking services at permitted facilities shall be limited in
hours of operation to between 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(e) Rear and side property yards shall be landscaped so as to
provide an effective screen, at time of planting, to obscure
from view at ground level the permitted use from adjoining
primary residential uses.
§ 270-72 TAXATION § 270-72
237:759
(f) The exterior design of all permitted buildings on lots which
abut a residence district or any street opposite land in a
residence district shall be in harmony with the general
character of the residential neighborhood.
(8) Self-service storage facilities. Self-service storage facilities uses
shall be subject to the following requirements: [Added 2-15-2018
by Ord. No. 18-05]
(a) Self-service storage facilities are permitted only within a single
contiguous multistory structure. Self-service storage facilities
shall be designed with such facade treatments and details that
break up large expanses of the building form. Such efforts shall
include architecture detailing by story and the use of
strategically placed windows or other building materials in
composition that reduce the visual monotony of the structure.
Roof form and materials shall also be considered to offset the
mass and scale. These design features shall be incorporated in
support of the zoning intent to reduce the visual impacts to the
surrounding zone plan. Such design requirements may be
waived when an existing structure is retrofitted for such a use
and not being enlarged.
(b) Individual storage units shall be the unit so rented and the
pickup and deposit of goods and/or property in dead storage.
Storage units shall not be used for activities such as:
[1] Residences, offices, workshops, studios, or hobby or
rehearsal areas.
[2] Manufacturing, fabrication, or processing of goods,
service or repair of vehicles, engines, appliances or other
electrical equipment, or any other individual activity.
[3] No drop-type shipping is permitted.
[4] Conducting retail sales of any kind, including garage or
estate sales or auctions, or to conduct any other
commercial activity; provided that the operator of the selfservice
storage may conduct a sale or otherwise liquidate
the contents of any storage unit to satisfy and settle an
account of unpaid rent or other charges, through public or
private sale, in a manner provided by law.
[5] The servicing or repair of any vehicles, boats, tools or
equipment.
[6] Storage of flammable, perishable or hazardous materials
or the keeping of animals.
[7] The rental of trucks, trailers or moving equipment and the
installation of trailer hitches are prohibited.
§ 270-72 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-72
237:760
[8] Sale of boxes or packing materials is permitted but only if
accessory to the self-service storage facility.
(c) Self-service storage facilities shall not operate or allow tenant
access between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Such
access shall be controlled by a security code access limitation
or approved equal.
(d) All goods and property stored in a self-service storage facility
shall be stored in an enclosed building. No outdoor storage of
any kind.
(e) All storage units above ground level and storage units visible
from residential areas shall gain access from the interior of the
building(s) or site; no unit doors, loading bays, or docks may
face towards any adjacent residential zoned areas.
(f) Electrical service to storage units shall be for lighting and
climate control only. No electrical outlets are permitted inside
individual storage units. Lighting fixtures and switches shall be
of a secure design that will not allow connecting to the fixtures
for other purposes.
(g) A minimum standard of one parking space per 2,500 square
feet of floor area plus one parking space per 200 units is
required for such self-storage facility.
B. The following uses are permitted in the D-1 and D-2 Zone Districts:
(1) Manufacturing, servicing or reconstruction of light machinery and
assembly, comprising any of the following:
(a) Point-of-sale terminals.
(b) Office business electronics or machinery.
(c) Sewing machines.
(d) Machine design, detailing and associated model making.
(2) Fabrication of metal products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Boats.
(b) Baby carriages.
(c) Bicycles and other such vehicles.
(d) Instrument making.
(e) Metal household furniture, screens and storm sashes.
(f) Musical instruments.
(3) Fabrication of paper products, comprising any of the following:
§ 270-72 TAXATION § 270-72
237:761
(a) Bags.
(b) Bookbinding.
(c) Boxes and packing materials.
(d) Office supplies.
(4) Fabrication of wood products, comprising any of the following:
(a) Boats.
(b) Boxes.
(c) Cabinets and woodwork.
(d) Furniture.
(5) Laboratories, including the following:
(a) Dental.
(b) Electronic.
(c) Pharmaceutical.
(6) Other permissible industry, comprising any of the following:
(a) Book publishing.
(b) Brush and broom manufacturing.
(c) Plastic product fabrication.
(d) Printing paper and cloth.
(e) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(7) Professional office buildings.
(8) Digital data storage facilities (accessory generators shall be as
regulated herein).
(9) Any nonresidential use permitted in the AAA Residence Zone
District, provided it is on a lot at least five acres in area.
C. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the D-1 and D-2 Zone
Districts;
(1) Cross-loading dock-type distribution facilities.
(2) Refrigeration facilities greater than 10% of the lease area of the
user; exterior refrigeration storage and equipment.
(3) Retail sales.
§ 270-72 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-73
237:762
§ 270-73. Performance standards.
The legislative intent and recitals set forth in the preamble to Ordinance
No. 06-27 (amending this section) are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein as if set forth herein at length.129 No use shall be permitted
in this zone district which is dangerous or obnoxious by reason of excessive
noise, odor, smoke or other hazard, or which would be detrimental to the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of the residents of the Borough of
Allendale. Any approved use shall:
A. Carry on all manufacturing operations and all storage of goods or
materials within a fully enclosed building except as permitted herein.
[Amended 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
B. Employ not more than 50 persons per acre.
C. Accept deliveries or make shipments only between the hours of 6:30
a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on Saturday.
D. (Reserved)
E. (Reserved)
F. Provide and maintain attractive landscape plantings on that portion of
the lot not required for buildings and parking area.
G. Require the storage of not more than 10,000 gallons of flammable, toxic
or otherwise dangerous liquids and provide for the storage of any
amount above ground level.
H. Not permit the escape of any toxic, noxious or unpleasant gases or
odors detectable beyond the limit of the lot on which the use is
conducted.
I. Not violate the requirements of Chapter 170, Noise. In addition,
approved uses shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) There shall be no discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other
device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. Motor
vehicles shall be equipped with the original muffler and other
components or equivalent replacement in good working order.
(2) There shall be no use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or so operated in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(3) No motor vehicle shall be permitted to idle for more than three
consecutive minutes unless waiting to enter a driveway or street
129. Editor's Note: Said preamble is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 270-73 TAXATION § 270-73
237:763
§ 270-74. Prohibited use.
Any use other than those set forth in § 270-72 hereof is hereby prohibited,
unless substantially similar in character and use to those uses listed in
§ 270-72 and approval thereof given specifically by the Planning Board and
the governing body in the same manner as set forth in § 270-77 hereof;
provided, however, that compliance shall be observed of the conditions set
forth in § 270-73 hereof.
§ 270-75. Height and area.
intersection; provided, however, that an initial warm-up period of
15 minutes shall be permitted for diesel trucks.
(4) All areas traveled by motor vehicles shall be designed, paved and
maintained in such condition so as to minimize the noise produced
by the movement of motor vehicles. Excessive bumps, dips or other
irregularities in the pavement that may contribute to noise
produced by motor vehicles shall be eliminated.
(5) Approved uses shall conduct loading and unloading operations; the
opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers,
building materials, liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects
or the pneumatic or pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials
in liquid, gaseous, powder or pellet form or the compacting of
refuse by persons engaged in the business of scavenging or
garbage collection, whether private or municipal, out of doors only
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. Exempt from this
limitation is the operation of snow blowers, snow throwers and
snow plows when operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow
removal.
J. Discharge no noxious, toxic or unpleasant, flammable wastes onto the
surface of the ground or onto surface waters.
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 40 feet in height, whichever is the lesser.
B. Area. No lot in the D Zone Districts shall be less than two acres in area.
Each lot shall have frontage on an improved street.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet.
D. Side yard. There shall be two side yards with a minimum width of 50
feet.
E. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet, except that this
requirement shall be waived where the rear yard abuts a railroad or a
public utility right-of-way at least 50 feet wide.
§ 270-73 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-75
237:764
§ 270-76. Accessory buildings.
§ 270-77. Accessory uses. [Added 2-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-05]
F. Total occupancy of land. Not more than 35% of the land in any one lot
may be occupied by buildings nor more than 85% by buildings and
paved area combined.
A. Accessory buildings shall be separated from each other and from the
principal building by at least 15 feet.
B. Accessory emergency generators shall meet the following setback
requirements:
(1) Front yard: 100 feet.
(2) Side yard: 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 50 feet (except six feet where adjacent to a fifty-footwide
railroad right-of-way).
C. Emergency generators shall meet the standards applicable in Chapter
170 of the Borough Code. Each unit shall be contained in a soundattenuating
cover that meets these standards. In addition, such
enclosures shall be screened from view by landscaping. The testing
required for these backup generating systems shall be confined to the
hours between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
A. Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to those uses customarily
incidental to the permitted principal uses in the district.
B. Limited outdoor storage of goods and materials incidental part of the
primary operation on a lot is permitted subject to the following
standards:
(1) Shall be approved by a site plan approval of the limits of this use.
(2) Shall not be in the front yard of the lot.
(3) Shall not be located closer than 10 feet to a side or rear yard lot
line, except where such side or rear lot line coincides with a
railroad or utility right-of-way at least 50 feet wide.
(4) The area of permitted outdoor storage shall not cover more than
40% of any lot serving the use.
(5) Shall not be for the storage, keeping or abandonment of scrap
metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition,
salvage, resale or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or
machinery or parts thereof.
(6) Shall be so screened by fencing, walls or evergreen planting that it
cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when
§ 270-75 TAXATION § 270-77
237:765
§ 270-78. (Reserved)
viewed by a person standing on the ground level at the common lot
line.
(7) Shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 199, Property
Maintenance.
§ 270-77 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-78
237:766
ARTICLE XVI
E Industrial Zone District
§ 270-79. Primary intended use. [Amended 3-28-2013]
The use permitted within this district is limited to light manufacturing,
warehousing, processing, packaging and assembly operation, including the
following:
A. Manufacturing or reconstruction of light machinery, comprising any of
the following:
(1) Carburetors and small machine parts.
(2) Cash registers.
(3) Typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(4) Sewing machines.
(5) Machine design, detailing and associated model making.
B. Fabrication of metal products, comprising any of the following:
(1) Boats.
(2) Baby carriages.
(3) Bicycles and other such vehicles.
(4) Instrument making.
(5) Metal household furniture, screens and storm sashes.
(6) Musical instruments.
(7) Toys.
C. Fabrication of paper products, comprising any of the following:
(1) Bags.
(2) Bookbinding.
(3) Boxes and packaging material.
(4) Office supplies.
(5) Toys.
D. Fabrication of wood products, comprising any of the following:
(1) Boats.
(2) Boxes.
(3) Cabinets and woodwork.
§ 270-79 TAXATION § 270-79
237:767
§ 270-80. Performance standards. [Amended 12-19-2004;
4-10-2006; 11-9-2006]
The legislative intent and recitals set forth in the preamble to Ordinance
No. 06-27 (amending this section) are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein as if set forth herein at length.130 No use shall be permitted
(4) Furniture.
(5) Toys.
E. Laboratories and packaging operations, including the following:
(1) Biological.
(2) Chemical.
(3) Dental.
(4) Electronic.
(5) Pharmaceutical.
F. Other permissible industry, comprising any of the following:
(1) Book publishing.
(2) Brush and broom manufacturing.
(3) Plastic product fabrication.
(4) Jewelry manufacturing, including gem polishing.
(5) Leather goods manufacture from already cured or tanned hides.
(6) Photo finishing.
(7) Printing of paper and cloth.
(8) Sporting goods manufacturing.
(9) Textile products manufacturing.
G. Office buildings.
H. Indoor physical fitness facilities, as defined in § 270-8. [Added
4-10-2006]
I. Warehousing, including the following: A building used for the handling
and storage of goods and materials by the owner of the goods or
operating for a specific commercial establishment or group of
establishments in a particular industrial or economic field; provided,
however, that such use shall not include vehicle maintenance, retail
sales or a public storage facility.
130. Editor's Note: Said preamble is on file in the Borough Offices.
§ 270-79 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-80
237:768
in this zone district which is dangerous or obnoxious by reason of excessive
noise, odor, smoke or other hazard, or which would be detrimental to the
health, safety, morals or general welfare of the residents of the Borough of
Allendale. Any approved use shall:
A. Carry on all manufacturing operations and all storage of goods or
materials within a fully enclosed building.
B. Employ not more than 50 persons per acre.
C. Accept deliveries or make shipments only between the hours of 6:30
a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on Saturday. However, exempted from the foregoing limitation are
any and all deliveries made by trucks directly to or from Route 17 or by
trucks using streets located within the E Zone District and/or using only
that portion of Boroline Road upon which the E Zone District has
frontage.
D. (Reserved)
E. (Reserved)
F. Provide and maintain attractive landscape plantings on that portion of
the lot not required for buildings and parking area.
G. Require the storage of not more than 10,000 gallons of flammable, toxic
or otherwise dangerous liquids and provide for the storage of any
amount above ground level.
H. Not permit the escape of any toxic, noxious or unpleasant gases or
odors detectable beyond the limit of the lot on which the use is
conducted.
I. Not violate the requirements of Chapter 170, Noise. In addition,
approved uses shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) There shall be no discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
internal combustion engine except through a muffler or other
device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. Motor
vehicles shall be equipped with the original muffler and other
components or equivalent replacement in good working order.
(2) There shall be no use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or so operated in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(3) No motor vehicle shall be permitted to idle for more than three
consecutive minutes unless waiting to enter a driveway or street
intersection; provided, however, that an initial warm-up period of
15 minutes shall be permitted for diesel trucks.
(4) All areas traveled by motor vehicles shall be designed, paved and
maintained in such condition so as to minimize the noise produced
§ 270-80 TAXATION § 270-80
237:769
§ 270-81. Prohibited use.
Any use other than those set forth in § 270-79 hereof is hereby prohibited
unless substantially similar in character and use to those uses listed in
§ 270-79 and approval thereof is given specifically by the Planning Board
and the Governing Body in the same manner as set forth in § 270-85 hereof;
provided, however, that compliance shall be observed of the conditions set
forth in § 270-80 hereof.
§ 270-82. Height and area.
by the movement of motor vehicles. Excessive bumps, dips or
other irregularities in the pavement that may contribute to noise
produced by motor vehicles shall be eliminated.
(5) Approved uses shall conduct loading and unloading operations; the
opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers,
building materials, liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects
or the pneumatic or pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials
in liquid, gaseous, powder or pellet form or the compacting of
refuse by persons engaged in the business of scavenging or
garbage collection, whether private or municipal, out of doors only
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. Exempt from this
limitation is the operation of snow blowers, snow throwers and
snow plows when operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow
removal.
J. Discharge no noxious, toxic or unpleasant, flammable wastes onto the
surface of the ground or onto surface waters.
A. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet in
height, including any and all superstructures and appurtenances.
[Amended 7-13-1995]
B. Area. No lot in the E Zone shall be less than three acres in area, and
each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 200 feet on an approved
municipal street.
C. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 55 feet from the
center line of the street.
D. Side yard. There shall be two side yards with minimum widths of 50 feet
each.
E. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip at least 75 feet wide between
the E Zone and any property used for or zoned for residential purposes.
This strip must be in common ownership with the contiguous industrial
property and shall be landscaped and planted with evergreens at least
six feet in height throughout its entire length and shall be so
maintained. This planting shall be so located with sufficient density as
to screen from view any building located on said plot from any
§ 270-80 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-82
237:770
§ 270-83. Accessory buildings.
There shall be permitted one accessory building per lot, and such accessory
building shall be separated from the principal building by at least 15 feet.
§ 270-84. Streets.
§ 270-85. through § 270-86. (Reserved)132
contiguous residential zone and shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board. Any existing growth in such buffer strip shall be
preserved if such existing growth supplements the desired screening
effect.
F. Total occupancy of land. Not more than 35% of the land in any one lot
may be occupied by buildings, nor more than 75% of the land involved
may be occupied by buildings and paved area combined.
G. Use adjacent to Route 17. No buildings or paved area shall be located
within 75 feet of the right-of-way of Route 17, except sidewalks and
streets.
H. There shall be one principal building per lot.
I. There shall be a maximum of 10 permitted uses per building, except
that if a building shall exceed 50,000 square feet in area, additional
uses shall be permitted not to exceed one use per each additional 5,000
square feet in excess of 50,000 square feet. [Amended 12-9-1982]
J. Minimum area for permitted uses. The minimum building area for a
permitted use shall be 2,500 square feet.
A. All streets shall be 60 feet in width, with paving 20 feet on either side of
the center line thereof. Four-foot sidewalks shall be installed on both
sides of the pavement and not closer than four feet therefrom. All other
improvements required by specifications of the Subdivision Ordinance
of the Borough of Allendale131 shall be provided, and all improvements
shall be in accordance with the specifications thereof.
B. Parking is prohibited on any street in the industrial area.
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
132. Editor's Note: Former § 270-85, Procedure, and former § 270-86, Use permit, were
repealed 10-23-2008.
§ 270-82 TAXATION § 270-85
237:771

ARTICLE XVII
AU Townhouse Zone District
§ 270-87. Definitions. [Amended 9-25-1986]
See § 270-8.
§ 270-88. Primary intended uses.
This zone district is intended for single-family townhouses. There is also
permitted in this zone district recreational facilities, such as golf courses,
tennis courts and swimming pools, and community center buildings
developed and maintained exclusively for the residents of the townhouses
and their guests.
§ 270-89. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those permitted herein is prohibited.
§ 270-90. District requirements.
A. Density. Townhouses shall not exceed four per acre.
B. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height. [Amended 7-13-1995]
C. Area. No lot in the AU Zone District shall be less than 10 acres in area.
D. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 40 feet for any
structure located within the zone district. Notwithstanding any other
provision to the contrary within this chapter, a front yard shall face
upon a public or private right-of-way, street or roadway and shall be
measured from the dwelling or other structure and the closest right-ofway,
street or roadway, whether private or public and whether or not
such street, roadway or right-of-way shall be an internal right-of-way
privately maintained for the use of residents. [Amended 2-12-1987]
E. Side yard. Side yards shall be that open space immediately to the side
of the townhouse structure. Such open space shall be a minimum of 100
feet between two adjacent townhouse structures and no side yard shall
be less than 50 feet from the nearest property line to the townhouse
structure. [Amended 2-12-1987]
F. Rear yard. Rear yards shall be that open space immediately to the rear
of the townhouse structure. Said rear yard shall not be less than 100
feet between the townhouse structure and any property line or other
unattached townhouse structure. [Amended 2-12-1987]
G. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 75 feet, located
within the townhouse property, between the AU Zone District and any
property used or zoned for residential purposes. This strip shall be
landscaped and planted with evergreens at least six feet in height
§ 270-87 TAXATION § 270-90
237:773
throughout its entire length and shall be so maintained. This planting
shall be so located with sufficient density as to screen from view any
building located on said plot from any contiguous residential zone
district and shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Any
existing growth in such buffer strip shall be preserved if such existing
growth supplements the desired screening effect. The Planning Board
may, upon a finding of reasons therefor, permit a portion of a buffer
strip to be used as a street to ensure access to and from adjacent
premises.
H. Occupancy of land. Not more than 30% of the land area of any one lot
may be occupied by buildings and paved areas combined.
I. Floor area ratio. The sum of the habitable area of all floors of buildings
or structures shall not exceed 27.5% of the area of the site. This formula
allows for 3,000 square feet of floor area for each unit or 12,000 square
feet per acre, the chapter permitting four units per acre. [Amended
12-21-1987]
J. Combined townhouses. Townhouses may be combined into one
building, provided that the overall building shall:
(1) Contain not more than six townhouses.
(2) Not exceed a length of 150 feet.
(3) Provide at least one staggered front building wall offset of at least
five feet when more than three townhouses are combined in one
building.
(4) Provide two means of ingress and egress into each townhouse.
(5) Have not less than two walls with window exposure for each
townhouse.
K. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
L. Roadways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal roads
shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police vehicles.
Minimum paved width shall be 15 feet for a one-way road and 25 feet
for a two-way road. All roads shall be constructed in accordance with
Borough ordinances and the laws of the State of New Jersey. Parking is
prohibited on any street in the AU Zone District.
M. Garages. There shall be at least one enclosed one-car garage for each
townhouse as an integral part thereof.
N. Off-street parking. One additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for each townhouse. An area of 200 square feet shall be the
minimum provided for each parking space required.
§ 270-90 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-90
237:774
§ 270-91. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough
of Allendale.133
O. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
P. Accessory buildings. Any building used for other than residential
purposes shall be constructed at least 40 feet from any roadway and
shall be separated from any townhouse by at least 200 feet and shall be
at least 150 feet from any abutting property line.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-90 TAXATION § 270-91
237:775

ARTICLE XVIII
BU Garden Apartments Zone District
§ 270-92. Definitions. [Amended 9-25-1986]
See § 270-8.
§ 270-93. Primary intended uses.
This zone district is intended for garden apartments with private garage
facilities.
§ 270-94. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 72-93 is prohibited.
§ 270-95. District requirements.
A. Density. Garden apartments shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre.
B. Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of two stories
or 30 feet in height. [Amended 7-13-1995]
C. Area. No lot in the BU Zone District shall be less than three acres in
area.
D. Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 40 feet.
E. Side yard. There shall be a side yard of at least 50 feet between two
adjacent garden apartment buildings, and no building shall be closer
than 25 feet to any abutting property line.
F. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet, except that this
requirement shall be waived where the rear yard abuts a railroad or a
public utility right-of-way at least 50 feet wide.
G. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 10 feet between the
BU Zone District and any property used or zoned for residential
purposes. This strip shall be landscaped with a dense planting of
evergreen shrubs or trees at least six feet high, either alone or in
combination with a wire or wooden fence.
H. Occupancy of land. Not more than 35% of the land in any one lot may be
occupied by buildings and paved areas combined.
I. Floor area ratio. The sum of the habitable floor area of all floors of
buildings or structures shall not exceed 34.5% of the area of the site.
This formula allows 1,500 square feet of floor area for each unit or
15,000 square feet per acre, the chapter permitting 10 units per
acre.134 [Amended 12-21-1987]
134. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, Maximum number of bedrooms, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
§ 270-92 TAXATION § 270-95
237:777
§ 270-96. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale.135
J. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
K. Maximum building length. The maximum length of any garden
apartment building shall not exceed 125 feet.
L. Recreation areas. Ten percent of the gross area of any one lot shall be
set aside for casual recreational use, such as an open grassy area for
games and other activities.
M. Clothes-drying areas. Clothes-drying areas shall be screened and shall
be located as approved by the Planning Board.
N. Roadways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal roads
shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police vehicles. All
roads shall be constructed in accordance with Borough ordinances and
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
O. Garages. There shall be at least one enclosed one-car garage for each
garden apartment unit.
P. Off-street parking. One additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for each garden apartment unit. An area of 200 square feet
shall be the minimum provided for each parking space required.
Q. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect light
away from all adjoining premises.
R. Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings other than garages shall
be permitted in the BU Zone District.
S. Superintendent. Each garden apartment project shall have a
superintendent residing on the premises.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-95 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-96
237:778
ARTICLE XIX
EM Mixed Industrial and Low- and Moderate-Income Multiple
Dwelling Zone District
[Added 4-11-1985136]
§ 270-97. Definitions. [Amended 9-25-1986]
See § 270-8.
§ 270-98. Primary intended uses and area of application.
A. This zone district is intended for the principal uses permitted in the E
Industrial Zone District, excluding indoor physical fitness facilities, and
for multiple-dwelling buildings providing housing accommodations for
low- and moderate-income families to comply with the provisions of the
New Jersey Supreme Court decision commonly referred to as Mount
Laurel II. The regulations and controls contained in this article shall be
interpreted to assure the construction of lower-income housing which
meets the standards and guidelines set forth in Mount Laurel II.
[Amended 4-10-2006]
B. Such multiple-dwelling use shall be restricted to a portion of the EM
Zone District at its south end containing 5.4 acres, more or less, and
described as follows:
(1) Beginning at the northwesterly corner of Lot 10 in Block 702 as
shown on the current Tax Map of the Borough of Allendale and
running; thence,
(a) Southwesterly along the division line between Lots 10, 9 and 8
in Block 702 to a point; thence,
(b) Northwesterly running parallel to the northerly line of Lots 7.1,
7, 6.1, 6 and 5 in Block 702, and 50 feet northerly measured at
right angles therefrom, to the easterly line of Lot 4 in Block
702; thence,
(c) Northeasterly along the easterly line of Lot 4 in Block 702 to a
point; thence,
(d) Southeasterly running parallel to the division line between
Lots 8 and 14 in Block 702, and 140 feet southerly measured at
right angles therefrom, to a point which is on a line from the
northwesterly corner of Lot 10 in Block 702, said line being
perpendicular to the northerly line of Lot 10 in Block 702;
thence,
(e) Southwesterly along said line to the point or place of
beginning.
136. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former Article XVIB, OR Office and Research Zone
District.
§ 270-97 TAXATION § 270-99
237:779
§ 270-99. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-98 is prohibited.
§ 270-100. District regulations.
A. For nonresidential uses permitted under this chapter, all standards and
requirements shall be as specified for the E Industrial Zone District
(Article XVI). [Amended 4-10-2006]
B. For multiple-dwelling uses permitted in § 270-98, requirements are as
follows:
(1) Density. The maximum density shall be 12 dwelling units per
acre.137
(2) Height. No building or structure shall exceed a maximum of three
stories or 35 feet in height. [Amended 7-13-1995]
(3) Area. Minimum lot size in this EM Mixed Zone District shall be five
acres. At least 60 dwelling units shall be constructed pursuant to
this article on a five-acre tract.
(4) Yards and setbacks. Minimum building setbacks from property
lines and zone lines shall be 50 feet.
(5) Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 75 feet, located
within the EM Zone District, adjoining any single-family residential
zone. This strip shall be landscaped and planted with evergreens at
least six feet in height throughout its entire length and shall be so
maintained. This planting shall be so located with sufficient density
as to screen from view any building located on said plot from any
contiguous residential zone district, subject to the approval of the
Planning Board. Any existing growth in such buffer strip shall be
preserved if such existing growth supplements the desired
screening effect. The Planning Board may, upon a finding of
reasons therefor, permit a portion of a buffer strip to be used as a
driveway to provide access to and from adjacent premises. This
buffer strip may be coincidental with and include any other setback
requirements in this article.
(6) Building separation. There shall be a separation of at least 40 feet
between adjacent multiple-dwelling buildings.
(7) Maximum building length. The maximum length of any multipledwelling
building shall not exceed 150 feet.
(8) Occupancy of land. Not more than 50% of the land may be occupied
by buildings and paved areas combined.
137. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), Maximum number of bedrooms, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-21-1987.
§ 270-99 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-100
237:780
(9) Recreation areas. At least 5% of the gross site area as designated
for multiple-dwelling use shall be set aside for casual recreational
use, such as an open grassy area for games and other activities.
(10) Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
(11) Driveways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal
driveways shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate
the maximum anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and
police vehicles. Minimum paved width shall be 12 feet for a oneway
driveway and 20 feet for a two-way driveway.
(12)Off-street parking and garages. There shall be at least two offstreet
parking spaces provided for each multiple-dwelling unit. The
size of a parking space required under this subsection shall be a
minimum of nine feet by 18 feet, notwithstanding the requirements
of § 270-43 of this chapter.
(13) Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the
light away from all adjoining premises.
C. If the construction of multiple dwellings on the site designated in
§ 270-98 is not feasible due to the physical characteristics of the
property, such as being located in a designated wetlands area, as
determined by the Borough or a governmental agency vested with such
jurisdiction, the developer shall make a monetary contribution to a
Housing Trust Fund to be established by the Borough for the purpose of
constructing or rehabilitating low and moderate income housing units
elsewhere in the Borough or, up to a maximum proportion as permitted
for the Borough by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing,
elsewhere in Bergen, Passaic or Hudson Counties. For such
contribution of funds, requirements are as follows: [Added 6-25-1987]
(1) The amount of this contribution shall be $10,000 for each of the 60
dwelling units required under § 270-100, or a total of $600,000.
However, to the extent that portions of additional lots within the
industrial subdivision to be developed in this EM Zone are
determined to be undevelopable due to physical conditions such as
being located in a designated wetlands area, this contribution shall
be reduced in proportion to the loss in building area in comparison
with the total industrial building area in the zone.
(2) For the portions of this contribution which are made after 1987, the
amounts shall be adjusted downward in proportion to increases in
the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, or other recognized standard
for low and moderate income limits adopted by the Council on
Affordable Housing, and shall be adjusted upward in proportion not
to exceed 50% of increases in the Housing Cost Index applying to
Bergen County as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
§ 270-100 TAXATION § 270-100
237:781
§ 270-101. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
(3) The contributions shall be scheduled according to the proportion of
building area where industrial buildings are completed and are
granted a certificate of occupancy as against the total area of all
industrial buildings in accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Percentage of
Building Area With Completed
Industrial Buildings
Percentage of Housing
Contribution
25 0
26 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
100 --
A. Timing of development and implementation.
(1) Within the EM Zone District as a whole, the timing of development
of residential and nonresidential uses shall be as follows:
Nonresidential Development
(acres)
Residential Development
(dwelling units)
0 to 33% 0%
Over 33% 20%
Over 50% 50%
Over 75% 100%
(2) The residential development specified shall be completed at the
time of commencement of nonresidential development in the
corresponding category.
B. Unit size. No more than 60% shall be one-bedroom or efficiency units.
C. Eligibility standard.
(1) One-half of all lower-income units shall meet Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Section 8, or other
assisted housing programs, eligibility requirements for very low
income, and 1/2 shall meet HUD eligibility requirements for lower
income (Mount Laurel II Low and Moderate Income).
(2) The applicant may substitute alternate comparable standards
(other than HUD) where appropriate and to the satisfaction of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 270-100 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-101
237:782
(3) The developer shall agree not to impose age restrictions upon the
occupants of any low- and moderate-income unit, except as to
publicly subsidized senior citizen housing.
D. Housing cost component. In computing eligibility, not more than 25% of
the family income may be used for housing as follows:
(1) Rental units: rent, excluding utilities.
(2) Sales units: principal and interest, insurance, taxes and
condominium or homeowner's association fees.
E. Subsidies. Government subsidies may be used, at the discretion of the
applicant, to fulfill the requirements of this action. The lack of said
subsidies shall in no way alter or diminish the lower-income
requirements of this article.
F. Resale and rental of lower-income housing.
(1) All lower-income dwelling units within this EM Mixed Zone District
shall be required to have covenants running with the land to
control the resale price of for-sale units or to employ other legal
mechanisms which shall be approved by the Mayor and Council and
will, in their opinion, ensure that such housing will remain
affordable to persons of lower income.
(2) The owner of all rental units shall provide legal documentation to
be approved by the Borough Attorney to assure that rental units
will remain affordable to persons of lower income.
(3) In the event that no low-income purchaser is found within 60 days
after the unit is listed for sale with a realtor and the Housing
Administrator (see next subsection) is notified, in writing, of such
listing, the low-income unit may be sold to a moderate-income
purchaser or, if none is available, to any interested purchaser. Proof
of the attempt to sell shall be submitted to and shall be satisfactory
to the Housing Administrator. Resale controls shall remain in effect
for any subsequent resales.
(4) The Borough and the applicant may develop reasonable
qualifications for occupants of lower-income housing. Borough
residents and employees shall have first priority over all lowerincome
housing for a period not to exceed 30 business days from
the time such units are listed for sale or resale or made available
for rent. Selection procedures shall be directed and administered
by a Borough official appointed each year as the Housing
Administrator by the Borough's Governing Body. The Borough's
Governing Body may arrange for third-party administration of
resale and tenant selection of lower-income housing.
(5) The developer shall formulate and implement a written affirmative
marketing plan acceptable to the Mayor and Council. The
§ 270-101 TAXATION § 270-101
237:783
§ 270-102. Plan review and approval.
affirmative marketing plan shall be realistically designed to ensure
that lower-income persons of all races and ethnic groups are
informed of the housing opportunities in the development, feel
welcome to seek or buy or rent such housing and have the
opportunity to buy or rent such housing. It shall include advertising
and other similar outreach activities.
(6) Sales prices and rents may be increased in accordance with the
annual Metropolitan New York Regional Consumer Price Index for
Housing of the Department of Labor, plus reimbursements for
documented monetary outlays for reasonable improvements and
reasonable costs incurred in selling or renting the unit. After 25
years, all such units may be sold or rented without restrictions.
(7) Rental units may be converted to condominium units after 15 years,
but any sale of condominium units shall be restricted to persons
meeting moderate-income eligibility standards. After 25 years from
the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy,
including both rental and condominium occupancy, all such units
may be sold or rented without restriction.
A. Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board
shall review and approve a conceptual site plan or preliminary
subdivision plan, whichever shall be applicable for the entire project in
accordance with the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the
Borough of Allendale.138 The Planning Board shall also review and
approve the provisions made for low- and moderate-income housing.
B. Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the developer shall
enter into an agreement with the Borough, which agreement shall be in
recordable form and shall be treated and deemed to be a covenant or
restriction pertaining to the land which is being developed, which
agreement shall describe the projected development for the entire tract
and specifically the multiple-dwelling portion thereof. This agreement
shall specify, as closely as possible, the anticipated time schedule and
shall recite the developer's assumption for himself or his assigns of
responsibility for the construction of the multiple-family housing
provided for in the agreement in accordance with the terms of this
article.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-101 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-102
237:784
ARTICLE XX
Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
§ 270-103. Certificate required; application and issuance.
[Amended 7-24-1986; 9-25-1986; 9-7-2000; 10-23-2008]
A. No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or
altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the Construction Code Official stating that the premises or building
complies with all the provisions of this section.
B. No change or extension of use and no alteration of use shall be made in
a nonconforming use of premises without a certificate of occupancy
having first been issued by the Construction Code Official that such
change, extension or alteration is in conformity with the provisions of
this section, and no extension of use shall be made in a nonconforming
use premises without approval of the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Act,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Allendale.
C. Certificate of compliance. No residential or nonresidential property
may be changed in tenancy, use or ownership unless a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Borough Construction Code Official
on forms provided and the required fee paid for such inspection. The
Construction Official, or his designee, shall inspect any residential or
nonresidential property not more than 60 days prior to the change in
any tenancy, use or ownership. The Construction Official, with the
approval of the Property Maintenance Official and Zoning Official, shall
issue a certificate of compliance, provided that there are no violations
of law or orders of the Construction Official, Property Maintenance
Official and Zoning Official pending and it is established after
inspection and investigation of available municipal records that the use
of the property has lawfully existed. The certificate shall also evidence
that a general inspection of the visual parts of the residential or
nonresidential structure has been made and that no violations of any
code of the Borough of Allendale have been found to exist. Except for a
nonresidential structure, the certificate of compliance shall also
establish that smoke detectors have been installed pursuant to Chapter
128, Fire Prevention, § 128-12. [Amended 9-27-2012]
D. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for at the same time that the
building permit is applied for and shall be issued within 10 days after
the erection or alteration of the building shall have been completed. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Construction Code Official, and copies shall be furnished upon request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected. A fee, as set by Chapter 100, Building Construction, shall be
charged for each original certificate and each copy thereof.
§ 270-103 TAXATION § 270-103
237:785
E. No permit for excavation for or the erection of any building shall be
issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.
No building or premises may be occupied until such certification shall
have been issued.
F. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all of the ordinances of
the Borough of Allendale have been complied with and a certificate has
been issued by the Board of Health stating that all the provisions of its
ordinances have been complied with. This provision shall apply to new
construction only.
G. Certificates of compliance shall be required in the C1, C2, D, E and EM
Zone Districts for each change of ownership, use, occupancy or tenancy
of such premises. No certificate of compliance shall issue under this
section for any nonresidential use without the approval of the Planning
Board for a site plan pursuant to Chapter 147, § 147-7 for any
application for a certificate of compliance, or any change in use, where
construction, reconstruction, alteration or change in use may affect
circulation, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping,
signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading, or other off-tract
conditions, or the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental
factors and other considerations as may be specified in Chapter 147 of
this Code.
H. When a building or structure is occupied by multiple users, a certificate
of compliance shall be required for each change of ownership, use,
occupancy or tenancy for each such user.
§ 270-103 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-103
237:786
ARTICLE XXA
Zoning Permits
[Added 10-23-2008]
§ 270-103.1. Permits required; applications; issuance.
A. A zoning permit is required prior to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building. The zoning permit shall
acknowledge that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom duly authorized by a
municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70 of the
Municipal Land Use Law and applicable ordinances of the Borough.
B. Pursuant to the authority of Code § 53-39C, the Zoning Officer shall
review and process applications for zoning permits. The Zoning Officer
is hereby authorized to prepare application forms for zoning permits.
C. The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit within 10 business days
from the date of application. Failure to issue a requested permit within
said 10 business days will be considered an approval.
D. Where new construction is proposed, no construction permit shall be
issued unless a zoning permit covering the use and location of the
proposed building or structure has first been obtained. Where
applicable, issuance of a zoning permit may be conditioned upon
payment of any taxes or assessments for local improvements which are
due or delinquent on the property for which any application is made.
E. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a zoning permit is
issued.
F. A zoning permit in connection with lighting of athletic field areas
regulated by § 270-32.1 shall not be issued until such time as a
certificate of field lighting approval is issued by the Borough's Zoning
Officer, in consultation with the Borough Construction Code Official.
[Added 3-2-2017]
§ 270-103.1 TAXATION § 270-103.1
237:787

ARTICLE XXI
Enforcement
§ 270-104. Authority and duties of the Zoning Officer and
Construction Code Official; use of certain terms. [Amended
4-25-2002]
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer or the Construction
Code Official, as appropriate, who shall in no case, except under written
order of the Borough Council, the Board of Adjustment or the Planning
Board, issue any permit for the erection or structural alteration of any
building or grant any occupancy permit for any building or land where
the proposed erection, structural alteration or use would be in violation
of any provisions of this chapter.
B. Wherever the term "Building Inspector" appears in this chapter, it shall
be deemed revised so as to read "Construction Code Official."
C. Wherever the terms "Board of Adjustment" and "Planning Board"
appear in this chapter, such terms shall be deemed interchangeable and
shall apply to either the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with provisions of the land use statute, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. (substituted for N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.1 et seq.) and the Land Use
Procedure Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale.139
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Land Use Procedures.
§ 270-104 TAXATION § 270-104
237:789

ARTICLE XXII
Penalties
§ 270-105. Conditional approvals; violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-25-1986; 1-22-2009]
A. Conditional approvals; enforcement; civil remedies. No person, firm,
corporation, owner, developer, tenant or other occupant shall
knowingly violate any condition of any resolution approving any site
plan, subdivision or variance, or any condition contained within any
developer’s agreement pertaining thereto. Such violation shall
constitute a violation of this chapter. In addition to any other remedies
provided by law, the Borough or Zoning Official may institute and
maintain an action in the Municipal Court pursuant to § 270-105.
B. Violations and penalties. For each and every violation of any provisions
of this chapter, the owner, contractor or other persons interested, as
general agent, architect, building contractor, owner, tenant or any other
persons, who commit, take part or assist in any violation of this chapter
or who maintains any building or premises or use of any land in
violation of this chapter shall, for each and every violation, be punished
as provided in § 1-18 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each and every
day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of this chapter.
§ 270-105 TAXATION § 270-105
237:791

ARTICLE XXIII
Residential Cluster - Open Space Zoning
[Amended 1-27-1983]
§ 270-106. Area.
Within any major subdivision employing the use of residential cluster - open
space zoning as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., all lots may be reduced in area as follows:
§ 270-107. Requirements.
Within any major subdivision employing the use of residential cluster - open
space zoning as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., the following requirements shall be complied with:
A. In the case of a subdivision located in the AAA Residential Zone District,
the lot may be reduced to an area of not less than 26,000 square feet
with an average width of 130 feet within 200 feet of the street lot line.
The shortest distance between side lot lines shall not be less than 100
feet measured along a line parallel with the street lot line and 40 feet
therefrom and not less than 90 feet within 200 feet of the street lot line,
except that any lot so situated that its side lot lines would meet at an
angle of 70° or more if extended in the direction of the street may have
a minimum distance between side lot lines at the street lot line which is
not less than 80 feet.
B. In the case of a subdivision located within the AA Residence Zone
District, all lots may be reduced to an area of not less than 20,000
square feet with an average width of 115 feet within 175 feet of the
street lot line. The shortest distance between side lot lines shall not be
less than 90 feet measured along a line parallel with the street lot line
and 35 feet therefrom and not less than 80 feet within 175 feet of the
street lot line, except that any lot so situated that its side lot lines would
meet at an angle of 70° or more if extended in the direction of the street
may have a minimum distance between said lot lines at the street lot
line which is not less than 70 feet.
A. A sketch plat shall be submitted to the Planning Board complying with
all the requirements of the zone district in which the proposed
subdivision is located, without regard to the open space zoning
exceptions as set forth herein. This sketch plat shall be used by the
Planning Board to determine the maximum number of homes
permissible in the proposed subdivision.
B. Upon a determination as to the maximum number of homes permissible
in the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall submit an additional
sketch plat to the Planning Board setting forth the details of the
proposed subdivision pursuant to this Article XXIII pertaining to
residential cluster - open space zoning. The subdivision shall then be
§ 270-106 TAXATION § 270-107
237:793
proceeded upon by the Planning Board in the manner set forth in the
Land Subdivision Ordinance pertaining to major subdivisions.140
C. The balance of the land remaining in the proposed subdivision, which
has been set aside for open space after the subdivision approval in
accordance with the requirements set forth in this Article XXIII, shall be
reserved for common open space; and such reservation shall, as far as
practical, defer the precise location of such common open space until
final approval is requested. The reservation as aforesaid may, at the
election of the applicant or property owner, be in the form of a
dedication of the land to the Borough for public use and maintenance
(acceptance at election of the Municipal Governing Body) or by grant of
easement or covenant in favor of the Borough (acceptance at election of
the Municipal Governing Body) or by the establishment of an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of common open space
for the benefit of the owners or residents of the development, provided
that such organization shall not be dissolved, nor shall it dispose of any
common open space by sale or otherwise (except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the common open
space), without first offering to dedicate the land to the Borough. In the
event that such organization shall fail to maintain the common open
space in reasonable order and condition, the Municipal Governing Body
shall serve notice and demand and conduct public hearings and
assessments for cost in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43b and c. The applicant shall advise the
Planning Board prior to the time of preliminary approval as to the type
of ownership proposed for the common open space area.
D. No area to be reserved for common open space under the terms of this
chapter shall be less than five acres.
E. The area to be reserved for common open space under the terms of this
chapter shall be used only for one or more of the following purposes:
(1) Open space as defined under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5.
(2) Park and recreational facilities.
F. The Planning Board, before preliminary or final approval of any
subdivision employing residential cluster - open space zoning as
provided herein, shall make specific findings as to the following facts
and conclusions:
(1) That departures by the proposed subdivision development from the
normal zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property conform to the Zoning Ordinance standards pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law and the provisions of this chapter.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable and that the amount, location and
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-107 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-107
237:794
purpose of the common open space are adequate. This provision
shall be applicable to final approval only.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed subdivision employing residential cluster - open
space zoning will not have an unreasonably adverse impact upon
the area in which the subdivision is proposed to be established.
(5) That in the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interest of the public, residents, occupants
and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of
the development are adequate. This provision shall be applicable to
final approval only.
§ 270-107 TAXATION § 270-107
237:795

ARTICLE XXIV
ML-1 Multiple-Dwelling Zone District
[Added 1-24-1991]
§ 270-108. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2003]
The purpose of this zone district is to provide certain development bonuses
in settlement of a Mount Laurel action entitled "Jomac Realty, Inc., et al.
v. Borough of Allendale" and in consideration of the developer’s agreement
to contribute to the production of lower-income housing in satisfaction of
Allendale’s affordable housing obligation under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
and N.J.A.C. 5:93.
§ 270-109. Primary intended use.
This zone district is intended for multiple dwellings.
§ 270-110. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in this article is prohibited.
§ 270-111. District requirements.
A. Density. A total of 59 dwelling units shall be permitted to be constructed
in this zone district, all of which shall be market rate. In lieu of
constructing the 15 lower-income units which would otherwise have
been required, the developer shall make a contribution of $300,000 to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Fund as specified in § 270-113.
B. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of three stories or 35 feet
in height as measured in accordance with § 270-51, except that nothing
in this article shall preclude the lowering of the ground directly
adjacent to any garage entrance to an elevation of not more than 40
feet below the highest point of the roof of the building. For purposes of
determining the number of stories, a parking level located below the
living levels shall not be deemed a story in this zone district.
C. Area. No tract in this zone district shall be less than four acres in area.
D. Front yard. There shall be a front yard setback of at least 35 feet from
the right-of-way of any public street.
E. Side yard. There shall be side yard setbacks of at least 50 feet from all
residential zone district lines established as of the date of the adoption
of this article and at least 25 feet from all other abutting property lines.
F. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard setback of at least 25 feet from
any railroad right-of-way.
G. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 10 feet between this
zone district and any property used or zoned for residential purposes or
any railroad right-of-way. This strip shall be landscaped with a dense
§ 270-108 TAXATION § 270-111
237:797
planting of evergreen shrubs or trees at least six feet high, either alone
or in combination with a wire or wooden fence. The buffer strip may be
coincidental with and included within any required setbacks.
H. Occupancy of land. Not more than 50% of the land in any tract may be
occupied by buildings and paved areas combined.
I. Minimum floor area. No dwelling unit shall be constructed unless it
shall contain a minimum living area, exclusive of porches, breezeways
and garages, as follows:
Number of Bedrooms
Minimum Living Area
(square feet)
1 650
2 900
3 1,000
J. Maximum number of bedrooms. The number of bedrooms shall not
exceed an average of two per dwelling unit.
K. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
L. Maximum building length. The maximum length of any building shall
not exceed 55 feet. Structures which are connected only by balconies
shall be considered separate buildings.
M. Maximum number of units per building. No building shall contain more
than six dwelling units.
N. Recreation areas. Five percent of the gross area of any tract shall be set
aside for casual recreational use, such as an open grassy area for games
and other activities.
O. Driveways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal
driveways shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the
maximum anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police
vehicles. The minimum paved width shall be 12 feet for a one-way
driveway and 24 feet for a two-way driveway.
P. Garages. There shall be at least one enclosed one-car garage for every
two dwelling units. No garage entrance shall directly face a public
street.
Q. Off-street parking. A reserved off-street parking space shall be provided
for each dwelling unit which does not have a garage. One additional offstreet
parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The
minimum size of each parking space required shall be nine feet by 18
feet.
§ 270-111 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-111
237:798
§ 270-112. Site plan review; approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of Allendale.141
§ 270-113. Affordable housing contribution.
In lieu of constructing the 15 lower-income units which would otherwise
have been required in this zone district, the developer shall contribute the
sum of $300,000 to the Borough's Affordable Housing Fund, representing
$20,000 for each of the 15 lower-income units. Payments shall be made
by the developer proportionately in accordance with the issuance of
certificates of occupancy based on the following schedule:
Percentage of Payment Percentage of Units Completed
0 25
10 26
50 50
75 75
100 90
-- 100
R. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect light
away from all adjoining premises.
S. Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall be permitted in this
zone district except enclosures for collection of refuse and recyclable
materials incidental to the residential use.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-111 TAXATION § 270-113
237:799

ARTICLE XXV
ML-2 Townhouse Zone District
[Added 1-24-1991]
§ 270-114. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2003]
The purpose of this zone district is to provide certain development bonuses
in settlement of a Mount Laurel action entitled "Jomac Realty, Inc., et al. v.
Borough of Allendale" and in consideration of the developer’s agreement to
contribute to the production of lower-income housing in partial satisfaction
of Allendale’s affordable housing obligation under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:93.
§ 270-115. Primary intended uses.
This zone district is intended for townhouses, as defined in § 270-8, and offstreet
parking incidental to the townhouse use.
§ 270-116. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those permitted herein is prohibited.
§ 270-117. District requirements.
A. Density. A total of 16 townhouses shall be permitted to be constructed
in this zone district, of which not less than two shall be affordable to
low-income households and one shall be affordable to moderate-income
households in accordance with Article XXVIII, Affordable Housing
Standards.
B. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
in height. A level used exclusively as a garage shall not be considered as
a story.
C. Area. No lot in this zone district shall be less than two acres in area.
D. Front, side and rear yards. No building shall be closer than 30 feet to
any abutting property line.
E. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 10 feet, located
within the townhouse property, between this zone district and any
property used or zoned for residential purposes, except that on the
eastern boundary of this zone district, the buffer strip shall be at least
five feet. This strip shall be landscaped and planted with evergreens at
least six feet in height throughout its entire length and shall be so
maintained. This planting shall be so located with sufficient density as
to screen from view any building located on said plot from any
contiguous residential zone district and shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board. Any existing growth in such buffer strip shall be
preserved if such existing growth supplements the desired screening
effect. The buffer strip area may be crossed by driveways and access
§ 270-114 TAXATION § 270-117
237:801
roadways. The buffer strip may be coincidental with and include any
other setback requirements.
F. Occupancy of land. Not more than 50% of the land area lot may be
occupied by buildings and paved areas combined, subject to any
existing easement rights to the contrary.
G. Minimum floor area. No townhouse shall be constructed unless it shall
contain a minimum living area, exclusive of porches, breezeways and
garages, as follows:
(1) One-bedroom: 650 square feet.
(2) Two-bedroom: 900 square feet.
(3) Three-bedroom: 1,000 square feet.
H. Combined townhouses. Townhouses may be combined into one
building, provided that the overall building shall:
(1) Contain not more than nine townhouses.
(2) Not exceed a length of 220 feet.
(3) Provide at least one staggered front-wall building offset of at least
five feet when more than three townhouses are combined in one
building.
(4) Provide two means of ingress and egress into each townhouse.
(5) Have not fewer than two walls with window exposure for each
townhouse.
I. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
J. Roadways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal roads
shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police vehicles.
Minimum paved width shall be 15 feet for a one-way road and 24 feet
for a two-way road. All roads shall be constructed in accordance with
Borough ordinances and the laws of the State of New Jersey. Parking is
prohibited on any street in this zone district.
K. Garages. There shall be at least one enclosed one-car garage for each
market-rate townhouse as an integral part thereof.
L. Off-street parking. One additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for each market-rate townhouse. An area of nine feet by 18
feet shall be the minimum provided for each parking space required.
Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each affordable
townhouse.
§ 270-117 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-117
237:802
§ 270-118. Site plan review; approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough
of Allendale.142
M. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
N. Accessory buildings. Any building used for other than residential
purposes shall be constructed at least 30 feet from any abutting
property line.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-117 TAXATION § 270-118
237:803

ARTICLE XXVI
ML-3 Townhouse Zone District
[Added 1-24-1991]
§ 270-119. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2003]
The purpose of this zone district is to provide certain development bonuses
in order to create a realistic opportunity for the construction of lowerincome
housing in satisfaction of Allendale’s affordable housing obligation
under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:93.
§ 270-120. Primary intended uses; applicability.
§ 270-121. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-120 is prohibited.
§ 270-122. District regulations.
A. This zone is intended for townhouses, as defined in § 270-8, of which at
least 20% must be affordable to lower-income families in accordance
with Article XXVIII, Affordable Housing Standards.
B. The district shall comprise properties shown as follows on the Borough
Tax Map and further defined by the Zoning Map and incorporated
herein by reference: Block 2101, Lot 9, comprising 13.58 acres, more or
less. [Amended 10-27-1994; 11-13-2003; 5-9-2013]
A. Density. Maximum density shall be eight units per acre of gross lot area,
except that lands upon which construction is not permitted under the
New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act143 shall be excluded
from lot area for the purpose of calculating density.
B. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 30 feet in height.
Townhouses shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories, with "1/2 story" meaning on
the top floor with a sloping roof, such that the habitable floor area is not
more than 1/2 of the area of the story below.
C. Area. No lot shall be developed with less than two acres in area.
D. Yards and setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of 40 feet from
public streets for buildings and parking area. The minimum setback of
buildings from all other property lines shall be 30 feet. Parking areas
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from such other property lines,
subject to the buffer strip requirements of Subsection E below.
E. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 20 feet within the
site, along all property lines other than on public streets, adjoining any
property zoned for residential purposes. This strip shall be landscaped
143. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 270-119 TAXATION § 270-122
237:805
§ 270-123. Site plan review; approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough
of Allendale.144
§ 270-124. Affordable housing contribution. [Added 1-7-1998]
In lieu of constructing certain lower income units, which would otherwise
have been required in this zoning district, the Borough and a developer may
with a dense planting of evergreen shrubs or trees at least six feet high,
either along or in combination with a wire or wooden fence.
F. Occupancy of land. Not more than 60% of the land area of any one
development site may be occupied by buildings and paved areas
combined.
G. Building requirements, townhouses. Townhouse buildings shall contain
a minimum of two and a maximum of six units; shall not exceed a length
of 150 feet; shall provide a staggered front-wall building offset of at
least five feet for each two units; and shall have not fewer than two
walls with window exposure for each unit.
H. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
I. Driveways. The pavement widths of all internal driveways shall be
adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access for fire-fighting and police vehicles. The
minimum paved width shall be 15 feet for a one-way driveway and 25
feet for a two-way driveway. Pavement, curbs and drainage facilities
shall be in accordance with Borough specifications. Parking is
prohibited within the required driveways.
J. Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the site, no more than 300 feet from the building entrance,
for each dwelling unit, except that, for units of two bedrooms or more,
there shall be an average of one additional space for each five units.
Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from building
walls.
K. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
L. Accessory buildings. Any building used for other than residential
purposes shall be set back at least 40 feet from public streets, 50 feet
from residential buildings and 30 feet from other property lines.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-122 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-124
237:806
agree to a contribution to the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Such agreement shall be:
A. Subject to the Borough's discretion;
B. Consistent with the Borough's fair share obligation and substantive
certification; and
C. Subject to review and approval of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) and its regulations.
§ 270-124 TAXATION § 270-124
237:807

ARTICLE XXVII
ML-4 Multifamily Zone District
[Added 1-24-1991]
§ 270-125. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2003; 5-8-2014]
As identified in the Borough of Allendale's Housing Element adopted
December 29, 2008, and granted third round certification by the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) on October 14, 2009, the purpose of the ML-4
Affordable Housing District is to provide for the development of affordable
housing units in satisfaction of Allendale's affordable housing obligation
under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. and N.J.A.C 5:93 et seq. The ML-4 District
provides an opportunity to create an attached residential district where
each of the dwellings created will be reserved for low- and moderateincome
households, as that term is defined and applied by COAH. This
zone promotes the purposes of zoning as identified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2
et seq., safeguarding the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
by providing, among others, the establishment of appropriate population
densities and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities, and regions and preservation of the
environment.
§ 270-126. Primary intended uses. [Amended 5-8-2014]
This zone shall include only the following as a primary intended use:
§ 270-127. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-126 is prohibited.
§ 270-128. District regulations. [Amended 5-8-2014]
A. Special needs residential housing.
B. Municipal parks, open space and passive recreation.
A. Density. Maximum density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre of
gross lot area.
B. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 30 feet in height.
Buildings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories, with "1/2 story" meaning on the
top floor with a sloping roof, such that the habitable floor area is not
more than 1/2 of the area of the story below.
C. Area. Each lot hereinafter created shall minimally contain 25,000
square feet of lot area.
D. Yards and setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of 50 feet from
the front yard setback, 10 feet from any side property line and 40 feet
from the rear lot line. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from such other property lines, subject to the buffer strip
requirements of Subsection E below.
§ 270-125 TAXATION § 270-128
237:809
§ 270-129. Site plan review; approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with the
provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough
of Allendale.145
§ 270-130. (Reserved)146
E. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 10 feet within the
site, along all property lines other than on public streets, adjoining any
property zoned for residential purposes. This strip shall be landscaped
with a dense planting of evergreen shrubs and trees at least six feet
high, either alone or in combination with a wire or wooden fence. The
buffer strip requirement is not applicable if the adjacent property zoned
for residential purposes has been the subject of a deed restriction
limiting the use of said property to park and/or open space or passive
recreation.
F. Occupancy of land. Not more than 60% of the land area of any one
development site may be occupied by buildings and paved areas
combined.
G. Off-street parking. A minimum of one parking space shall be provided
on site for each special needs residential housing dwelling. Parking
spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from building walls. Not
more than half of the number of proposed parking spaces are permitted
to be constructed of grass pavers, approved by both the Borough Fire
Chief and Engineer. This provision is in recognition of the reduced
parking demand inherent in this zone.
H. All special needs residential housing shall be occupied by qualified
individuals in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:36.
I. All special needs residential housing shall at all times be occupied by
low- or moderate-income qualifying individuals. It is the intent of the
Borough that each dwelling in this zone shall be Council on Affordable
Housing creditworthy and all residents occupying dwellings in this zone
will be certified as income-qualified.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
146. Editor's Note: Former § 270-130, Affordable housing contribution, was repealed 5-8-2014.
§ 270-128 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-130
237:810
ARTICLE XXVIII
(Reserved)147
§ 270-131. through § 270-144. (Reserved)
147. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXVIII, Affordable Housing Standards, added 1-24-1991, as
amended, was repealed 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-13. See now Ch. 81, Affordable Housing.
§ 270-131 TAXATION § 270-131
237:811

ARTICLE XXIX
ML-5 Townhouse Zone District
[Added 10-27-1994; amended 11-13-2003]
§ 270-145. Purpose.
The purpose of this zone district is to provide certain development bonuses
in order to create a realistic opportunity for the developer to contribute to
the production of or to construct lower-income housing in satisfaction of
Allendale’s affordable housing obligation under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
and N.J.A.C. 5:93.
§ 270-146. Primary intended uses and area of application.
§ 270-147. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-146 is prohibited.
§ 270-148. District regulations.
A. This zone is intended for townhouses, as defined in § 270-8, of which at
least 20% must be affordable to lower-income families in accordance
with Article XXVIII, Affordable Housing Standards.
B. This district shall comprise properties shown as follows on the Borough
Tax Map and as further defined by maps prepared by the Borough
Engineer and incorporated herein by reference: Block 801, Lots 22, 23
(part) and 31, comprising 20.7 acres, more or less.
A. Density. Maximum density shall be eight units per acre of gross lot area,
except that lands upon which construction is not permitted under the
New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Act148 shall be excluded from lot area
for the purpose of calculating density. In lieu of constructing the lowerincome
units which are required as a set-aside, the developer of any
tract comprised of 15 acres or more may make a contribution of
$240,000 to the Borough's Affordable Housing Fund as specified in
§ 270-150. In the event that all units constructed on-site are market
rate, the maximum density shall be 6.4 units per acre of gross lot area
as defined above but in no event shall more than 25 units be
constructed.
B. Height. Townhouses shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories, with "1/2 story"
meaning on the top floor with a sloping roof, such that the habitable
floor area is not more than 1/2 of the area of the story below. No
building in an inclusionary development shall exceed a maximum of 30
feet in height. In the event that all units constructed on-site are market
rate, the maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
C. Area. No lot shall be developed with less than two acres in area.
148. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 270-145 TAXATION § 270-148
237:813
D. Yards and setbacks. There shall be a minimum setback of 40 feet from
roadways for buildings and parking areas. The minimum setback of
buildings from all other property lines shall be 30 feet. Parking areas
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from such other property lines,
subject to the buffer strip requirements of Subsection E below.
E. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip of at least 20 feet within the
site, along all property lines other than on public streets, adjoining any
property zoned for residential purposes. This strip shall be landscaped
with a dense planting of evergreen shrubs or trees at least six feet high,
either alone or in combination with a wire or wooden fence.
F. Occupancy of land. Not more than 60% of the land area of any one
development site may be occupied by buildings and paved areas
combined.
G. Building requirements, townhouses. Townhouse buildings shall contain
a minimum of two and a maximum of six units; shall provide a staggered
front wall building offset of at least five feet for each two units; and
have not less than two walls with window exposure for each unit.
Townhouse buildings within an inclusionary development shall not
exceed a maximum of 150 feet in length. In the event that all the units
constructed on-site are market rate, the maximum length of townhouse
buildings shall not exceed 160 feet.
H. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
I. Roadways. The pavement widths of all internal roadways shall be
adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access for fire-fighting and police vehicles.
Minimum paved width shall be 15 feet for a one-way roadway and 25
feet for a two-way roadway. Pavement, curbs and drainage facilities
shall be in accordance with Borough specifications. Parking is
prohibited within the required roadways.
J. Off-street parking. A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the site, no more than 300 feet from the building entrance,
for each dwelling unit, except that for units of two bedrooms or more,
there shall be an average of one additional space for each five units.
Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of five feet from building
walls.
K. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
L. Accessory buildings. Any building used for other than residential
purposes shall be set back at least 40 feet from public streets, 50 feet
from residential buildings and 30 feet from other property lines.
§ 270-148 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-149
237:814
§ 270-149. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board shall
review and approve a site plan for the entire project in accordance with
the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance149 of the
Borough of Allendale.
§ 270-150. Affordable housing contribution.
§ 270-151. Repeal of block and lot designation.
The designation of Block 801, Lots 22, 23 and 31 in § 270-120B (ML-3
Townhouse Zone District) is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency, it being the intent that said block and lots are subject to this
ML-5 Zone District.
A. In lieu of constructing the lower-income units which would otherwise
have been required in this zone district, the developer shall contribute
$240,000 to the Borough's Affordable Housing Fund. Payment of
$160,000 shall be made by the developer at the time of the issuance of
the first building permit or within nine months of the effective date of
approval of the development by the Allendale Planning Board or when
required by a regional contribution agreement payment schedule,
whichever first occurs. Payment of the balance of $80,000 shall be
made by the developer in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Upon completion of 25% of the units: $20,000.
(2) Upon completion of 50% of the units: $20,000.
(3) Upon completion of 75% of the units: $20,000.
(4) Upon completion of 100% of the units: $20,000.
B. A unit shall be deemed completed upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. As a condition of site plan approval, the developer will
furnish a guaranty for the payment of $240,000 in a form acceptable to
the Borough.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-149 TAXATION § 270-151
237:815

ARTICLE XXX
ML-6 Townhouse/Apartment Zone District
[Added 11-13-2003]
§ 270-152. Purpose and area of application.
The purpose of the ML-6 Zone District is to create a realistic opportunity
for the construction of low- and moderate-income rental housing pursuant
to the Borough of Allendale's affordable housing obligation pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., the Substantive Rules of the
Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., relevant mediation
agreements entered into by the Borough of Allendale and the terms of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing's grant of substantive
certification of the Borough's housing element and fair share plan. The
district shall be defined as shown on the Zoning Map and shall be comprised
of the following properties shown on the Borough of Allendale Tax Map:
Block 2101, Lots 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8, containing 22.36 acres, more or less.
§ 270-153. Primary intended uses.
The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the ML-6
Zone District:
§ 270-154. Accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to those uses customarily
incidental to the permitted principal uses in the district, and in the case of
townhouses and apartments, including but not limited to clubhouses, pools,
tennis courts and similar personal recreation facilities for the exclusive
use of the residents and guests of the development, gatehouses and gates,
roadways and other access and circulation improvements, parking areas,
etc.
§ 270-155. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than the uses permitted by §§ 270-153 and 270-154 shall be
prohibited.
§ 270-156. Lot, bulk and intensity of use regulations.
Single-family detached dwellings shall be subject to the lot, bulk and
intensity of use regulations for the A Residence Zone District in § 270-57.
Townhouses and apartments located in the same building with townhouse
dwellings shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Single-family attached dwellings, also known as "townhouses."
B. Apartments located in the same building with townhouse dwellings.
C. Single-family detached dwellings.
A. Minimum tract area. The minimum tract area shall be 17 acres.
§ 270-152 TAXATION § 270-156
237:817
B. Maximum number of housing units. The number of housing units to be
developed in the district shall not exceed 150 units. The developer shall
have the option to develop fewer than the maximum permitted housing
units, provided that the provisions of § 270-158 are complied with.
C. Minimum front yard. There shall be provided a front yard abutting all
public streets at least 40 feet in depth, measured perpendicular to the
street right-of-way line. Principal buildings shall be located at least 20
feet from the traveled way of private internal streets, roadways, etc.
D. Minimum side and rear yards. There shall be provided yards at least 30
feet in depth adjacent to all property lines, except for front yards as set
forth in Subsection C above.
E. Maximum height of principal buildings. No building shall exceed 35 feet
in height or 2 1/2 stories. For purposes of administering this provision,
"one-half-story" shall mean the top floor of a building directly beneath a
sloping roof, such that the habitable floor area is not more than 1/2 of
the habitable floor area of the story below.
F. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply
with the following minimum setback requirements:
(1) Forty feet from public streets; 20 feet from the traveled way of
private internal streets, roadways, etc.
(2) Thirty feet from all property lines other than public street right-ofway
lines.
(3) Forty feet from residential buildings located in the ML-6 District.
G. Maximum coverage by improvements. Not more than 60% of the tract
area may be occupied by buildings, paved areas and other
improvements. At least 40% of the tract area shall be landscaped or, in
the case of wetlands, wetland transition areas, water bodies or other
undevelopable areas, preserved in a natural condition.
H. Minimum buffer. There shall be provided a buffer along all property
lines, other than along public streets, which adjoin any property zoned
for residential purposes, regardless of whether the residential zone is
developed for residential use or not. The buffer shall be designed to
effectively screen the view of the ML-6 Zone property from such
adjoining residential zone during all seasons.
(1) The buffer shall be at least 20 feet in depth.
(2) No improvements shall be permitted within the buffer other than
plantings, berms, walls, fences or a combination of the foregoing,
and when determined necessary by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, utility structures, drainage pipes and
related structures, etc., provided that such utility and drainage
structures shall not reduce the effectiveness of the buffer.
§ 270-156 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-156
237:818
§ 270-157. Other requirements.
The following other requirements shall apply to townhouses and apartments
located in the same building with townhouse dwellings:
(3) In the event that berms, walls and fences are the primary method
used for screening, plantings shall also be required within the
buffer for aesthetic reasons, as determined by the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment, as applicable. Plantings shall be provided
between the tract boundary and any walls or fences used for
buffers in order to improve the appearance of the wall or fence
from outside the tract.
(4) In the event that plantings are the primary method used for
screening, the plantings shall include evergreen shrubs or trees at
least six feet high at the time of planting. Additional plantings may
be included or required, as determined by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, as applicable. The precise type, quantity and
spacing of plantings in the buffer shall be determined as part of any
site plan review required by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, as necessary to achieve the intent of this
subsection.
(5) In the event that wetlands or other undevelopable areas exist in the
location of a required buffer, and such areas do not provide an
effective buffer in their natural state, plantings and/or berms and/
or fencing, etc., sufficient to meet the intent of the buffer, as
determined by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, shall be required to be provided outside of such
undevelopable areas. The foregoing shall not be construed to
require that such additional plantings, etc., have a minimum depth
of 20 feet. The nature and extent of the buffer in such case shall be
determined by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, based upon field conditions.
A. Minimum distance between buildings. The following minimum
dimensions shall separate principal buildings:
(1) Front wall facing front wall: 60 feet.
(2) Front wall facing rear wall: 50 feet.
(3) Front wall facing end/side wall: 35 feet.
(4) End/side wall facing end/side wall: 20 feet.
(5) End/side wall facing rear wall: 30 feet.
(6) Rear wall facing rear wall: 40 feet.
(7) In case of uncertainty as to the definition of "front," "rear," "end/
side" wall or in case the angle of the walls facing each other make
§ 270-156 TAXATION § 270-157
237:819
interpretation of the required setbacks uncertain, the more
restrictive of possible interpretations shall apply.
B. Building design.
(1) Apartment flat units shall be located in buildings containing
townhouse units. In such buildings containing more than six total
units, a minimum of 40% shall be townhouse units. In such
buildings containing up to six total units, a minimum of 33% shall
be townhouse units. There shall not be more than six buildings in
the development combining apartment flats and townhouse units
that contain six or fewer total units. The number of dwelling units
in buildings containing a combination of townhouses and
apartment flats shall not exceed 10 units, and the facade of such
buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in length.
(2) Buildings containing townhouses and apartment flats shall be
designed in a manner that does not distinguish between the
exterior design and appearance of apartment and townhouse units.
Apartment flats must be incorporated into the building in a manner
consistent with overall architectural theme of the building and
shall emulate the facade design and treatment of the townhouse
units in order to create the exterior appearance of a townhouse
unit. If apartment flats are stacked one unit over the other, the
units must be accessed via a common interior hallway with a single
front and single rear door.
(3) Buildings containing all townhouse units shall contain a minimum
of two and a maximum of six dwelling units, and the facade of such
buildings shall not exceed 150 feet in length.
(4) All residential buildings shall provide a staggered front-wall
building offset of at least five feet for each two units; and shall have
not fewer than two walls with window exposure for each unit. For
the purposes of regulating facade articulation pursuant to this
section, stacked apartment flats shall constitute a single unit.
C. Landscaping.
(1) Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and maintained.
(2) Existing trees shall be retained wherever possible. Removal and
preservation of trees shall comply with all applicable regulations of
the Borough of Allendale and any other entity having jurisdiction.
(3) Shade trees shall be provided along both sides of roadways at a
ratio of at least one tree for each 30 feet of roadway center line
length (one tree for each 60 feet on each side).
(4) Shade trees shall be provided within and/or around the perimeter
of parking areas, except driveway parking, at a ratio of at least one
tree for each 10 parking spaces.
§ 270-157 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-157
237:820
D. Access and circulation. The design of access and circulation
improvements serving development within the ML-6 District shall be in
accordance with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.), and shall minimize detrimental
impacts to area streets and residential neighborhoods. The following
additional provisions shall apply:
(1) Location of access. Any development in the ML-6 District shall
provide two means of access; one at Chestnut Street and one at
New Street. Other access locations may be permitted where
feasible. Traffic controls and limitations as to vehicular ingress and
egress at such locations will be determined by the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, during the course of its site
plan review, as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law, local
ordinances and applicable law. The Board may require traffic
studies, as it deems appropriate, in order to address issues relating
to traffic safety and the distribution and impact of traffic. The site's
internal circulation design shall incorporate measures designed to
prevent through traffic by nonresidents, including but not
necessarily limited to entry gates and/or any other measures
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
as applicable.
(2) Private streets. Private streets, roadways and other means of
access shall be designed to comply with all applicable laws,
statutes, rules and regulations.
E. Parking. The amount and design of on-site parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.). In addition, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard between
townhouse or apartment buildings and public streets. Individual
driveways serving townhouses or apartment housing units shall not
have direct access to a public street, but may have direct access to
an internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located between townhouse or
apartment buildings and internal streets, roadways, etc., except
that parking spaces in the individual driveways for townhouse and
apartment units located in front of garage doors shall be permitted
in such locations, and furthermore parking areas containing a
single row (i.e., one side of the access aisle only) of up to six spaces
shall be permitted in such locations.
(3) Parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least five feet from
all property lines abutting a nonresidential zone, and at least 20
feet from all other property lines, except as may otherwise be
required for buffers as set forth in § 270-156H.
§ 270-157 TAXATION § 270-157
237:821
§ 270-158. Affordable housing requirements.
(4) Parking areas shall be set back at least seven feet from building
walls, except parking spaces in driveways located in front of garage
doors.
(5) Parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from the traveled
way of internal streets, roadways, etc., except that parking spaces
adjacent to the traveled way and which use the traveled way for
direct access to the space shall be exempt from this requirement.
(6) Parking spaces and private driveways shall be paved in accordance
with the requirements for the same in the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.).
F. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged to direct light away
from all adjoining premises.
A. Minimum number of affordable housing units. Fifteen percent of the
total number of housing units shall be required to be affordable;
provided, however, that at least 20 units shall be affordable. In order to
address this requirement, the developer may exercise either of the
following options, provided that the developer shall identify which
option is selected at the time of filing the application for land use
approvals:
(1) Construction of all affordable units within the ML-6 Zone District.
(2) Construction of 12 affordable units within the ML-6 Zone District
and payment of a fee in lieu of construction for the balance of the
affordable units, which fee shall be dedicated to fund a COAHapproved
regional contribution agreement for such affordable
units. The required fee in lieu of construction for each unit shall be
the amount required by the Substantive Rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing at the time of payment.
B. Tenure. All affordable housing units constructed within the ML-6
District or created pursuant to a regional contribution agreement
funded by a fee in lieu of construction within the ML-6 District shall be
required to be rental housing units, as required by the regulations of
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing at the time of the
development approval.
C. Age restriction. No affordable housing units constructed in the ML-6
District or created pursuant to a regional contribution agreement
funded by a fee in lieu of construction within the ML-6 District shall be
age-restricted.
D. Other. The requirements of Article XXVIII, Affordable Housing
Standards, shall be complied with.
§ 270-157 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-159
237:822
§ 270-159. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, as applicable, shall review and approve a final site
plan for the entire project in accordance with the provisions of the Land
Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance150 and all other applicable ordinances
of the Borough of Allendale.
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-159 TAXATION § 270-159
237:823

ARTICLE XXXA
ML-7 Single-Family Residence Zone District
[Adopted 5-9-2013]
§ 270-159.1. Purpose.
§ 270-159.2. Primary intended use.
This zone is intended to provide for no more than a total of 10 detached
single-family housing units, of which eight shall be market-rate units and
two shall be affordable housing units constructed on site, or in lieu of
construction, payment for two off-site/in-town affordable units, which
payment shall be in the amount set forth in the Borough's applicable
ordinance and COAH regulations, and any amendments or supplements
thereto.
§ 270-159.3. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-159.2 is prohibited.
§ 270-159.4. Lot, bulk and intensity of use regulations.
A. As identified in the Borough of Allendale's housing element adopted
December 29, 2008, and granted third-round certification by the
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), the purpose of this residence
zone district is to provide for the development of certain market-rate
single-family detached units as well as to construct two affordable
housing units in satisfaction of Allendale's affordable housing obligation
under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. The ML-7
District provides a compatible single-family residence district to the
surrounding single-family residential zone districts. This zone promotes
the purposes of zoning as identified in the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 et seq.,
safeguarding the public health, safety, morals and general welfare by
providing, among others, the establishment of appropriate population
densities and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities, regions and preservation of the
environment. This zone also seeks to ensure that the development of
individual municipalities does not conflict with the development and
general welfare of neighboring municipalities.
B. The creation of this zone furthers the Borough of Allendale Master Plan
goals, including, among others, to preserve and protect the suburban
character of the existing one- and two-family residential
neighborhoods. In addition, the proposed single-family density would
create a lesser burden on adjacent roadways at this location due to the
limited sight distance on the adjacent frontage roadway of East
Crescent Avenue and the intersection of East Crescent Avenue and
Arlton Avenue.
§ 270-159.1 TAXATION § 270-159.4
237:825
§ 270-159.5. Subdivision review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the appropriate land use
agency of the Borough shall review and approve a final subdivision plan for
the entire project in accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision
and Site Plan Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough
of Allendale.
A. Minimum lot area. A lot used or intended to be used for residential
purposes shall have an area of not less than 15,000 square feet located
within a distance of 150 feet from the street upon which it fronts or, for
corner lots, from both streets.
B. Minimum lot width. A lot used or intended to be used for residential
purposes shall have an average width of 85 feet within 150 feet of the
street lot line. The shortest distance between side lot lines shall not be
less than 60 feet therefrom, measured along a line parallel with the
street lot line and 35 feet therefrom.
C. Setbacks and building height limitations. The setback requirements for
single-family residential lots shall be subject to the bulk and building
height regulations of the A-Residence Zone District in § 270-57, except
for the criteria for minimum lot area and lot width as noted herein.
[Amended 12-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17]
D. Impervious surfaces requirements. The impervious surface
requirements for the single-family residential lots herein shall be
subject to the regulations set forth in § 270-62.
E. Floor area ratio requirements. The floor area ratio requirements for the
single-family residential lots herein shall be subject to the regulations
set forth in § 270-63.
F. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings on the single-family
residential lots herein shall be subject to those permitted in the A
Residence Zone District and the regulations set forth in § 270-14.
§ 270-159.4 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-159.5
237:826
ARTICLE XXXB
ML-8 Affordable Housing District
[Added 5-8-2014]
§ 270-159.6. Purpose and area of application.
As identified in the Borough of Allendale's Housing Element adopted
December 29, 2008, and granted third round certification by the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) on October 14, 2009, the purpose of the ML-8
Affordable Housing District is to provide for the development of affordable
housing units in satisfaction of Allendale's affordable housing obligation
under N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. The ML-8 District
provides an opportunity to create an attached residential district where
each of the dwellings created will be reserved for low- and moderateincome
households, as that term in defined and applied by COAH. This
zone promotes the purposes of zoning as identified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2
et seq., safeguarding the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
by providing, among others, the establishment of appropriate population
densities and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities, and regions and preservation of the
environment.
§ 270-159.7. Primary intended uses.
The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the ML-8
Zone District:
§ 270-159.8. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than those listed in § 270-159.7 is prohibited.
§ 270-159.9. District regulations.
A. Attached dwellings reserved for individuals with developmental
disabilities or multiple sclerosis.
B. Unrestricted attached dwellings reserved for low- and moderateincome
households.
C. Group home for special needs residents.
A. Density. The maximum permitted density in this district is 12 dwelling
units per acre.
B. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of 35 feet. No building
shall exceed 2 1/2 stories. A "1/2 story" is defined in accordance with
the International Building Code as adopted by the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey.
C. Lot size. Every lot in this zone developed with attached housing shall
contain no less than 28,000 square feet of lot area within a distance of
225 feet from the street upon which it fronts or, for corner lots, from
§ 270-159.6 TAXATION § 270-159.9
237:827
both streets. Single-family dwellings used as group homes in this zone
shall be on lots containing at least 15,000 square feet of lot area.
D. Minimum lot width. Every lot within this zone shall have and maintain
an average width of 115 feet within 100 feet of the street lot line. The
shortest distance between side lot lines shall not be less than 100 feet
therefrom, measured along a line parallel with the street lot line and 35
feet therefrom. Single-family dwellings used as group homes in this
zone shall be on lots with no less than 100 feet of lot width.
E. Yards and setbacks for principal structures.
(1) There shall be a minimum setback of 17 feet from a municipally
owned street. The minimum required setback from a street under
the jurisdiction of the County of Bergen shall be 25 feet. Minimum
setbacks for side property lines shall be 25 feet, except for a side
lot line contiguous with a railroad right-of-way, wherein such a
setback shall be 10 feet; the minimum rear yard setback shall be no
less than 25 feet.
(2) Multiple buildings on a lot in this zone shall be permitted if the lot
in question contains more than 43,560 square feet. The separation
between buildings on the same lot in this zone shall be no less than
15 feet.
F. Buffer strip. There shall be provided a buffer strip of at least 10 feet
within the site, along all property lines other than on public streets,
adjoining any property zoned for single-family residential purposes.
This provision shall not apply where internal common circulation and
parking elements designed and intended to be used by, or for, residents
of adjoining property are located. This buffer strip shall also not apply
at locations where a property line coincides with the railroad right-ofway.
This strip shall be landscaped with a dense planting of evergreen
shrubs or trees at least six feet high, either alone or in combination with
a wire or wooden fence.
G. Coverage of land. Not more than 75% of the land area of any one
development site may be covered by buildings and paved areas
combined. Building coverage shall not exceed 25% of lot area.
H. Building requirements. Townhouse buildings shall contain a minimum
of two and a maximum of six dwellings; shall not exceed a length of 130
feet; shall provide a staggered front-wall building offset of at least five
feet for every two units; and shall have not fewer than two walls with
window exposures for each unit. Buildings containing dwellings
reserved for developmentally disabled residents shall contain no more
than 11 dwellings; shall not exceed 180 feet; and shall have not fewer
than two walls with window exposures for each unit.
I. All occupants of any dwelling unit within the ML-8 Affordable Housing
District shall meet and satisfy all relevant income and family size
requirements established by COAH, thereby furthering the intent of the
§ 270-159.9 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-159.9
237:828
§ 270-159.10. Site plan review; approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the appropriate land use
agency of the Borough shall review and approve a final site plan for the
entire project in accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Ordinance151 and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough
of Allendale.
Borough of Allendale to secure COAH credits for each dwelling
constructed in this zone district.
J. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
K. Driveways. The pavement widths of all internal driveways shall be
adequate in size and location to accommodate the maximum
anticipated traffic and access for firefighting and police vehicles.
Minimum paved width shall be 15 feet for a one-way driveway and 25
feet for a two-way driveway. Pavement, curbs and drainage facilities
shall be in accordance with Borough specifications. Use of grass pavers
or similar materials shall be limited in use to emergency accessways
and must be approved by the Borough Fire Subcode Official and
Engineer. Parking is prohibited within drive aisles.
L. Off-street parking. Off-street parking for unrestricted affordable
dwellings shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
established pursuant to the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
For each affordable dwelling unit for residents with developmental
disability, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each
dwelling unit.
M. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
N. Accessory buildings. Any building used for other than residential
purposes shall be set back at least 40 feet from public streets, 50 feet
from residential buildings and 30 feet from other property lines.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-159.9 TAXATION § 270-159.10
237:829

ARTICLE XXXI
(Reserved)152
§ 270-160. through § 270-161. (Reserved)
152. Editor's Note: Former Article XXXI, Requirements for Developments that Increase the
Borough of Allendale's Growth Share Obligation for Affordable Housing, added 3-23-2006,
as amended, was repealed 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-13. See now Ch. 81, Affordable
Housing.
§ 270-160 TAXATION § 270-160
237:831

ARTICLE XXXII
(Reserved)153
§ 270-162. through § 270-181. (Reserved)
153. Editor's Note: Former Article XXXII, Third Round Fair Share of Affordable Housing, added
11-27-2009, was repealed 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-13. See now Ch. 81, Affordable
Housing.
§ 270-162 TAXATION § 270-162
237:833

ARTICLE XXXIII
Houses of Worship; Conditional Use in All Zone Districts
[Added 10-13-2016]
§ 270-182. Definition; principal and ancillary uses.
A. As used in this chapter, "house of worship" shall mean: A building or
structure, or group of buildings or structures, which by design and
construction are intended for the conducting of organized religious
services, and accessory uses customarily associated therewith
including, but not limited to, the following: educational services,
facilities for weddings, funerals, religious ceremonies, parish houses,
rectories, convents, and other similar functions directly related with the
principal function of the house of worship, places of assembly for selfhelp
and support groups, indoor or outdoor activities particularly
related to said use and other similar accessory functions relating to
ministry, provided that such uses are not residential in nature.
B. A house of worship may consist of the following primary use, together
with a combination of one or more of the following ancillary uses:
(1) Principal use. House of worship, at times referred to herein as the
"principal structure."
(2) Ancillary uses.
(a) Cleric's residence.
[1] An apartment, group of rooms, or other residence for the
facility's religious leader within the same building or
structure located on the same lot as the house of worship
hereinafter referred to as "cleric's attached residence."
[2] An apartment, group of rooms, or other residence for the
facility's religious leader in a separate or distinct structure
from the same building or structure as the place of
assembly for religious services or worship, but on the
same lot or lots as is situated said place of assembly,
hereinafter referred to as "cleric's detached ancillary
residence."
(b) Facilities for religious education and instruction, including but
not limited to Saturday or Sunday school, after-school learning
and adult study groups, within the same building or structure
as the place of assembly for religious services or worship,
hereinafter referred to as "attached educational facilities."
(c) Facilities for religious education and instruction, including but
not limited to Saturday or Sunday school, after-school learning
and adult study groups, in one or more separate and distinct
building(s), whether connected or not, on the same property or
§ 270-182 TAXATION § 270-182
237:835
§ 270-183. Conditional use approval.
Upon proper application and hearing, as herein provided, a house of
worship shall be permitted as a conditional use in all zoning districts of the
Borough, provided that the Planning Board finds and determines that the
following conditions have been met:
tract of land as the house of worship, hereinafter referred to as
"detached ancillary building educational facilities."
(d) Facilities for social functions such as, but not limited to,
weddings, funerals, religious ceremonies and other similar
events, hereinafter referred to as "detached ancillary building
social facilities" in one or more separate building(s), whether
connected or not, on the same property, or tract of land, as the
house of worship.
(e) Facilities for a convent or other housing for members of a
religious order, separate and apart from a residence for the
facility's religious leader, as referred to in Subsection B(2)(a)
hereof.
A. For a house of worship consisting solely of the primary use set forth in
§ 270-182, a place of assembly for religious services or worship, the
following minimum area, yard and dimensional standards must be met:
(1) Minimum lot size: three acres.
(2) Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 400 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 100 feet.
(7) Minimum buffer width: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum building coverage: 25%.
(9) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 65%.
(10) Maximum principal building height same as zone district
requirement for permitted uses. Steeples, bell towers, crosses,
minuets and similar vertical projections shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum permitted building height limitation by 20
feet so long as the circumference or perimeter of the vertical
projection does not exceed 10% of the roof surface of the principal
structure.
B. For a house of worship consisting of the primary use set forth in
§ 270-182B(1), a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
§ 270-182 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-183
237:836
together with the ancillary use set forth in § 270-182B(2)(a), a cleric's
attached residence, the same area, yard and dimensional standards for
the primary use only shall apply.
C. For a house of worship consisting of the primary use set forth in
§ 270-182B(1), a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with the ancillary use set forth in § 270-182B(2)(b), attached
educational facilities, the same area, yard and dimensional standards
for the primary use only shall apply.
D. For a house of worship consisting of the primary use set forth in
§ 270-182B(1), a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with any one or more of the following detached ancillary uses,
the following additional area, yard and dimensional standards must be
met for each separate detached ancillary use, as set forth on Table I,
Area, Yard and Bulk Standards for Houses of Worship, annexed hereto
and incorporated by reference herein.154
(1) A cleric's detached residence, as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 0.5 acre.
(2) Detached ancillary educational facilities, as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 1.0 acre;
(b) Minimum lot width: an additional 50 feet;
(c) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 10
feet; and
(d) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
10 feet.
(e) Detached ancillary educational facilities shall not exceed two
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less.
(3) Detached ancillary building for social facilities as herein defined:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 2.5 acres;
(b) Minimum lot width: an additional 150 feet;
(c) Minimum lot depth: an additional 200 feet;
(d) Minimum front yard setback: an additional 25 feet;
(e) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 25
feet;
(f) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
25 feet;
154. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 270-183 TAXATION § 270-183
237:837
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: an additional 50 feet; and
(h) Minimum buffer width from adjoining residentially developed
or zoned lots: an additional 25 feet.
(i) Detached ancillary building for social facilities shall not exceed
two stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less.
(4) Facilities for a convent or other housing for members of a religious
order, separate and apart from a residence for the facility's
religious leader:
(a) Minimum lot size: an additional 2.0 acres;
(b) Minimum lot frontage: an additional 150 feet;
(c) Minimum lot depth: an additional 200 feet;
(d) Minimum front yard setback: an additional 25 feet;
(e) Minimum side yard setback for one side yard: an additional 35
feet;
(f) Minimum side yard setback for other side yard: an additional
35 feet;
(g) Minimum rear yard setback: an additional 50 feet; and
(h) Minimum buffer width from adjoining residentially developed
or zoned lots: an additional 25 feet.
(i) Convents or other housing for members shall not exceed two
stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less.
E. For a house of worship consisting of the primary use set forth in
§ 270-182B(1), a place of assembly for religious services or worship,
together with any one or more of the following detached ancillary uses,
the following maximum lot coverage and improved lot coverage
requirements shall apply:
(1) Detached ancillary educational facilities:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 28%; and
(b) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 62.5%.
(2) Cleric's detached ancillary residence together with educational
facilities:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
(3) Detached ancillary educational facilities together with a detached
ancillary building for social facilities:
§ 270-183 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-183
237:838
(a) Maximum building coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
(4) Cleric's detached ancillary residence together with outside
educational facilities and social facilities:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 25%; and
(b) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
(5) Detached ancillary educational facilities, detached ancillary
building for social facilities and facilities for a convent or other
housing for members of a religious order, separate and apart from a
residence for the facility's religious leader:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 22%; and
(b) Maximum impervious lot coverage: 60%.
F. Off-street parking.
(1) In addition to the area, yard and bulk requirements set forth
herein, houses of worship shall also meet the following conditions
with respect to off-street parking:
(a) A house of worship consisting solely of a place of assembly for
religious services or worship shall provide one parking space
for each three permanent or fixed seats based on seating
capacity.
(b) Any such church or other house of worship not having
permanent or fixed seating shall provide one parking space for
each three persons based on capacity attendance, which shall
be calculated by taking the total square footage of the place of
assembly for religious services or worship and dividing it by
the square footage of space allotted to each person in
attendance as stated in the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code (BOCA Code).
(c) For the purposes of calculating the number of seats, every 22
inches of pew or bench length shall be considered one seat. For
the purpose of determining the minimum total required
number of parking spaces on site, only those uses operating
simultaneously creating the greatest parking demand shall be
calculated.
(2) In addition to the off-street parking required for a house of worship
consisting solely of the primary use set forth in § 270-182B(1), a
place of assembly for religious services or worship, there shall be
provided the following off-street parking;
(a) For a cleric's attached residence or detached residence: two
parking spaces;
§ 270-183 TAXATION § 270-183
237:839
§ 270-184. Amendment of Area and Bulk Schedule.
The Zoning, Area and Bulk Schedule for Allendale, New Jersey, is hereby
amended and supplemented as set forth in the annexed table. Said table is
incorporated by reference herein as though set forth at length.155
(b) For attached or detached educational facilities: 1.25 parking
spaces for every teaching station (e.g., teacher's desk) for
children under the age of 17, and two parking spaces for each
three persons age 17 or over participating in the educational
program;
(c) For social facilities, the required parking shall be one parking
space for each three persons based on the maximum capacity
of the facility as determined by application of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code (BOCA Code), plus 10%;
(d) For a convent or other housing for members of a religious
order, separate and apart from a residence for the facility's
religious leader: one parking space for every three members of
the religious order;
(e) For any other ancillary use not listed herein, additional parking
shall be one parking space for each three persons based upon
maximum capacity of the facility as determined by application
of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (BOCA Code);
(f) No off-street parking facility shall be located in the required
front yard setback of a property used as a house of worship;
(g) Every house of worship shall provide within the minimum
required buffer a fifteen-foot-wide landscaped buffer along the
side property line. If adjacent to a residential zone, the
required landscape buffer within the minimum required buffer
shall be no less than 30 feet in width. No parking spaces or
their associated drive(s) shall encroach into a required buffer
area except where accessing a street;
(h) All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect light
away from all adjoining premises. Lighting sources shall not
exceed 18 feet in height. Fixtures near a residential property
shall be equipped with house side shields.
G. Signs. See § 270-20H(2). A freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
155. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 270-183 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-184
237:840
ARTICLE XXXIV
Ramsey Golf Course Inclusionary Overlay Residential District
[Added 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-16]
§ 270-185. Purpose and area of application.
To address its affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Borough shall
implement an Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income
households in the portion of the Ramsey Country Club and Golf Course
located within the Borough of Allendale, also known as Block 301, Lot 37,
and Block 406, Lot 21.01. This article establishes the Ramsey Golf Course
Inclusionary Overlay Zone (the MFRO-2 District) and permits multifamily
and townhouse development on the properties identified above, provided
that such housing complies with a required 20% inclusionary set-aside
requirement and with the requirements of this article. This article shall
not take effect unless the golf course/country club use ceases, or portions
thereof located within the Borough become released for residential
development. In such an event, the golf course/country club use may not be
changed to any other nonresidential use.
§ 270-186. Special rules.
§ 270-187. Primary intended uses.
The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the
MFRO-2 Zone District:
A. In any inclusionary development permitted by this article, at least 20%
of the residential units must be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households. In the event that 20% of the total number of residential
units does not result in a full integer, the developer (as defined in
§ 81-2) shall refer to § 81-3C with regard to addressing the fractional
unit.
(1) In any development having five or more residential units, at least
one unit must be established as affordable to low- and moderateincome
households
B. Where this article contradicts § 81-3 of the Borough's Affordable
Housing Ordinance, the effects and requirements of this article shall
supersede the requirements of § 81-3.
A. Single-family attached dwellings, also known as townhouses.
B. Multifamily buildings, also known as apartment buildings.
C. Apartments located in the same building with townhouse dwellings.
§ 270-185 TAXATION § 270-188
237:841
§ 270-188. Accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to those uses customarily
incidental to the permitted principal uses in the district, and in the case of
townhouses and apartments, including but not limited to clubhouses, pools,
tennis courts and similar personal recreation facilities for the exclusive use
of the residents and guests of the development, etc.
§ 270-189. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than the uses permitted by § 270-187 and § 270-188 shall be
prohibited.
§ 270-190. Lot, bulk and intensity of use regulations.
A. The maximum density of any development in the MFRO-2 District shall
not exceed 10 units per acre.
B. All residential buildings in the MFRO-2 District shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Minimum front yard. There shall be provided a front yard abutting
all public streets at least 40 feet in depth, measured perpendicular
to the street right-of-way line. Principal buildings shall be located
at least 20 feet from the traveled way of private internal streets,
roadways, etc.
(2) Minimum side and rear yards. There shall be provided yards at
least 30 feet in depth adjacent to all property lines, except for front
yards as set forth in Subsection B(1) above.
(3) Maximum height of principal buildings. No building shall exceed 35
feet in height or 2 1/2 stories. For purposes of administering this
provision, "one-half story" shall mean the top floor of a building
directly beneath a sloping roof, such that the habitable floor area is
not more than 1/2 of the habitable floor area of the story below.
(4) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with the following minimum setback requirements:
(a) Forty feet from public streets; 20 feet from the traveled way of
private internal streets, roadways, etc.
(b) Thirty feet from all property lines other than public street
right-of-way lines.
(c) Forty feet from residential buildings located in the MFRO-2
District.
C. Maximum impervious coverage by improvements. Not more than 60%
of the tract area may be occupied by buildings, paved areas and other
improvements. At least 40% of the tract area shall be landscaped or, in
§ 270-188 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-190
237:842
§ 270-191. Other requirements.
the case of wetlands, wetland transition areas, water bodies or other
undevelopable areas, preserved in a natural condition.
D. Minimum buffer. There shall be provided a buffer along all property
lines, other than along public streets, which adjoin any property zoned
for residential purposes, regardless of whether the residential zone is
developed for residential use or not. The buffer shall be designed to
effectively screen the view of the MFRO-2 Zone property from such
adjoining residential zone during all seasons.
(1) The buffer shall be at least 20 feet in depth in front yards and 25
feet in depth for side or rear yards of a tract.
(2) No improvements shall be permitted within the buffer other than
plantings, berms, walls, fences or a combination of the foregoing,
and when determined necessary by the Joint Land Use Board utility
structures, drainage pipes and related structures, etc., provided
that such utility and drainage structures shall not reduce the
effectiveness of the buffer.
(3) In the event that berms, walls and fences are the primary method
used for screening, plantings shall also be required within the
buffer for aesthetic reasons, as determined by the Joint Land Use
Board, as applicable. Plantings shall be provided between the tract
boundary and any walls or fences used for buffers in order to
improve the appearance of the wall or fence from outside the tract.
(4) In the event that plantings are the primary method used for
screening, the plantings shall include evergreen trees at least six
feet in height at the time of planting. Additional plantings may be
included or required, as determined by the Joint Land Use Board as
applicable. The precise type, quantity and spacing of plantings in
the buffer shall be determined as part of any site plan review
required by the Joint Land Use Board as necessary to achieve the
intent of this subsection.
(5) In the event that wetlands or other undevelopable areas exist in the
location of a required buffer, and such areas do not provide an
effective buffer in their natural state, plantings and/or berms and/
or fencing, etc., sufficient to meet the intent of the buffer, as
determined by the Joint Land Use Board, shall be required to be
provided outside of such undevelopable areas. The foregoing shall
not be construed to require that such additional plantings, etc.,
have a minimum depth as required herein. The nature and extent of
the buffer in such case shall be determined by the Joint Land Use
Board based upon field conditions.
A. Minimum distance between buildings. The following minimum
dimensions shall separate principal buildings:
§ 270-190 TAXATION § 270-191
237:843
(1) Front wall facing front wall: 60 feet.
(2) Front wall facing rear wall: 50 feet.
(3) Front wall facing end/side wall: 35 feet.
(4) End/side wall facing end/side wall: 25 feet.
(5) End/side wall facing rear wall: 30 feet.
(6) Rear wall facing rear wall: 50 feet.
(7) In case of uncertainty as to the definition of "front," "rear," "end/
side" wall or in case the angle of the walls facing each other make
interpretation of the required setbacks uncertain, the more
restrictive of possible interpretations shall apply.
B. Building design.
(1) Apartment flat units may be located in buildings containing
townhouse units. In such buildings containing more than six total
units, a minimum of 40% shall be townhouse units. In such
buildings containing up to six total units, a minimum of 33% shall
be townhouse units. There shall not be more than six buildings in
the development combining apartment flats and townhouse units
that contain six or fewer total units.
(2) Apartment-only buildings and buildings containing townhouses and
apartment flats shall be designed in a manner that does not
distinguish between the exterior design and appearance of
apartment and townhouse units.
(a) In buildings containing apartment flats and townhouses,
apartment flats must be incorporated into the building in a
manner consistent with overall architectural theme of the
building and shall emulate the facade design and treatment of
the townhouse units in order to create the exterior appearance
of a townhouse unit. If apartment flats are stacked one unit
over the other, the units must be accessed via a common
interior hallway with a single front and single rear door.
(b) Buildings containing apartment flats with or without attached
townhouses shall contain a minimum of two and a maximum of
12 dwelling units.
(3) Buildings containing all townhouse units shall contain a minimum
of two and a maximum of six dwelling units.
(4) No building facade shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(5) All residential buildings shall provide a staggered front-wall
building setback of at least five feet for every two units, so as to
avoid a flat, continuous facade. Additionally, each unit shall have
not fewer than two walls with window exposure. For the purposes
§ 270-191 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-191
237:844
of regulating facade articulation pursuant to this section, stacked
apartment flats shall constitute a single unit, so that multifamily
buildings without townhouses appear similar to buildings with
townhouses.
C. Landscaping.
(1) Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and maintained.
(2) Existing trees shall be retained wherever possible. Removal and
preservation of trees shall comply with all applicable regulations of
the Borough of Allendale and any other entity having jurisdiction.
(3) Shade trees shall be provided along both sides of roadways at a
ratio of at least one tree for each 30 feet of roadway center line
length (one tree for each 60 feet on each side). All shade trees shall
be at least three inches in caliper at the time of planting.
(4) Shade trees and shrubs shall be provided within and/or around the
perimeter of parking areas, except driveway parking. Shade trees
shall be provided at a ratio of at least one tree for each 10 parking
spaces.
D. Access and circulation. The design of access and circulation
improvements serving development within the MFRO-2 District shall be
in accordance with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.), and shall minimize detrimental
impacts to area streets and residential neighborhoods. The following
additional provisions shall apply:
(1) Location of access. Any development in the MFRO-2 District shall
provide two means of access; one at Canterbury Drive in Ramsey
Borough and one at Ethel Avenue in Allendale Borough. If feasible,
access to Heights Road should be considered. Traffic controls and
limitations as to vehicular ingress and egress at such locations will
be determined by the Joint Land Use Board during the course of its
site plan review, as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law, local
ordinances and applicable law. The Board may require traffic
studies, as it deems appropriate, in order to address issues relating
to traffic safety and the distribution and impact of traffic. The site's
internal circulation design shall incorporate measures designed to
prevent through traffic by nonresidents.
(2) Private streets. Private streets, roadways and other means of
access shall be designed to comply with all applicable laws,
statutes, rules and regulations.
E. Parking. The amount and design of on-site parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.). In addition, the
following provisions shall apply:
§ 270-191 TAXATION § 270-191
237:845
(1) Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard between
townhouse or apartment buildings and public streets. Individual
driveways serving townhouses or apartment housing units shall not
have direct access to a public street, but may have direct access to
an internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located between townhouse or
apartment buildings and internal streets, roadways, etc., except
that parking spaces in the individual driveways located in front of
garage doors shall be permitted in such locations. Furthermore,
parking areas containing a single row (i.e., one side of the access
aisle only) of up to 10 spaces shall be permitted in such locations.
(3) Parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least five feet from
all property lines abutting a nonresidential zone, and at least 20
feet from all other property lines, except as may otherwise be
required for buffers as set forth in § 270-190D.
(4) Parking areas shall be set back at least seven feet from building
walls, except parking spaces in driveways located in front of garage
doors.
(5) Parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from the traveled
way of internal streets, roadways, etc., except that parking spaces
adjacent to the traveled way and which use the traveled way for
direct access to the space shall be exempt from this requirement.
(6) Parking spaces and private driveways shall be paved in accordance
with the requirements for the same in the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.).
F. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged to direct light away
from all adjoining premises.
(1) Unless specifically approved as part of a submitted site plan
development application by the applicable approving board, no
lighting shall be attached to the roof of a building.
(2) Any lighting within a building shall be of an intensity and shall be
designed and focused to eliminate, to the maximum extent
practicable, any emission of lighting outside of the building; all
lighting outside of a building shall be provided via lighting fixtures
approved by the applicable approving board, as part of an approval
for a submitted site plan development application. The applicant is
required to submit a lighting plan indicating the location of the
lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the wattage and
isolux curves for each fixture, the hours of operation of the lighting
and the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries, all in
accordance with the following:
§ 270-191 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-191
237:846
§ 270-192. Review requirements.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Joint Land Use Board,
as applicable, shall review and approve a final site plan for the entire
project in accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site
Plan Ordinance156 and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Allendale.
(a) The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting
height not higher than 15 feet, measured from the ground level
to the centerline of the light source;
(b) The lighting fixtures are to include nonglare lights with
recessed lenses focused downward and with cut-off shields as
appropriate in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon
adjacent and nearby properties, the safety of traffic along
adjacent roadways and overhead sky glow;
(c) The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated
in footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not
more than 5/10 footcandle throughout the area to be
illuminated. The reviewing board may adjust these light levels
where deemed appropriate to reduce the effects of the light
levels on surrounding properties.
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-191 TAXATION § 270-192
237:847

ARTICLE XXXV
Allendale Corporate Center Inclusionary Overlay Residential
District
[Adopted 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-14]
§ 270-193. Purpose and area of application.
To address its affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Borough shall
implement an inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income
households on Block 702, Lot 14, also known as the Allendale Corporate
Center. This article establishes the Allendale Corporate Center Inclusionary
Overlay Zone the MFRO-3 District and permits the creation of multifamily
development on the property identified above provided that such housing
complies with a required 20% inclusionary set-aside requirement and with
the requirements of this article. This article shall not take effect until
such time that the site ceases to be used for warehousing, distribution,
and any ancillary office use, or the site becomes available for residential
development.
§ 270-194. Special rules.
§ 270-195. Primary intended uses.
§ 270-196. Accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to those uses customarily
incidental to the permitted principal uses in the district, including but not
limited to clubhouses, pools, tennis courts and similar personal recreation
facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and guests of the
development, etc.
A. In any inclusionary development permitted by this article, at least 20%
of the residential units must be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households. In the event that 20% of the total number of residential
units does not result in a full integer, the developer (as defined in
§ 81-2) shall refer to § 81-3C with regard to addressing the fractional
unit.
(1) In any development having five or more residential units, at least
one unit must be established as affordable to low- and moderateincome
households
B. Where this article contradicts § 81-3 of the Borough's Affordable
Housing Ordinance, the effects and requirements of this article shall
supersede the requirements of § 81-3.
A. Multifamily development, also known as apartments.
§ 270-193 TAXATION § 270-197
237:849
§ 270-197. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than the uses permitted by §§ 270-195 and 270-196 shall be
prohibited.
§ 270-198. Lot, bulk and intensity of use regulations.
All buildings shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Maximum density. The maximum density of housing units shall be 12
units per acre.
B. Principal building standards
(1) Maximum height of principal buildings: 35 feet in height or three
stories.
(2) Minimum building setback to any property line or zone boundary
shall be 50 feet
C. Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply
with the following minimum setback requirements:
(1) Forty feet from public streets; 20 feet from the traveled way of
private internal streets, roadways, etc.
(2) Thirty feet from all property lines other than public street right-ofway
lines.
(3) Forty feet from residential buildings located in the MFRO-3
District.
D. Maximum impervious coverage by improvements. Not more than 60%
of the tract area may be occupied by buildings, paved areas and other
improvements.
E. Building separation. There shall be a separation of at least 40 feet
between adjacent multifamily buildings.
F. Building scale. No building in the District shall exceed 150 feet in
length.
G. Recreation areas. At least 5% of the gross site area shall be set aside for
casual recreational use, such as an open grassy area for games and
other activities.
H. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
I. Driveways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal
driveways shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the
maximum anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police
vehicles. Minimum paved width shall be 12 feet for a one-way driveway
and 20 feet for a two-way driveway.
§ 270-197 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-198
237:850
J. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
K. Minimum buffer. There shall be provided a buffer along all property
lines, other than along public streets, which adjoin any property zoned
for residential purposes, regardless of whether the residential zone is
developed for residential use or not. The buffer shall be designed to
effectively screen the view of the MFRO-3 Zone property from such
adjoining residential zone during all seasons.
(1) The buffer shall be at least 25 feet in depth.
(2) No improvements shall be permitted within the buffer other than
plantings, berms, walls, fences or a combination of the foregoing,
and when determined necessary by the Joint Land Use Board utility
structures, drainage pipes and related structures, etc., provided
that such utility and drainage structures shall not reduce the
effectiveness of the buffer.
(3) In the event that berms, walls and fences are the primary method
used for screening, plantings shall also be required within the
buffer for aesthetic reasons, as determined by the Joint Land Use
Board, as applicable. Plantings shall be provided between the tract
boundary and any walls or fences used for buffers in order to
improve the appearance of the wall or fence from outside the tract.
(4) In the event that plantings are the primary method used for
screening, the plantings shall include evergreen trees, with trees
planted at a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting.
Additional plantings may be included or required, as determined by
the Joint Land Use Board, as applicable. The precise type, quantity
and spacing of plantings in the buffer shall be determined as part of
any site plan review required by the Joint Land Use Board as
necessary to achieve the intent of this subsection.
(5) In the event that wetlands or other undevelopable areas exist in the
location of a required buffer, and such areas do not provide an
effective buffer in their natural state, plantings and/or berms and/
or fencing, etc., sufficient to meet the intent of the buffer, as
determined by the joint Land Use Board, shall be required to be
provided outside of such undevelopable areas. The foregoing shall
not be construed to require that such additional plantings, etc.,
have a minimum depth of 20 feet. The nature and extent of the
buffer in such case shall be determined by the Joint Land Use Board
based upon field conditions.
L. Building design.
(1) Apartment-only buildings containing flats shall be designed as
follows:
§ 270-198 TAXATION § 270-198
237:851
(a) In buildings containing apartment flats stacked one unit over
the other, the units must be accessed via a common interior
hallway with a single front and single rear door.
(b) Buildings containing apartment flats shall contain a minimum
of two and a maximum of 16 dwelling units.
(2) No building facade shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(3) All residential buildings shall provide a staggered front-wall
building setback of at least five feet for every two units, so as to
avoid a flat, continuous facade. For the purposes of regulating
facade articulation pursuant to this section, stacked apartment
flats shall constitute a single unit, so that multifamily buildings
without townhouses appear similar to buildings with townhouses.
M. Parking. The amount and design of on-site parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.). In addition, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard between
buildings and public streets. Individual building driveways shall not
have direct access to a public street, but may have direct access to
an internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located between buildings and internal
streets, roadways, etc., except that parking spaces in the individual
driveways located in front of garage doors shall be permitted in
such locations, and furthermore parking areas containing a single
row (i.e., one side of the access aisle only) of up to 10 spaces shall
be permitted in such locations.
(3) Parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least five feet from
all property lines abutting a nonresidential zone, and at least 20
feet from all other property lines, except as may otherwise be
required for buffers as set forth in § 270-198J.
(4) Parking areas shall be set back at least seven feet from building
walls, except parking spaces in driveways located in front of garage
doors.
(5) Parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from the traveled
way of internal streets, roadways, etc., except that parking spaces
adjacent to the traveled way and which use the traveled way for
direct access to the space shall be exempt from this requirement.
(6) Parking spaces and private driveways shall be paved in accordance
with the requirements for the same in the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.).
N. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged to direct light away
from all adjoining premises.
§ 270-198 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-198
237:852
§ 270-199. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Joint Land Use Board
shall review and approve a final site plan for the entire project in
accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Ordinance157 and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Allendale.
(1) Unless specifically approved as part of a submitted site plan
development application by the applicable approving board, no
lighting shall be attached to the roof of a building.
(2) Any lighting within a building shall be of an intensity and shall be
designed and focused to eliminate, to the maximum extent
practicable, any emission of lighting outside of the building; all
lighting outside of a building shall be provided via lighting fixtures
approved by the applicable approving board, as part of an approval
for a submitted site plan development application. The applicant is
required to submit a lighting plan indicating the location of the
lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the wattage and
isolux curves for each fixture, the hours of operation of the lighting
and the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries, all in
accordance with the following:
(a) The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting
height not higher than 15 feet, measured from the ground level
to the centerline of the light source;
(b) The lighting fixtures are to include nonglare lights with
recessed lenses focused downward and with cut-off shields as
appropriate in order to mitigate against adverse impacts upon
adjacent and nearby properties, the safety of traffic along
adjacent roadways and overhead sky glow;
(c) The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated
in footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not
more than 5/10 footcandle throughout the area to be
illuminated. The reviewing board may adjust these light levels
where deemed appropriate to reduce the effects of the light
levels on surrounding properties.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-198 TAXATION § 270-199
237:853

ARTICLE XXXVI
Franklin Turnpike Inclusionary Overlay Residential District
[Added 9-27-2018 by Ord. No. 18-15]
§ 270-200. Purpose and area of application.
To address its affordable housing unmet need obligation, the Borough shall
implement an Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that creates a realistic
opportunity for housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income
households on Block 1803, Lot 1 also known as the Church of the Guardian
Angel, at 320 Franklin Turnpike. This article establishes the Franklin
Turnpike Inclusionary Overlay Zone - the MFRO-4 District, and permits the
creation of townhouse and multifamily housing on the property identified
above provided that such housing complies with a required 20%
inclusionary set-aside requirement and with the requirements of this article.
This article will not take effect unless the church use ceases, or portions of
the property become released for residential development. In such an event,
the church use may not be changed to any other nonresidential use.
§ 270-201. Special rules.
§ 270-202. Primary intended uses.
The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the
MFRO-4 Zone District:
§ 270-203. Accessory uses.
Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to those uses customarily
incidental to the uses permitted in this District, including but not limited
to clubhouses, pools, tennis courts and similar personal recreation facilities
for the exclusive use of the residents and guests of the development, etc.
A. In any inclusionary development permitted by this article, at least 20%
of the residential units must be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households. In the event that 20% of the total number of residential
units does not result in a full integer, the developer/property owner
shall refer to § 81-3C with regard to addressing the fractional unit.
(1) In any development having five or more residential units, at least
one unit must be established as affordable to low- and moderateincome
households
B. Where this article contradicts § 81-3 of the Borough's Affordable
Housing Ordinance, the effects and requirements of this article shall
supersede the requirements of § 81-3.
A. Multifamily development, also known as apartments or flats.
B. Single-family attached dwellings, also known as townhouses.
§ 270-200 TAXATION § 270-204
237:855
§ 270-204. Prohibited uses.
Any use other than the uses permitted by §§ 270-202 and 270-203 shall be
prohibited.
§ 270-205. Lot, bulk and intensity of use regulations.
All buildings shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Maximum density: 12 units per acre.
B. Principal building standards
(1) Maximum height of principal buildings: 35 feet in height or 2 1/2
stories.
(2) Minimum front yard from Franklin Turnpike: 35 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard setback from interior driveways and roads: 20
feet from the traveled way of private internal streets, roadways,
etc.
(4) Minimum side yard to interior driveways and roads: 10 feet.
(5) Setback to residential zone districts: 50 feet.
(6) Rear yard setback: 25 feet.
C. Accessory building standards. Accessory buildings and structures shall
comply with the following minimum setback requirements:
(1) Forty feet from public streets; 20 feet from the traveled way of
private internal driveways and roads.
(2) Thirty feet from all property lines other than public street right-ofway
lines.
(3) Forty feet from residential buildings located in the MFRO-4
District.
D. Maximum coverage by improvements. Not more than 65% of the tract
area may be occupied by buildings, paved areas and other
improvements. At least 35% of the tract area shall be landscaped or, in
the case of wetlands, wetland transition areas, water bodies or other
undevelopable areas, preserved in a natural condition.
E. Minimum distance between buildings. The following minimum
dimensions shall separate principal buildings:
(1) Front wall facing front wall: 60 feet.
(2) Front wall facing rear wall: 50 feet.
(3) Front wall facing end/side wall: 35 feet.
§ 270-204 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-205
237:856
(4) End/side wall facing end/side wall: 25 feet.
(5) End/side wall facing rear wall: 30 feet.
(6) Rear wall facing rear wall: 50 feet.
(7) In case of uncertainty as to the definition of "front," "rear," "end/
side" wall or in case the angle of the walls facing each other make
interpretation of the required setbacks uncertain, the more
restrictive of possible interpretations shall apply.
F. Building design.
(1) Apartment flat units may be located in buildings containing
townhouse units. In such buildings containing more than six total
units, a minimum of 40% shall be townhouse units. In such
buildings containing up to six total units, a minimum of 33% shall
be townhouse units. There shall not be more than six buildings in
the development combining apartment flats and townhouse units
that contain six or fewer total units.
(2) Apartment-only buildings and buildings containing townhouses and
apartment flats shall be designed in a manner that does not
distinguish between the exterior design and appearance of
apartment and townhouse units.
(a) In buildings containing apartment flats and townhouses,
apartment flats must be incorporated into the building in a
manner consistent with overall architectural theme of the
building and shall emulate the facade design and treatment of
the townhouse units in order to create the exterior appearance
of a townhouse unit. If apartment flats are stacked one unit
over the other, the units must be accessed via a common
interior hallway with a single front and single rear door.
(b) Buildings containing apartment flats with or without attached
townhouses shall contain a minimum of two and a maximum of
12 dwelling units.
(3) Buildings containing all townhouse units shall contain a minimum
of two and a maximum of six dwelling units.
(4) No building facade shall exceed 150 feet in length.
(5) All residential buildings shall provide a staggered front-wall
building setback of at least five feet for every two units, so as to
avoid a flat, continuous facade. Additionally, each unit shall have
not fewer than two walls with window exposure. For the purposes
of regulating facade articulation pursuant to this section, stacked
apartment flats shall constitute a single unit, so that multi family
buildings without townhouses appear similar to buildings with
townhouses.
§ 270-205 TAXATION § 270-205
237:857
G. Buffer standards.
(1) Minimum buffer from residential zones: 25 feet
(2) No improvements shall be permitted within the buffer other than
plantings, berms, walls, fences or a combination of the foregoing,
and when determined necessary by the Joint Land Use Board utility
structures, drainage pipes and related structures, etc., provided
that such utility and drainage structures shall not reduce the
effectiveness of the buffer.
(3) In the event that berms, walls and fences are the primary method
used for screening, plantings shall also be required within the
buffer for aesthetic reasons, as determined by the Joint Land Use
Board, as applicable. Plantings shall be provided between the tract
boundary and any walls or fences used for buffers in order to
improve the appearance of the wall or fence from outside the tract.
(4) In the event that plantings are the primary method used for
screening, the plantings shall include evergreen shrubs or trees at
least six feet high at the time of planting. Additional plantings may
be included or required, as determined by the Joint Land Use
Board, as applicable. The precise type, quantity and spacing of
plantings in the buffer shall be determined as part of any site plan
review required by the Joint Land Use Board as necessary to
achieve the intent of this subsection.
(5) In the event that wetlands or other undevelopable areas exist in the
location of a required buffer, and such areas do not provide an
effective buffer in their natural state, plantings and/or berms and/
or fencing, etc., sufficient to meet the intent of the buffer, as
determined by the Joint Land Use Board shall be required to be
provided outside of such undevelopable areas. The foregoing shall
not be construed to require that such additional plantings, etc.,
have a minimum depth as prescribed herein. The nature and extent
of the buffer in such case shall be determined by the Joint Land Use
Board based upon field conditions.
H. Parking. The amount and design of on-site parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.). In addition, the
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard between
townhouse or apartment buildings and public streets. Individual
driveways serving townhouses or apartment housing units shall not
have direct access to a public street, but may have direct access to
an internal street, roadway, etc.
(2) Parking areas shall not be located between townhouse or
apartment buildings and internal streets, roadways, etc., except
that parking spaces in the individual driveways for townhouse and
§ 270-205 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-205
237:858
apartment units located in front of garage doors shall be permitted
in such locations, and furthermore parking areas containing a
single row (i.e., one side of the access aisle only) of up to 10 spaces
shall be permitted in such locations.
(3) Parking areas and driveways shall be set back at least five feet from
all property lines abutting a nonresidential zone, and at least 20
feet from all other property lines, except as may otherwise be
required for buffers as set forth in § 270-205G.
(4) Parking areas shall be set back at least seven feet from building
walls, except parking spaces in driveways located in front of garage
doors.
(5) Parking areas shall be set back at least 10 feet from the traveled
way of internal streets, roadways, etc., except that parking spaces
adjacent to the traveled way and which use the traveled way for
direct access to the space shall be exempt from this requirement.
(6) Parking spaces and private driveways shall be paved in accordance
with the requirements for the same in the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.).
I. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged to direct light away
from all adjoining premises.
(1) Unless specifically approved as part of a submitted site plan
development application by the applicable approving board, no
lighting shall be attached to the roof of a building.
(2) Any lighting within a building shall be of an intensity and shall be
designed and focused to eliminate, to the maximum extent
practicable, any emission of lighting outside of the building; all
lighting outside of a building shall be provided via lighting fixtures
approved by the applicable approving board, as part of an approval
for a submitted site plan development application. The applicant is
required to submit a lighting plan indicating the location of the
lighting fixtures, the direction of illumination, the wattage and
isolux curves for each fixture, the hours of operation of the lighting
and the details of the lighting poles and the luminaries, all in
accordance with the following:
(a) The lighting is to be provided by fixtures with a mounting
height not higher than 15 feet, measured from the ground level
to the centerline of the light source;
(b) The lighting fixtures are to include nonglare lights with
recessed lenses focused downward and with cut-off shields as
appropriate to mitigate against adverse impacts upon adjacent
and nearby properties, the safety of traffic along adjacent
roadways and overhead sky glow;
§ 270-205 TAXATION § 270-205
237:859
§ 270-206. Site plan review and approval.
Prior to the issuance of any construction permit, the Joint Land Use Board
shall review and approve a final site plan for the entire project in
accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Ordinance158 and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough of
Allendale.
(c) The light intensity provided at ground level shall be indicated
in footcandles on the submitted plans and shall average not
more than 5/10 footcandle throughout the area to be
illuminated. The reviewing board may adjust these light levels
where deemed appropriate to reduce the effects of the light
levels on surrounding properties.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 270-205 ALLENDALE CODE § 270-206
237:860
Appendix
Appendix A275
ACT OF INCORPORATION
Appendix A276
BYLAWS OF BOROUGH COUNCIL
§ 270-206 TAXATION § 270-206
237:861

ARTICLE I
General Procedures
§ A276-1. Rules of order.
The deliberations of the Council shall be governed by "Robert's Rules of
Order."
§ A276-1 TAXATION § A276-1
237:863

ARTICLE II
Mayor
§ A276-2. Presiding officer; participation in determination of
Borough affairs.
The Mayor shall preside over the deliberations of the Council and shall
conduct its meetings. The Mayor shall also participate in the determination
of Borough affairs to the extent permitted by statute.
§ A276-3. Preservation of order.
The Mayor shall on all occasions preserve the strictest order and decorum
and shall cause the removal of all persons who interrupt the orderly
proceedings of the Council.
§ A276-4. Conflicts over right to floor.
When two or more Council members shall rise at the same time, the Mayor
shall name the one entitled to the floor.
§ A276-5. Questions of order.
The Mayor shall decide all questions of order without debate subject to
an appeal to the Council; but he or she may call upon the Council for the
opinion of the Council upon any question of order.
§ A276-6. Membership on committees.
The Mayor shall be a standing member of all Council committees, both
standing and special, and shall be informed in advance of all meetings of
such committees.
§ A276-7. Liaison officer.
The Mayor shall serve as the liaison between the Governing Body and all
boards, committees, agencies or organizations, except when assigned to a
specific Council committee for liaison purposes.
§ A276-8. Absence of the Mayor.
If the Mayor is absent or unable to perform official duties, the Council
President (or, if unable to act, the Council member having the longest term
as such) shall act as Mayor, as provided by statute.
§ A276-2 TAXATION § A276-8
237:865

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)159
§ A276-9. through § A276-11. (Reserved)
159. Editor’s Note: Former Article III, Borough Clerk, was repealed 2-11-2008 by Res. No.
08-77 and 2-28-2008 by Res. No. 08-89.
§ A276-9 TAXATION § A276-9
237:867

ARTICLE IV
Meetings
§ A276-12. Annual meetings.
The Council shall hold an annual reorganization meeting during the first
seven days of each year as prescribed by law. The date and time of the
annual meeting will be determined by resolution of the Council at a regular
meeting held in December of the year preceding the annual meeting. (See
N.J.S.A 40:88-1160)
§ A276-13. Time and place of regular meetings.
At the annual meeting, the Council shall fix the time and place for holding
regular meetings during the ensuing year. The time and place shall not be
changed except by a resolution introduced at a regular meeting and acted
upon at a subsequent regular meeting. (See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3)
§ A276-14. Election of President.
At the annual meeting, the Council will elect one of its members as Council
President to serve for the calendar year.
§ A276-15. Special meetings.
The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the Council. In
case of neglect or refusal to do so, any four members of the Council may call
such meeting at time and place in the Borough as they may designate. In all
cases of special meetings, reasonable advance notice, considered to be 48
hours under the Open Public Meetings Act,161 except in case of emergency,
shall be given in person to all members of the Council or left at their place
of residence.
§ A276-16. Quorum.
Three Council members and the Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor, four
Council members, shall constitute a quorum. (See N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3)
§ A276-17. Adjournment of meetings.
If no quorum is present at any meeting, those assembled shall have power
and are hereby authorized to set a new meeting date, and then adjourn.
§ A276-18. Order of business.
A. The following order of business shall be observed:
(1) Roll call.
160. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:88-1 was repealed by P.L. 1987, c. 379. See now N.J.S.A.
40A-60.3.
161. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ A276-12 TAXATION § A276-18
237:869
§ A276-19. Action by majority vote.
Except as otherwise required by statute or provided in these bylaws, all
actions of the Council shall be by a majority vote of those present.
§ A276-20. Roll-call vote.
A roll-call vote shall occur upon demand of one member of the Council,
when ordered by the Mayor, or directed by statute; the yeas and nays shall
be entered in the minutes of the meeting.
(2) Salute to the flag.
(3) Approval of minutes.
(4) Public hearings for advertised ordinances.
(5) Public comment.
(6) Presentation of proclamations, petitions, and other
communications.
(7) Introduction of ordinances.
(8) Resolutions.
(9) Consent resolutions.
(10) Unfinished business.
(11) New business.
(12) Committee reports and comments.
(13) Staff reports.
(14) Public comment.
(15) Adjournment.
B. The order of business at any meeting may be changed by a majority vote
of the members of the Council present at such meeting.
§ A276-18 ALLENDALE CODE § A276-20
237:870
ARTICLE V
Committees
§ A276-21. Appointment; Mayor's responsibilities.
The Mayor shall appoint members of all committees, subject to the
concurrence of a majority of the Council. The Mayor shall be a member, ex
officio, of each committee. Should a majority of the Council not concur in
the appointment of any Council member to a committee, a majority of the
members of the Council may make such an appointment.
§ A276-22. Proposed standing committees.
The Mayor shall appoint each Council member to at least one standing
committee, subject to concurrence by a majority of the Council:
§ A276-23. Purpose, authority and duties of standing committees.
Standing committees are appointed to expedite and facilitate the work of
the Council within statutory limits. The entire Council is held responsible
for the action of any single committee.
A. Administration, Finance, and Personnel.
B. Public Safety.
C. Water, Sewer and Public Utility.
D. Public Works.
E. Facilities, Parks, and Recreation.
F. Land Use and Construction Code.
A. A standing committee shall:
(1) Plan, study, and carry on routine activities within its areas of
responsibility.
(2) Perform activities as may be assigned by the full Council.
(3) Report and make recommendations to the Council for
consideration.
B. Except as provided above, a standing committee shall not:
(1) Exceed its budgetary appropriations without prior approval of the
Council.
(2) Make promises or commitments that directly, or by inference, bind
the Council.
(3) Act in such a manner or make decisions that set a precedent, or
violate established Council policy.
§ A276-21 TAXATION § A276-24
237:871
§ A276-24. Special committees.
Special committees may be appointed for purposes other than those
included in the duties of the standing committees.
§ A276-25. Committee Chairperson.
At the time of the appointment of any committee, the Mayor shall name
one member as the Chair of the committee, subject to the concurrence of
a majority of the Council. In the case of death, resignation or removal from
office of a member of the Council, the Mayor shall name the successor
to any such Chair, also subject to the concurrence of a majority of the
Council. The Mayor may change existing committee assignments and/or
Chairperson, subject to the concurrence of a majority of the Council. Should
a majority of the Council not concur in the Mayor's appointment of any
committee Chairperson, or in the change of any existing committee
assignments and/or Chairperson, a majority of the members of the Council
may make such appointments or approve such changes.
§ A276-26. Committee reports.
The Chairperson of each standing or special committee shall be prepared to
report to the Mayor and Council at each regular meeting on the principal
activities and achievements of the committee.
§ A276-24 ALLENDALE CODE § A276-26
237:872
ARTICLE VI
Duties of Standing Committees of the Council
§ A276-27. Finance, Human Resources, and Administration
Committee. [Amended 3-10-2011 by Res. No. 11-106; 3-24-2011 by
Res. No. 11-116]
The Finance, Human Resources, and Administration Committee shall have
responsibility for oversight of the functions and practices of the offices of
Borough Administrator, Borough Clerk, Finance and Tax, Tax Assessor, and
Municipal Attorney, including:
§ A276-28. Public Safety Committee.
The Public Safety Committee shall have responsibility for oversight of the
functions and practices of the Police Department, Municipal Court, Fire
Official, Volunteer Fire Department, and Board of Health, including:
A. Examination and review of all bill lists prior to their submission to the
Council for authorization to pay bills.
B. General policies and practices, such as personnel procedures,
insurance and risk management, purchasing, records maintenance,
information systems, and labor negotiations with the participation of
members of the appropriate standing committee.
C. Initiation of foreclosure action, and subsequent administration and
disposition of property acquired by the Borough under foreclosure of
tax title liens.
D. Coordination of departmental budgets and budget development;
relation to the activities above mentioned; and the final preparation,
explanation and continuing supervision of the budget.
E. Liaison between the Council and municipal auditors, bond counsel, and
any other body or organization on fiscal matters.
A. Responsibilities for the Police Department as outlined in Chapter 26,
Article II, entitled "Police Department," of the Code of the Borough of
Allendale.
B. Responsibilities for the Fire Department as outlined in Chapter 26,
Article I, entitled "Fire Department," of the Code of the Borough of
Allendale, as amended.
C. Liaison to the Municipal Court, Borough Judge, Prosecutor, and Public
Defender.
D. All matters relating to traffic and existing or proposed street and train
station parking, except the construction and maintenance of municipal
parking lots.
E. Oversight of emergency management compliance and activities.
§ A276-27 TAXATION § A276-28
237:873
§ A276-29. Water, Sewer, and Public Utilities Committee.
The Water, Sewer, and Public Utilities Committee shall have responsibility
for:
§ A276-30. Public Works Committee.
The Public Works Committee shall have responsibility for:
§ A276-31. Parks, Recreation, and Facilities Committee.
The Parks, Recreation, and Facilities Committee shall have responsibility
for:
F. Oversight of public health responsibilities and Board of Health.
G. Liaison to the Volunteer Ambulance Corps.
A. Ensuring the safe operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer
system.
B. Ensuring the safe and reliable operation of the Water Utility for the
Borough of Allendale.
C. Liaison with any other public utility activities operating within the
Borough of Allendale.
D. Street lighting.
A. Maintenance and improvement of all Borough streets.
B. Maintenance and installation of sidewalks and curbs.
C. Maintenance of a proper and functional storm drainage system.
D. Ensuring proper collection and disposal of garbage, trash, and other
solid waste items.
E. The management of a recycling program for newspapers, glass,
designated metals and plastics, tires, batteries, cardboard, and other
materials.
F. Oversight of other activities of the Public Works Department.
G. Oversight of the activities of the Borough Engineer.
A. Ensuring maintenance, repair, modifications and upgrade of all
municipal buildings.
B. Defining procedures for facilities use.
C. Ensuring the maintenance, modification, and improvement of all
Borough parks, playgrounds playing fields, and Crestwood Lake
swimming facility.
§ A276-28 ALLENDALE CODE § A276-31
237:874
§ A276-32. Land Use and Construction Code Committee.
The Land Use and Construction Code Committee shall have the
responsibilities of:
D. Provide for Borough liaison with all organized groups who manage and
participate in recreational activities requiring the use of Borough fields
and facilities.
E. Serve as liaison with the Boards of Education of the Allendale and
Northern Highlands Regional School Districts.
A. Liaison to the Planning Board, with one member serving as Class Three
representative on the Board and keeping the Council informed of
Planning Board activity.
B. Liaison to the Board of Adjustment.
C. Liaison to the Construction Code Office with oversight of building and
zoning activities and code enforcement; communicating the policies of
the Governing Body to Borough officials.
D. Monitoring and studying zoning and enforcement policies and making
recommendation to the Mayor and Council to ensure fair and consistent
compliance with current practices.
E. Ensuring compliance with the Council on Affordable Housing
regulations and the administration of the Borough's Fair Share Plan.
§ A276-31 TAXATION § A276-32
237:875

ARTICLE VII
Bills, Claims and Vouchers
§ A276-33. Preparation and submission.
§ A276-34. Certification, checking, review and preliminary approval.
§ A276-35. Authorization by Council.
A. All bills or claims against the Borough shall be in writing, fully itemized
and on such forms as the Borough shall provide for that purpose. As
required by statute, they shall be sworn to by the claimant before
submission for approval and payment.
B. All vouchers must be submitted to the Borough Administrator in full
form, except for Finance Committee approval, on or before the Friday
preceding the Council meeting at which they will be approved.
A. All bills and claims must be supported by a certification of the receipts
of the goods, or the satisfactory rendering of the services, by the
responsible person accepting the same on behalf of the Borough and
who may be held accountable therefor. Each such bill or claim shall
then be carefully reviewed and checked by, or under the direction of,
the Borough official who accomplishes the administrative certification
on the voucher form.
B. All checked vouchers with supporting papers attached will then be
presented to the Committee Chairperson having jurisdiction over the
activity or matter for which the expenditure was incurred or, in that
person's absence, another member of the Committee who has been
designated by the Chairperson to act in his or her place. Each such
voucher shall be reviewed and if approved by the Committee
Chairperson having jurisdiction, or his or her designate, it will then be
referred to the Council for inclusion in the bill list and authorization to
pay the same.
C. The Chairperson of the Finance Committee, or in that person's absence,
another member of the Finance Committee who has been designated by
the Chairperson to act in his or her place, shall review the bill list
authorizing payment of bills and shall advise the Council, prior to the
Council's approval, of the result of such review.
A. All vouchers recommended for payment shall be presented to the
Council by the Borough Clerk at a regular meeting or an adjourned
regular meeting.
B. Authorization to draw the checks and pay the amounts of the approved
vouchers shall be by motion of the Council, or by resolution.
§ A276-33 TAXATION § A276-36
237:877
§ A276-36. Signing of checks.
The corresponding vouchers shall accompany all checks drawn in payment
thereof when said checks are presented to the Mayor and the Chief Finance
Officer for signature.
§ A276-37. Filing of bills, vouchers and paid checks.
All bills, vouchers and paid checks shall be filed in a safe place and be made
available for public inspection whenever requested.
§ A276-36 ALLENDALE CODE § A276-37
237:878
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ A276-38. Proposal to amend; appointment of committee.
§ A276-39. Presentation of committee recommendations.
The special committee will present its recommendations at a regular
business meeting of the Council.
§ A276-40. Roll-call vote.
These bylaws shall only be altered or amended by a two-thirds majority on
a roll call vote of the full Council, taken at two successive regular meetings
of the Council.
A. The Mayor or any member of the Council may propose amendments to
these bylaws at any regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting.
B. The Mayor will then appoint a special committee of three members of
the Council to consider the proposed amendments.
§ A276-38 TAXATION § A276-40
237:879

ARTICLE IX
Adoption and Term
§ A276-41. Adoption by resolution; when effective.
The bylaws shall be adopted at the annual reorganization meeting by a
resolution of the Borough Council concurred in by a majority of the
members. The bylaws shall become effective immediately after adoption
and shall remain in effect until December 31 of that calendar year.
§ A276-41 TAXATION § A276-41
237:881
Appendix A277
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A277-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Allendale
Cablevision Franchise Ordinance."
§ A277-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission in Federal Communications Commission
Rules and Regulations, § 76.5, 47 CFR 420
[37 Fed. Reg. 3278 (February 1972), as amended 37 Fed. Reg. 13864 (July
1972); 37 Fed. Reg. 25844 (December 1972); 40 Fed. Reg. 2690 (January
1975); 41 Fed. Reg. 1063 (February 1976)], and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.) and shall in no way be construed to broaden,
alter or conflict with the federal or state definitions.
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey 1972, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
COMPANY The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"UA-Columbia Cablevision of New Jersey."
MUNICIPALITY The Municipality of Allendale, County of Bergen, in the
State of New Jersey.
§ A277-3. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to the company its consent to place in,
upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors
and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
municipality of a cable television system and cable communications system.
§ A277-4. Statement of findings.
A public bearing concerning the franchise herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Act. Said hearing having been held as above stated, and said hearing
having been fully open to the public, and the municipality having received
at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this franchise, the municipality hereby finds that the company
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A276-41 ALLENDALE CODE § A277-5
237:882
§ A277-5. Duration of franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the effective date of
this ordinance.
§ A277-6. Franchise renewal.
The consent granted herein shall be subject to renewal for a period of
five years only after a review of the performance of the company and
the adequacy of the terms of the consent herein granted in a full public
proceeding.
§ A277-7. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges received
by the company from subscribers to its cable television reception service in
the municipality.
§ A277-8. Franchise territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
municipality and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A277-9. Construction timetable.
The company shall commence construction when the company has received
a certificate of approval from the Board of Public Utilities, has filed a
registration statement with the Federal Communications Commission and
has received all necessary utility licenses to proceed and shall complete
significant construction within six months thereafter. The company shall
apply for all necessary utility licenses with all reasonable dispatch and shall
make every reasonable effort to obtain such licenses as soon as possible.
To the extent that this ordinance varies from or is inconsistent with the
application of the company incorporated herein, it is the intent hereof that
the ordinance shall control.
§ A277-10. Extension of service territory.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any person's residence
or business located in those areas of the franchise territory described
herein in accordance with the proposal for the provision of service as
described in the application. Any additional extension of the system which
is necessary in the future but not contemplated in the application shall
be made in accordance with the Office of Cable Television's line-extension
policy now or hereafter promulgated.
§ A277-11. Construction requirements.
§ A277-5 TAXATION § A277-11
237:883
§ A277-12. Local franchise office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event less than from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ A277-13. Additional specialized services.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purposes of providing
other specialized services, then the company shall be required to apply to
the Board for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions
of such contract. All costs for such application to the Board shall be borne
by the contractee.
§ A277-14. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough of Allendale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints
shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work, all in
compliance with the applicable ordinances of the Borough of Allendale
and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, at its expense, upon reasonable notice by
the municipality, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
municipality, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's wires and cables.
§ A277-11 ALLENDALE CODE § A277-15
237:884
§ A277-15. Performance bond.
During the period of construction, the company shall give a bond to the
Borough of Allendale, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000, which
amount reflects the nature of the undertaking proposed in the application
and the information presented during the municipal franchise proceeding.
Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings
of the company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein and shall remain in effect for the life of the franchise.
§ A277-16. Rates approved.
The municipality, having determined that the rates proposed in the
application for cable television reception service are reasonable, approves
them as presented.
§ A277-17. Interconnection services.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purposes of providing
interconnection services, applications shall be made in accordance with
Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations,
§§ 76.252(a)(2) and 76.258, 41 Fed. Reg. 20665 (June 21, 1976).
§ A277-18. Two-way service.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for the purposes of providing
two-way service, applications shall be made in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, §§ 76.252(a)(2) and
76.258, 41 Fed. Reg. 20665 (June 21, 1976).
§ A277-19. Public buildings serviced without charge.
The company shall install one outlet without charge and make basic service
available free of charge at each of the following public buildings in the
Borough of Allendale: Hillside Elementary School (Hillside Avenue),
Brookside Elementary School (Brookside Avenue), Northern Highlands
Regional High School (Hillside Avenue) and Allendale Free Public Library
(West Crescent Avenue).
§ A277-20. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of Allendale as an insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the
minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person,
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death from any one accident and $100,000
for property damage resulting from any one accident.
§ A277-15 TAXATION § A277-21
237:885
§ A277-21. Extent of application provisions.
All of the written commitments contained in the written application except
as modified herein are to be considered to be binding upon the applicant
as the terms and conditions of this consent, and that application shall be
annexed hereto and made a part hereof by reference. This section shall not
be construed as making effective any provision herein which is in conflict
with the provisions of the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and
Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, § 76.1 et seq.
(1972), as amended and as clarified, Federal Communications Commission
Clarification of Rules, 39 Fed. Reg. 142, 88 through 14300 (April 1974).
In addition, to the extent any provision of the application exceeds Federal
Communications Commission rules, it is considered unenforceable.
§ A277-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A277-23. Incorporation of state and federal regulations.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A277-24. When effective.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality receives written notification that the company accepts the
terms and conditions herein.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
00-13 NCM
00-14 NCM
§ A277-21 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:886
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
00-15 NCM
00-16 12-14-2000 Acquisition of property Repealed by Ord. No.
01-16
00-17 NCM
00-18 12-14-2000 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
01-01 1-25-2001 Personnel policies,
practices and regulations
amendment
NCM; see Ch. 59
01-03 2-22-2001 Water charges
amendment
Ch. 262
01-05 3-8-2001 Protection of trees
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. II
01-06 4-9-2001 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. III
01-09 5-10-2001 Street vacation NCM
01-11 5-10-2001 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. I
01-12 5-10-2001 Protection of trees
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. II
01-14 6-14-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
01-15 6-14-2001 Filming Ch. 123
01-16 6-14-2001 Acquisition of property
repealer
Repealer only
01-18 10-25-2001 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. III
01-19 8-28-2001 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 24
01-20 8-28-2001 Noise Ch. 170
01-21 9-13-2001 Newsracks repealer Ch. 167(footnote
only)
01-22 9-13-2001 Newsracks Ch. 167
01-23 9-27-2001 Adoption of Code
renumbering
Ch. 1, Art. III
01-24 10-25-2001 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. II
02-01 2-14-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:887
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-02 2-28-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
02-03 3-25-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
02-04 3-14-2002 Water amendment Ch. 262
02-05 3-14-2002 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220
02-06 3-14-2002 Salaries NCM
02-07 3-5-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 252
02-08 2-28-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
02-09 2-28-2002 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 85
02-10 4-11-2002 Trees amendment Ch. 244
02-11 Not approved
02-12 4-25-2002 Zoning Officer and
Property Maintenance
Officer
Ch. 53, Arts. IX and X
02-13 4-25-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
02-14 4-25-2002 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 199
02-15 5-9-2002 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 191
02-16 Bond NCM
02-17 Bond NCM
02-18 Water rates NCM
02-19 Salaries NCM
02-20 7-11-2002 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
02-21 Number not used
02-22 8-22-2002 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
02-23 9-12-2002 Borough Prosecutor
amendment
Ch. 21, Art. III
02-24 10-10-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
02-25 Appropriation NCM
02-26 9-26-2002 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 191
02-27 9-26-2002 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:888
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-28 12-12-2002 Public places: designated
park and playground use
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
02-29 11-12-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
03-01 Easement and lease NCM
03-02 2-27-2003 Engineer amendment Ch. 53, Art. III
03-03 2-27-2003 Public places: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 203, Art. I
03-04 2-27-2003 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 191
03-05
03-06
03-07
03-08
03-09
03-10 5-8-2003 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
03-11 7-24-2003 State uniform
construction code
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
03-12 7-24-2003 Plot plan approval Ch. 196
03-13 7-24-2003 Soil removal and
importation amendment
Ch. 225
03-14 9-25-2003 Public records and fees
amendment; Board of
Health fees repealer
Ch. 12 Arts. I and II
03-15 10-9-2003 Soil removal and
importation amendment
Ch. 225
03-16 10-9-2003 Allendale Shopping Plaza
amendment
Ch. 252, Art. VII
03-17
03-18
03-19
03-20 11-13-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
03-21
03-22
03-23 12-29-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:889
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04-01 2-5-2004 Public records and fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. I
04-02
04-03
04-04
04-05 3-4-2004 Personnel practices Ch. 60
04-06
04-07 4-8-2004 Property tax refunds for
disabled veterans
Ch. 237, Art. I
04-08
04-09 5-27-2004 Alcoholic beverages
licenses amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
04-10
04-11
04-12 7-8-2004 Parking on private
property
Ch. 252. Art. XIII
04-13 7-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
04-14 10-7-2004 Retail food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 210
04-15 9-9-2004 Parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
04-16
04-17 10-14-2004 Stop intersections; stop
signs
Ch. 252, Art. XIV
04-18 10-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
04-19 10-14-2004 Zoning fees Ch. 120, Art. III
04-20
04-21 11-19-2004 Public records and fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. I
04-22 11-11-2004 Parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
04-23 12-9-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
04-24 11-22-2004 Water amendment Ch. 262
05-06 8-11-2005 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 132
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:890
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-07 8-26-2005 Storm sewers
amendment
Ch. 262, Art. I
05-08 9-22-2005 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. I
05-10 11-8-2005 Protection of trees
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. II
05-11 12-22-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
05-12 12-22-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
06-01 2-9-2006 State uniform
construction code
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
06-02 2-9-2006 Zoning fees amendment Ch. 120, Art. III
06-03 3-23-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
06-04 2-9-2006 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. I
06-06 2-28-2006 Wildlife feeding Ch. 203, Art. V
06-07 2-28-2006 Separation and collection
of recyclables
amendment
Ch. 228, Art. I
06-08 2-28-2006 Littering amendment Ch. 158
06-09 2-28-2006 Pet waste Ch. 195
06-10 2-28-2006 Illicit connections Ch. 140
06-11 3-9-2006 Improper disposal of
waste
Superseded by Ord.
No. 15-13
06-13 3-23-2006 Outdoor cafes
amendment
Ch. 185
06-14 3-9-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 231 (reference
page only)
06-15 3-23-2006 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
06-17 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
06-18 3-23-2006 Parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
06-22 5-11-2006 State uniform
construction code
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
06-25 6-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
06-26 7-27-2006 Municipal housing liaison Ch. 53, Art. XI
06-27 11-9-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:891
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-28
06-29 12-14-2006 Open space trust fund Ch. 55
06-30 12-14-2007 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. II
06-31
06-32 12-28-2006 Street dedication NCM
07-01 3-22-2007 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
07-02 4-12-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
07-03 5-3-2007 Bond NCM
07-04 5-3-2007 Bond NCM
07-05 4-12-2007 Establish cap bank NCM
07-06
07-07 5-3-2007 Salaries NCM
07-08 5-24-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and sale
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
07-09 5-24-2007 Bond NCM
07-10 7-12-2007 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 132
07-11 7-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
Franklin Turnpike, East
Crescent Avenue, West
Crescent Avenue
intersection: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 252, Art. IV
07-12 7-26-2007 Public places: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 203, Art. I
07-13 8-9-2007 Bond NCM
07-14 8-9-2007 Capital surplus NCM
07-15 8-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
07-16 8-23-2007 Boards, committees and
commissions: Historic
Preservation Commission
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
09-20
07-17 10-25-2007 Stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 231 (reference
page only)
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:892
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-18 11-8-2007 Public places: designated
park and playground use
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
07-19 12-13-2007 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220
07-20 12-27-2007 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
08-01 1-24-2008 Administrator repealer Ch. 53, Art. I,
reference only
Res. No.
08-77
2-11-2008 Bylaws of Borough
Council amendment
Ch. A276
08-02 Salaries NCM
08-03 2-14-2008 Municipal Clerk/
Administrative Officer;
Director of Operations
Ch. 53, Arts. XII; XIII
08-04 Bond NCM
08-05 2-28-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 191
08-06 2-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic:
parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
Res. No.
08-89
2-28-2018 Bylaws of Borough
Council amendment
Ch. A276
08-07 3-27-2008 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. II
08-08 Salaries NCM
08-09 Bond NCM
08-10 Not adopted
08-11 Salaries NCM
08-12 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
08-13 5-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
08-14 Salaries NCM
08-15 6-12-2008 Public records and fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. I
08-16 6-26-2008 Residency exemption Ch. 63
08-17 7-10-2008 Salaries NCM
08-18 8-14-2008 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. II
08-19 10-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
08-20 10-23-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:893
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-21 10-6-2008 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
08-22 8-28-2008 Soil movement
amendment
Ch. 225
08-23 9-10-2008 Appropriation NCM
08-24 9-10-2008 Nadler Court NCM
08-25 9-25-2008 Bond NCM
08-26 9-25-2008 Bond NCM
08-27 10-6-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 22
08-28 10-6-2008 Property Maintenance
Officer amendment
Ch. 53, Art. X
08-29 11-13-2008 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
08-30 11-24-2008 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
08-31 11-24-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 199
09-01 1-22-2009 Salaries NCM
09-02 1-22-2009 Salaries NCM
09-03 1-22-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
09-04 1-22-2009 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
09-05 3-12-2009 Zoning fees amendment Ch. 120, Art. III
09-06 2-26-2009 Donation clothing bins Ch. 115
09-07 2-26-2009 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 120, Art. II
09-08 3-12-2009 Separation and collection
of recyclables
amendment
Ch. 228, Art. I
09-09 3-26-2009 Appropriation NCM
09-10 3-26-2009 Bond NCM
09-11 Not adopted
09-12 5-14-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-13 5-28-2009 Salaries NCM
09-14 6-11-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
09-15 7-23-2009 Zoning fees amendment Ch. 120, Art. III
09-16 7-23-2009 Sale of property NCM
09-17 7-23-2009 Acquisition of land NCM
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:894
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-18 8-13-2009 State Uniform
Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
09-19
09-20 9-24-2009 Historic Preservation
Commission
Ch. 6, Art. IV
09-21 8-27-2009 Designated park and
playground use
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
09-23 9-30-2009 Stream corridor
protection
Ch. 232
09-25 10-8-2009 Beekeeping Ch. 93, Art. V
09-26 11-27-2009 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
09-27 11-27-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
09-30 12-26-2009 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
10-02 2-1-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
Allendale Town Center
amendment
Ch. 252, Art. VII
10-03 2-17-2010 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
10-06 4-12-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 199
10-07 3-25-2010 Brush, weeds and debris Ch. 97
10-08 4-8-2010 Parking prohibition for
snowplowing and snow
removal
Ch. 252, Art. XV
10-09 5-13-2010 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 82
10-15 7-22-2010 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
10-16 8-12-2010 Towing amendment Ch. 240
10-17 8-26-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 26, Art. II
10-19 9-23-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
10-20 10-28-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and sale
amendment
Ch. 85, Art. I
10-24 11-8-2010 Stormwater control:
private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 231, Art. II
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:895
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-25 11-8-2010 Solid waste: refuse
containers/dumpsters
Ch. 228, Art. IV
10-26 11-22-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
Res. No.
11-106
3-10-2011 Bylaws of Borough
Council amendment
Ch. A276
Res. No.
11-116
3-24-2011 Bylaws of Borough
Council amendment
Ch. A276
11-08 8-25-2011 Visual obstructions
amendment
Ch. 256
11-10 8-25-2011 Park and ride
amendment
Ch. 252, Art. XI
12-02 2-23-2012 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
12-07 4-12-2012 Separation and collection
of recyclables
amendment; collection
and pickup amendment
Ch. 228, Arts. I, III
12-09 8-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
12-10 6-14-2012 Visual obstructions
amendment
Ch. 256
12-15 8-23-2012 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 26, Art. I
12-16 9-13-2012 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220
12-17 9-27-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
12-18 9-13-2012 Code Enforcement
Official
Ch. 53, Art. XIV
12-19 10-11-2012 Political contributions Ch. 197
13-02 3-28-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
13-03 3-14-2013 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
13-05 3-14-2013 Officers and employees:
Deputy Municipal Clerk
Ch. 53, Art. XIIA
13-06 3-28-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk or curb damage
caused by shade trees
Ch. 233, Art. IVA
13-10 5-9-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
13-11 5-9-2013 Departments: outside
employment
Ch. 26, Art. III
14-02 3-13-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 26, Art. II
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:896
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-05 3-27-2014 Solid waste: separation
and collection of
recyclables amendment
Ch. 228, Art. I
14-07 5-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
14-08 5-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
14-09 5-22-2014 Vacant/abandoned
properties: registration
and maintenance
Ch. 248, Art. I
14-10 6-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
14-11 6-12-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
14-12 6-26-2014 Salaries and
compensation: direct
deposit
Ch. 67, Art. II
14-14 8-14-2014 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
14-17 8-28-2014 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
14-19 9-22-2014 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
14-21 10-23-2014 Protection of trees
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. II
14-22 12-11-2014 Animals: deer feeding Ch. 93, Art. VI
14-23 12-11-2014 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 147
14-24 12-11-2014 Street openings and
excavations repealer
Ch. 233, Art. III
14-25 12-11-2014 Street openings and
excavations
Ch. 233, Art. III
15-08 4-9-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 199
15-09 4-9-2015 Soliciting amendment Ch. 194, Art. II
15-10 4-9-2015 Smoking: smoke-free
zones and areas
Ch. 223, Art. I
15-11 8-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
15-12 5-14-2015 Hazardous materials:
improper disposal
Ch. 137, Art. I
15-13 5-14-2015 Improper disposal of
waste to storm sewer
system
Ch. 141
15-14 5-14-2015 Bingo and raffles Ch. 95
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:897
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-15 5-28-2015 Temporary storage
containers
Ch. 238
15-16 5-28-2015 Hazardous materials:
recovery of costs of
cleanup
Ch. 137, Art. II
15-17 5-28-2015 Littering amendment Ch. 158
15-20 8-27-2015 Background checks Ch. 4
15-21 7-23-2015 Officers and employees:
Municipal Clerk/
Administrative Officer
amendment
Ch. 53, Art. XII
15-27 12-10-2015 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
15-28 12-28-2015 Water: storm sewers
amendment; water
supply amendment
Ch. 262, Art. I; Ch.
262, Art. II
16-02 2-11-2016 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
16-03 2-25-2016 Water: water supply
amendment
Ch. 262, Art. II
16-07 3-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
parking and through
streets amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
16-09 4-7-2016 Drones and unmanned
aircraft
Ch. 118
16-10 4-7-2016 Glue sales and head
shops
Ch. 135
16-11 4-28-2016 Public recreational
bathing
Ch. 205
16-12 4-28-2016 Youth camps Ch. 267
16-13 4-28-2016 Garage sales Ch. 134
16-14 4-28-2016 Streets and sidewalks:
posting of signs
Ch. 233, Art. VI
16-15 4-28-2016 Boards, committees and
commissions: Allendale
Volunteer Goose Patrol
(AVGP)
Ch. 6, Art. V
16-16 4-28-2016 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 93, Art. I
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:898
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-17 4-28-2016 Public places: designated
park and playground use
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
16-18 5-26-2016 State Uniform
Construction Code
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
16-19 5-26-2016 Trees: protection of trees
amendment
Ch. 244, Art. II
16-21 7-28-2016 Vacant/abandoned
properties: registration
and maintenance
amendment
Ch. 248, Art. I
16-22 10-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
16-23 10-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
16-24 9-22-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
16-25 10-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
16-26 10-13-2016 Retail food
establishments: licensing
of establishments
amendment
Ch. 210, Art. I
16-27 11-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
Franklin Turnpike, East
Crescent Avenue, West
Crescent Avenue
intersection: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 252, Art. IV
17-03 3-2-2017 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 147; Ch. 270
17-04 3-23-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 199
17-06 3-23-2017 Water supply amendment Ch. 262, Art. II
17-08 5-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
17-10 8-24-2017 Departments: Police
Department amendment
Ch. 26, Art. I
17-11 9-14-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 270
17-12 9-28-2017 Sewer use amendment Ch. 220
17-15 10-12-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
posting of signs
amendment
Ch. 233, Art. VI
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:899
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-16 11-30-2017 Solid waste: refuse
containers/dumpsters
amendment
Ch. 228 Art. IV
17-18 12-14-2017 Firearms amendment Ch. 125
17-19 12-14-2017 Public places: wildlife
feeding amendment
Ch. 203, Art. V
17-20 12-14-2017 Public places: designated
park and playground use
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
17-17 12-28-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-01 1-25-2018 Salaries See Ch. 67, Art. I
18-02 1-25-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 128
18-03 1-25-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 40
18-04 2-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-05 2-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-06 3-22-2018 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 100
18-07 3-22-2018 Fees: Zoning Fees
Amendment
Ch. 120, Art. III
18-08 3-22-2018 Water: Water Supply
Amendment
Ch. 262, Art. II
18-12 5-10-2018 Animals: Feeding of
Wildlife on Private
Property
Ch. 93, Art. VII
18-13 9-27-2018 Affordable Housing;
Fees: Development Fees
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 81; Ch. 120, Art.
II; Ch. 270
18-14 9-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-15 9-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-16 9-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-17 7-12-2018 Water: Water Supply
Amendment
Ch. 262, Art. II
18-18 9-27-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
No-Knock Registry
Ch. 194, Art. III
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:900
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-19 9-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking and Through
Streets Amendment
Ch. 252, Art. II
18-20 9-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270
18-21 10-11-2018 Salaries See Ch. 67, Art. I
18-22 11-19-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 81
18-23 12-27-2018 Building Construction:
State Uniform
Construction Code
Amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-01 1-31-2019 Salaries See Ch. 67,
Art. I
25
19-02 1-31-2019 Building
Construction: State
Uniform
Construction Code
Amendment
Ch. 100, Art. I 25
19-05 4-11-2019 Outdoor Cafes
Amendment
Ch. 185 25
19-08 5-23-2019 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 81 25
19-09 6-27-2019 Salaries See Ch. 67,
Art. I
25
19-10 7-11-2019 Floodplain
Management
Amendment
Ch. 132 25
19-11 7-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 270 25
19-12 7-25-2019 Departments: Police
Department
Amendment
Ch. 26, Art. II 25
19-13 7-25-2019 Salaries See Ch. 67,
Art. I
25
19-14 9-12-2019 Boards, Committees
and Commissions:
Shade Tree
Commission Repealer
Ch. 6, Art. II 26
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
237:901
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-15 12-19-2019 Salaries See Ch. 67,
Art. I
26
§ DL-1 ALLENDALE CODE § DL-1
237:902